
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08550/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 22 July 2015                              |    On 14 August 2015          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   A B L M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ashika Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Slatter, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 9 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook allowed the  appeal
    of Mrs M on Article 8 grounds against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
    to remove her.  The judge also dismissed an appeal by Mrs M  under  the
    Immigration Rules in which her  position  was  that  her  marriage  had
    permanently broken down by reason of domestic violence. Mrs  M  appeals
    with permission on the grounds, in summary, that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for finding that she had not established that the
    cause of the breakdown of her marriage was domestic violence.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals in turn, with permission, on the  ground
    that the judge's consideration under Article 8 is said to  have  failed
    to include a proper proportionality balancing exercise or that adequate
    reasons were not given for the judge's finding  that  the  decision  to
    remove Mrs M was disproportionate. In particular it is to be noted that
    the judge's finding that the removal was disproportionate was stated in
    terms of a conclusion that Mrs M's removal "at the present time"  would
    not be proportionate.

3.   As the decision of the judge recorded, Mrs  M  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 28 September 2011 with entry clearance valid to 22  December
    2013 as the spouse of a Mr Y M.  The decision of the Secretary of State
    to refuse to grant her indefinite  leave  to  remain  was  made  on  10
    January 2014.

4.   On Mrs M's behalf,  Mr  Slatter  of  Counsel  advanced  submissions  by
    reference to the decision made under the  Rules  under  five  headings.
    First it was his submission that paragraph 16 of the  decision  of  the
    judge contained a misdirection. That paragraph is in these terms:

         "The burden of proof is on [Mrs M] to establish that she meets  the
         requirements of paragraph 298A.  [Mrs M]  is  required  to  produce
         evidence  to  establish  that  the  relationship  was   caused   to
         permanently break down as a result of domestic violence."

5.   We detect no misdirection in that paragraph. Under  further  discussion
    and by reference to written materials supplied on behalf of  Mrs  M  it
    does appear that the objection is not in fact to the terms of paragraph
    16 but to the possibility that the judge required the evidence from Mrs
    M to include independent third party evidence over and  above  evidence
    that she herself contributed.  From a fair reading of the  decision  of
    the judge as a whole and from his treatment of  the  evidence  in  that
    decision we detect no presence of a requirement  on  the  part  of  the
    judge for independent evidence.  Of course there  is  observation  from
    the judge,  in  particular  at  paragraph  20,  about  the  absence  of
    independent party evidence in  a  particular  respect  but  that  is  a
    legitimate comment by reference to the evidence in the case rather than
    an indication of a direction on the part of the judge to himself as  to
    what evidence must be made available.

6.   The second point advanced by Mr Slatter was  to  the  effect  that  the
    judge had not considered the available evidence  on  domestic  violence
    cumulatively.  The judge had taken different types of domestic violence
    in turn, moving  from,  for  example,  evidence  of  physical  violence
    through evidence of  emotional  violence  through  evidence  of  sexual
    violence.  We see no problem with the judge examining the  evidence  in
    this type by type fashion and do not detect, again reading the decision
    of the judge fairly and as a whole, any failure  on  his  part,  having
    divided the evidence, to have regard to the evidence as a whole on  the
    fundamental question of presence or absence of domestic violence.
    7.   The third point advanced by Mr Slatter concerned the  evidence  of
    the aunt of Mrs M.  He pointed  in  particular  to  a  passage  in  the
    judgment at paragraph 24  which  reads:  "There  was  no  evidence  for
    example from the appellant's aunt to corroborate this".  That  sentence
    was a reference to evidence of sexual violence.  Mr  Slatter  contrasts
    the sentence with the presence of a letter signed by Mrs M's aunt,  Mrs
    T R, dated 1 November 2013 in which the following appears:

         "Their married life did not work out pretty  well  as  her  husband
         preferred always to stay with his mother most of time.  We  noticed
         numerous arguments regarding the said matter but the  husband  just
         kept saying he must be with his mother as he loves his family  too.
         A foul word was even overheard sometimes.  Just a few months  after
         A B L M revealed us an appalling  story  of  abuse  physically  and
         sexually but we did not get involved deeper as it  will  be  a  bit
         personal in our part to go beyond."

8.   Mrs M's aunt also gave a witness  statement  which  did  not  in  terms
    refer to sexual  domestic  violence.   It  did  refer  more  generally,
    without  particularisation,  to  "cruelty  ...  both  mental  and  some
    physical".  She gave evidence at the hearing before the judge  as  well
    and indeed the judge analyses some of that evidence in  the  course  of
    his decision.

9.   Doing the best we can and again with the advantage of  considering  the
    judgment of the judge as a whole  we  conclude  that  the  sentence  at
    paragraph 24 is talking about direct evidence of the aunt  rather  than
    indirect evidence from the aunt of what she has been  told  by  Mrs  M.
    Thus when the judge refers to no evidence from the aunt to  corroborate
    the evidence  of  Mrs  M  herself  of  sexual  violence  the  judge  is
    indicating simply that the aunt's evidence was not that of a first-hand
    witness to the sexual violence that  was  being  alleged,  and  in  the
    letter from which I have quoted it is clear that the aunt is  referring
    to the account that she was given from  Mrs  M.   As  to  Mrs  M's  own
    evidence on this aspect, that is the aspect  of  sexual  violence,  the
    judge with the advantage he had of hearing Mrs M, described her account
    as "rather confused and very general".  He assessed, as he recorded  in
    his decision, that evidence against certain background factors but  his
    overall conclusion with the advantage that he had was that he could not
    give any significant weight to Mrs M's  evidence  of  sexual  violence.
    That was an assessment that the judge was in our conclusion entitled to
    make.

10.  The fourth ground  of  challenge  raised  by  Mr  Slatter  attacks  the
    references that are to be found in the decision, and  in  some  of  the
    evidence and submissions that contributed to the decision of the judge,
    to a  hope  of  reconciliation.   The  attack  suggests  that  hope  of
    reconciliation between Mrs M and her husband is not mutually exclusive,
    to use the phrasing of Mr Slatter, to the presence of abuse,  and  with
    that submission there could be little disagreement. But  the  important
    thing for the purpose of this appeal is that we  do  not,  reading  the
    judge's decision as a whole, see him to suggest hope of  reconciliation
    is mutually exclusive of abuse.  He simply includes that matter, as  he
    should, in his review of the evidence of the case as a whole.  He  does
    not use it to drive his conclusion.

11.  The fifth area of submission from Mr Slatter contended that  there  was
    no basis for a final sentence to  be  found  at  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision of the judge.  That read:

         "There was no emotional abuse  of  this  sort  [that  is  a  cross-
         reference to 'blackmail, mental torture and threats  to  disown  or
         kill  an  individual  or  the  individual's  children']   in   this
         relationship; it was on the evidence a  decision  by  the  husband;
         that the relationship was a mistake but no more."

12.  Again, with the advantage of considering the judgment as  a  whole  and
    seeing the judge's overall process of reasoning, we see  the  reference
    in that sentence to "a decision by the husband  that  the  relationship
    was a mistake but no more" as a statement made not  because  there  was
    positive evidence to that effect but as a process of reasoning  by  way
    of elimination of other possibilities.  In any event we do  not  regard
    that statement by the judge, that on the evidence there was a  decision
    by the husband that the  relationship  was  a  mistake,  to  have  been
    central to the decision by the judge  made  under  the  Rules.   It  is
    ultimately, in our assessment, neither here nor there.

13.  With gratitude to Mr Slatter for very usefully  compartmentalising  the
    argument for Mrs M within the five categories that  I  have  mentioned,
    for the reasons given we must reject each of those  lines  of  argument
    and uphold the decision of the judge on the Rules.

14.  I turn then to the judge's decision under  Article  8.  The  judge  had
    this to say at paragraphs 27 to 29 of his decision:

         27.  Mr Turner's submission [for  Mrs  M]  was  that  [Mrs  M]  was
             prejudiced by the fact that she would be unable to remarry  in
             the Philippines because she could not obtain a divorce in  the
             UK unless she  was  'ordinarily  resident'.   It  was  unclear
             whether or not [Mrs M] could have started divorce  proceedings
             in the period since December 2013 since when she  had  had  3C
             leave and her appeal  rights  were  not  exhausted.   For  the
             purposes of this appeal I have accepted Mr Turner's submission
             on this point and accepted that [Mrs M]  could  not  file  for
             divorce herself and that this was an exceptional  circumstance
             not covered by the Immigration Rules.


         28.  [Mrs M's] family life  is  limited  to  her  aunt  and  uncle.
             However she is adult and I  was  not  satisfied  that  such  a
             relationship amounted to family life for Article  8  purposes.
             As to private life I accept  that  she  had  established  some
             private life through her work.  As to proportionality [Mrs  M]
             asserts she will be destitute in the Philippines.  However she
             did live there until  the  age  of  24.   There  was  evidence
             submitted of remittances from her aunt from 2008 to  2012  and
             no indication such help would not resume.  [Mrs M] stated  she
             had no one to rely on but she had two uncles  present  at  the
             wedding which indicates that she does  have  a  family  circle
             with whom she is in contact.


         29.  I accept however that she has  no  parents  and  that  she  is
             particularly close to [her aunt and uncle].  She entered  with
             valid leave.  She speaks English and with her work and support
             from her aunt and uncle is financially  self-sufficient.   Her
             private life was established while she was in the UK  lawfully
             although  her  private  life  has  since  January  2014   been
             precarious.  Applying paragraph [sic] 117B there was no strong
             public interest in [Mrs M's] removal.  I also  accept  that  a
             limited period of leave may enable [Mrs M] to  regularise  her
             matrimonial situation rather than returning to the Philippines
             in legal limbo.  On the evidence overall I concluded that  her
             removal at the present time would not be proportionate."

15.  The Secretary of State challenges that  reasoning  and  the  conclusion
    that derives from it.  The Secretary of State emphasises in  particular
    that the burden is on Mrs M to show that the Article  8  considerations
    produce a conclusion in her  favour.   She  starts  of  course  from  a
    position that she does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   The  judge  does  not  record  the  public  interest  in   the
    maintenance of effective immigration control nor do we detect that that
    consideration is contained implicitly in  his  reasoning.   Indeed  his
    brief reference to the application of section 117B  where  he  observed
    that applying that paragraph there was no strong public interest in the
    appellant's removal is a reference that unfortunately in our assessment
    tends against rather than towards weighing the public interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control.  This will always  be  an
    assessment by reference to the reasoning in any particular case but  we
    are not in this respect, and with respect, content with  the  reasoning
    that has been expressed in the present case.

16.  The Secretary  of  State  further  identifies  as  is  clear  from  the
    reasoning of the judge that the equation here is one that has reference
    to private life grounds  and  not  family  life  grounds.  Overall  the
    Secretary of State urges that the proportionality assessment  has  been
    inadequately reasoned, has ignored the public interest and  has  failed
    to engage sufficiently or  at  all  with  a  balancing  exercise.   Our
    assessment with the benefit of submissions on both sides  is  that  the
    judge has fallen into error.  Our conclusion is that  his  decision  on
    Article 8 should be reversed and we do reverse that decision.

17.  It is very important that the public interest under Section  117  takes
    a proper part in the balancing exercise to be undertaken, even  taking,
    and there was some discussion about this, the facts as recorded by  the
    judge at paragraphs 27 to 29.  Some of the facts are left  inconclusive
    where in our assessment it was for Mrs  M  to  produce  material  which
    would have allowed a more  confident  or  conclusive  understanding  of
    them, particularly when it comes to the question of the availability of
    divorce  proceedings  either  hitherto  or   hereafter   and   in   one
    jurisdiction or another.

18. We are troubled by the result of the decision of the judge which is  in
    effect to allow a period of time in this country  for  the  purpose  of
    seeking a divorce in this country which has not on the material  before
    us been sought hitherto and with the implication from the reasoning  of
    the judge that the Article 8 point might then fall away  and  therefore
    Mrs M might then be returned to the Philippines  potentially  with  the
    benefit of a divorce in circumstances where on Mrs  M's  own  case  the
    legal regime in that country would have a  different  approach  to  the
    question of divorce.  We do see the judge  as  envisaging  a  temporary
    arrangement by his reasoning and do not see that temporary  arrangement
    as having been properly underpinned by the required balancing exercise.




19. It is of course open to Mrs M to make any points she may wish  to  make
    to the Secretary of State in this regard if she has a  particular  plan
    as to what it is she would wish to do in relation to her marital status
    and that approach can be considered by the Secretary of  State  on  its
    merits, but for the purpose of the matters before us Article 8 is  not,
    we are sure, made out in the circumstances of this case. Therefore,  as
    I have indicated, the decision  of  the  judge  below  that  Mrs  M  is
    unsuccessful on the Rules is a decision that we uphold and the decision
    of the judge below that Mrs M  is  successful  under  Article  8  is  a
    decision that we reverse.


Notice of Decision

20.  The appeal of Mrs M is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appeal of the Secretary of State in relation to human rights grounds is
    allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on
    Article 8 grounds is set aside and remade as follows:  The  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 7th August 2015

