
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08797/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2013                              |On 4 November 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                rosina mumuni
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Rosina Mumuni, was born on 27 July 1981 and claims to be
    a citizen of Ghana.  A decision was taken on 5 March 2013 to refuse the
    appellant's application for a residence card as confirmation  of  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  The appellant claims to be married to
    an EU national (Robert Sebastian Pawlowski) who is a citizen of Poland.
     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 27 June 2013, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant has appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  I have a letter from the
    UK Border Agency dated 22 August 2013, annexed to  which  is  a  report
    entitled "Customary Marriage and Divorce/Proxy Marriages Contracted  in
    Ghana".  The report is dated 17 January 2012. The letter indicates that
    the respondent did not seek to oppose the appeal.

 2. Permission was granted to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had that (i) failed  to  deal  with  Article  8
    ECHR; (ii) failed to have regard to the fact that the original document
    (the absence of which the judge criticised in his determination at [8])
    had been in the possession of the respondent.  It was apparent that the
    judge did not deal with Article 8 ECHR although this had been raised as
    a ground of  appeal.   In  the  circumstance,  I  have  set  aside  the
    determination and have remade the decision.

 3. The appeal concerns an alleged customary marriage which  the  appellant
    claims she has contracted with a Polish national.  The  refusal  letter
    noted that the appellant had provided a copy of  a  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage certificate and an affidavit.  That affidavit is, in  fact,  a
    statutory declaration apparently  made  under  the  Ghanaian  Statutory
    Declarations Act 389 of 1971.  The declarants are Andrzej Pawlowski and
    Alhassan Mumuni who are, respectively, the father of  Robert  Sebastian
    Pawlowski and the father of the appellant.  The  declaration  indicates
    that the marriage was contracted in Accra on 27 April 2012.

 4. The burden of proving that  any  of  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant in support of her application are not genuine  rests  on  the
    respondent.   Otherwise,  "the  onus  of  proving  either  a  customary
    marriage or disillusion rests on the party making the assertion."  (see
    NA (customary marriage and  divorce  -  evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT
    00009).  The refusal letter challenges the authenticity of the marriage
    certificate, suggesting that "purported wet ink stamps  are  underneath
    that of the black background lines as indeed are the  two  signatures."
    This "would indicate that they are either applied to the paper prior to
    the certificate being printed as a certificate  or  that  all  markings
    were printed simultaneously.  This is not consistent  with  the  normal
    application of a wedding stamp."  There was no allegation  of  outright
    forgery  only  a  submission  that  the  anomalies  "detract  from  the
    credibility of the stated document."  No evidence has been provided  to
    show what might constitute "the normal application of a wedding  stamp"
    on such documents.  In the absence of evidence which might indicate how
    the document produced by the appellant  and  a  "normal"  document  may
    differ, it is difficult to know how to take that part  of  the  refusal
    letter any further.

 5. The letter cites paragraph 3(1) of Part 1  of  the  Ghanaian  Customary
    Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985  which  records  that
    statutory declarations accompanying applications  for  registration  of
    marriages in Ghana shall state "the places of residence of the  parties
    at the date of the marriage."  The letter states that:

         The statutory declaration provided  accompanying  the  registration
         for a marriage does not state the places of residence at  the  time
         of marriage for either yourself or your EEA sponsor instead stating
         places of residence for your proxies at the ceremony.

    The respondent was not satisfied that the marriage had  been  conducted
    in accordance with the Ghanaian Law of 1985 and "for this reason the UK
    Border Agency cannot accept the registration of marriage  or  statutory
    declarations submitted as being valid and lawfully issued and  evidence
    of your relationship."

 6. The statutory declaration shows that Mr Pawlowski's father  was  living
    at house number M212/2 Madina, Accra whilst the appellant's father  was
    living at house  number  C574/3  Asylum  Down,  Accra.   The  customary
    marriages register  form  simply  states  that  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Pawlowski are living in "UK".

 7. A question in the appeal is whether  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    reject the application  for  a  residence  card  by  insisting  upon  a
    scrupulous adherence to the requirements of the Ghanaian Law  of  1985.
    The document which has been  submitted  by  the  respondent  concerning
    customary marriage and divorce in Ghana gives details of  the  concerns
    which arise in proxy/customary marriages.  It notes that  there  is  no
    central register  of  marriages  with  the  consequence  that  marriage
    certificates  are  extremely  difficult  to  verify.   The  potentially
    polygamous nature of such customary marriages was also  raised  in  the
    report.  The report notes that:

         The contents of the statutory declarations are not  verifiable  and
         this renders the system open to abuse.   ...  Even  with  customary
         marriages that are  registered,  the  certificates  are  of  little
         evidential  worth  as  information  provided  on   the   forms   of
         registration  of  marriage  or  divorce  is  accepted  as  a   true
         representation of facts without any verification.

 8.  Set  against  the  problematic  nature  of   the   Ghanaian   marriage
    registration system are the considerable benefits to  an  appellant  of
    participating in what is, in essence, a purely paper exercise.  I  make
    no criticism of the appellant for not attending the hearings before the
    First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal; it is her right to have  the
    appeal decided on the papers.   However,  the  fact  remains  that  the
    appellant seeks, simply by submitting to the  respondent  a  number  of
    documents created abroad the  veracity  of  which  cannot  be  properly
    established, a right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.    In  the
    circumstances, I consider that it is  reasonable  that  the  respondent
    should insist  that  the  documents  submitted  to  her  should  comply
    strictly and in every particular with the foreign laws subject to which
    they purport to have been  created.   In  this  appeal,  the  statutory
    declaration does not, as required by the 1985 law, give details of  the
    places of residence of the bride and groom.  Given  that  the  onus  of
    proving the particulars of this marriage rests on the appellant, I find
    that she has failed to establish that she has  contracted  a  customary
    marriage with an EEA national.
 9. I have considered  new  documents  which  have  been  provided  by  the
    appellant to the Upper Tribunal.  I have a  71  page  bundle  which  is
    indexed on its face.  There are witness statements from  the  appellant
    and Mr Pawlowski in which they state that they live together at 120  St
    Leonards Road, Bradford.  There are some particulars in both statements
    as to how the  couple  met.   I  note  that  there  is  also  a  letter
    purportedly written by the Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Regional
    Integration of Ghana dated 3 May 2012 verifying a signature endorsed on
    the statutory declaration.  There are a number of documents relating to
    the employment of Mr Pawlowski.  There  are  documents  from  insurance
    companies and bank statements relating to both  Mr  Pawlowski  and  the
    appellant indicating that they both reside at the same address.  It  is
    not clear how much further forward this evidence takes the  appellant's
    case.  I can give little weight to the witness  statements  given  that
    they have not been tested in  court  in  cross-examination.   Whilst  I
    acknowledge the appellant's right to have her appeal determined without
    a hearing, she cannot expect  significant  weight  to  be  attached  to
    witness evidence which is not tested  by  cross-examination.   Further,
    the new documents relating to the marriage process do not  address  the
    reason why the respondent rejected those papers, namely the failure  of
    the statutory declaration to record the places of  residence  of  bride
    and groom.

10. As regards Article 8 ECHR, I repeat that I  am  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that the appellant and Mr Pawlowski are  married  as  claimed.
    The only evidence regarding their private and family  lives  appear  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal where an assertion  is
    made that Mr Pawlowski is a European citizen who "lives  and  works  in
    the United Kingdom."  The grounds go on to say that, "the appellant has
    therefore established a private and family life in the UK by virtue  of
    her marriage to her  husband."   Given  that  I  have  found  that  the
    appellant has failed to prove that Mr Pawlowski is her husband,  I  can
    place little weight on that assertion.  I have been given  no  evidence
    of the strength of their ties either to each other  or  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is no evidence at all regarding their relationship  nor
    is there any reliable evidence that they are living together.  I am not
    satisfied that Article 8 ECHR is engaged at all in this appeal but,  if
    it is, then I find, on the evidence, that the respondent's decision  is
    entirely proportionate.

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    27 June 2013 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.

12. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 31 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



