
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08693/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2016                           |On 7 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               Mr ACE KENTAKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Respondent/Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant/Respondent:   Miss K Tobin, Counsel
For the Respondent/Appellant :Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,
    who was the respondent below.  I will continue to refer to her as  "the
    respondent" and the appellant in the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT")  as
    "the appellant".
Background

2.   The appellant's mother first came to the UK from Jamaica in 1987.   The
    appellant, who is a Jamaican national, was born on 15 April 1988 in the
    UK.  In 2008 he was  sentenced  to  eight  years'  imprisonment  for  a
    serious offence of robbery and related offences. On 5 August  2010,  he
    was subject to a  deportation  order  but  the  appellant  successfully
    appealed that to the First-tier Tribunal on 27 February 2012. An appeal
    against that decision by the  respondent  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    unsuccessful. The present appeal is against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baldwin ("the Immigration  Judge"),  promulgated  on  16
    June 2016, to allow the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to revoke his indefinite leave to remain ("ILR"). The decision
    to revoke the appellant's ILR was taken on 27th January 2015. That gave
    the appellant a right to appeal the Immigration Judge's decision to the
    FTT.

3.   Judge Bennett, who, in 2012,  allowed  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the deportation  decision,  described  the  terrifying
    ordeal for the victim of the robbery for  which  he  was  sentenced  by
    Judge Moss in 2008, in paragraph 2 of his decision. There he  indicated
    that it was an offence of the utmost seriousness in which the appellant
    had pointed a gun into the victim's chest. There was no  doubt  in  the
    sentencing judge that it must have been a terrifying experience of  the
    victim. Unfortunately, the appellant pleaded not guilty to the  offence
    but was found guilty by the jury.  However, Judge  Moss  recorded  that
    the appellant did not present a significant risk of reoffending.

4.   Judge Bennett distinguished the case of Maslov v  Austria  [2009]  INLR
    47 because in the case of Maslov the appellant had  committed  offences
    of a non-violent nature, with  one  exception.  Having  considered  the
    appellant's behaviour as an adult Judge Bennett did not consider the UK
    to be in breach of its obligations under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Nevertheless Judge  Bennett,  having
    considered the revulsion with which society regarded offences  such  as
    robbery, decided that the consequences  of  removal  were  sufficiently
    serious to outweigh other considerations, including the public need for
    protection from dangerous criminals.  The nature and seriousness of the
    offence did not require him to deport the appellant. I suggested to the
    appellant's representative that a tribunal may have reached a different
    view today.

5.    Even  though  Judge  Bennett  had  concerns  over  the  accuracy   and
    reliability  of  the  information  the  appellant  gave   as   to   his
    relationships in Jamaica, he was satisfied that the interference by the
    respondent  with  the  appellant's  protected  human  rights  would  be
    disproportionate.  He therefore allowed the appeal.
The Revocation of Leave and FTT Tribunal Appeal

6.   The present phase of proceedings came in on  1  August  2013  when  the
    respondent notified the appellant of his  desire  to  revoke  leave  to
    remain.  The appellant was sent a letter to this effect on  27  January
    2015. The appellant gave notice of appeal to the FTT on 2nd March  2015
    and this came before the Immigration Judge on 9th June 2016 sitting  at
    Hatton Cross.

7.   The Immigration Judge noted that the  appellant's  offending  was  very
    serious and of a type which society finds repellent.  The appellant had
    shown a complete disregard for UK law but he had provided evidence that
    he was employed and was supporting himself and had  less  incentive  to
    reoffend.  He had started a family of his own in the UK.  Having  lived
    in the UK all his life,  the  appellant  succeeded  on  his  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds. It was not appropriate in all the  circumstances  to
    revoke the appellant's leave to remain.  The Immigration Judge was also
    critical of the respondent.

8.   In granting permission  to  the  respondent  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the Immigration Judge's decision, Judge of FTT Brunnen
    pointed out that the  Immigration  Judge  had,  apparently,  applied  a
    mandatory test pursuant to Section 76 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). In fact, Section 76(1) of the  2002
    Act provides that:


         "The Secretary of State may revoke a person's indefinite  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person -


         (a)  is liable to deportation, but
         (b)  cannot be deported for legal reasons"


9.   The Immigration Judge having considered the documentary  evidence  from
    the appellant and his partner and  the  appellant's  relationship  with
    their children and the welfare of those children,  concluded  that  the
    appellant had a strong case for "being allowed to remain in the UK". It
    is  now  necessary  to  consider  whether  that  decision  is   legally
    sustainable having regard to the correct analysis of the law.

The Upper Tribunal appeal

10.  On 22 June 2016, the respondent appealed the decision  of  the  FtT  to
    allow the appellant's appeal.  The respondent raises effectively, three
    grounds:

    (i)  It was wrong for the Immigration Judge to suggest, as he  appeared
         to  in  his  decision,  that  the  fact  that  the  respondent  had
         mistakenly referred to the word "will" tainted the discretion which
         the respondent had exercised.  It was submitted  that  no  material
         error had been identified in the manner  of  the  exercise  of  the
         respondent's discretion.


    (ii)     The Immigration Judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         finding the exercise of the discretion  was  unreasonable  in  this
         case.


    (iii)    The Immigration Judge had failed to apply the judgment of  the
         Supreme Court in Fitzroy George [2014] UKSC 28.


11.  In the light of these failings the FtT was invited to  give  permission
    to appeal.

12.  As has been indicated, the application came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brunnen on 9 October 2016. Judge Brunnen  considered  the
    provisions of Section 76 of the 2002 Act and the fact that  Section  76
    of the 2002 Act gave the respondent a discretion. Plainly, in his view,
    a discretion had to be exercised by the respondent. He then went on  to
    consider Fitzroy George and thought  it  "arguably  unclear"  from  the
    decision of the FTT in this case whether  the  Immigration  Judge  held
    that the respondent had failed to exercise her discretion or whether he
    had held that the  respondent  should  have  exercised  her  discretion
    differently on the facts of this case.  Paragraphs 18  and  19  of  the
    decision suggested  both  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  not  been
    satisfied as to the reasons given by the respondent and that he allowed
    the appeal outright. In any event, the  Immigration  Judge's  reasoning
    left something to be desired.


The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

13.  At the hearing, Miss  Brocklesby-Weller  indicated  that  she  accepted
    that  revocation  was  not  automatic  in  this  case.   However,   the
    respondent  had  in  fact  considered  all  the  factors  relevant   to
    revocation.  Ultimately the question was one  of  reasonableness.   The
    respondent had  exercised  her  discretion  properly,  considering  all
    relevant factors but the  seriousness  of  the  offence,  the  lack  of
    evidence to support rehabilitation, the poor character of the appellant
    and all aspects of the case led to the conclusion  that  he  should  be
    subject to the revocation of his ILR.

14.  Her second main ground of attack on the decision of  the  FTT  was  the
    lack of application of the decision in Fitzroy George.   In  that  case
    the appellant had  been  convicted  on  seven  different  occasions  of
    offences including the supply of cocaine in January 2002, for which  he
    was sentenced to three years in a Young Offenders Institution.  He also
    had driving and other offences on a number of occasions.  On the  basis
    of his convictions the Secretary of State  judged  that  a  deportation
    order was conducive to the public good.   However,  subsequent  appeals
    resulted in a finding that the appellant's Article 8  rights  would  be
    infringed by his deportation  and  that  these  outweighed  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.

15.  Their lordships considered whether the "legal bar to  deportation",  in
    that  case  under  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  meant  that  it  was
    inappropriate to revoke ILR.  The existence of a power  to  revoke  was
    clear, according to their lordships (See paragraph 16 of  the  judgment
    of the Supreme Court in Fitzroy George).

16.  The human rights claim may well prevent an actual  deportation  of  the
    individual concerned.  However, it did not prevent the respondent  from
    altering the individual's  status  and  revoking  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  This may control some of his activities  in  public  and  have
    other implications for the appellant.

17.  I was also referred by the respondent at the hearing  to  paragraph  28
    of the decision in Fitzroy George.   There,  it  is  indicated  that  a
    deportation order not having been made it was not necessarily anomalous
    or wrong  for  the  foreign  criminal  concerned  to  face  a  loss  of
    immigration status.

18.  I raised at the hearing the issue of  delay.   Clearly,  there  was  no
    meeting of the minds as to the cause of that.  The  appellant  did  not
    himself  accept  responsibility  for  it  and  Miss   Brocklesby-Weller
    considered both sides had a part to play.

19.  Overall, Miss  Brocklesby-Weller  said  that  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence and the other points she had made justified the revocation.

20.  Miss Tobin pointed out that  the  discretion  had  not  been  exercised
    correctly.  Fitzroy George was not referred to  but  the  circumstances
    were different here.  She accepted that the Secretary of  State  had  a
    discretion and had exercised it but she did not accept that, given  the
    appellant's personal history  (he  has  children  here),  this  was  an
    appellant case for interfering with the decision of the FtT.  In  fact,
    the Immigration Judge was fully justified in giving her client  another
    chance.

21.  At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether
    or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the FtT and
    if so what steps should be taken to rectify that.

Discussion

22.  Section 76 of the 2002 Act allows the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  where  the  person  who  is  liable   to
    deportation cannot be removed for legal reasons. The fact that here the
    Secretary of State, erroneously, referred  to  a  mandatory  basis  for
    revoking ILR does not appear to be relevant to the  approach  that  she
    took.  Whether or not the proposed deportation was mandatory  does  not
    decide the  issue  of  whether  or  not  to  revoke  ILR.  Overall  the
    respondent did not regard the revocation of the appellant's  ILR  as  a
    mandatory requirement.

23.  Unfortunately, the Immigration Judge  did  not  refer  to  the  Fitzroy
    George case.  That  case  sets  out  the  framework  within  which  the
    discretion under Section 76(1) must be exercised.  There are  a  number
    of procedural hurdles that the respondent must go  through  before  she
    gets to the stage of revocation of ILR:


    (i)  It must have been determined that it was in  the  public  good  to
         deport the appellant within Section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
         1971.  Where the deportation order is upheld, revocation  of  leave
         to remain follows automatically.


    (ii)     Section 76 was enacted to deal with precisely the situation in
         this case; where the deportation cannot be implemented  for  "legal
         reasons", for example, a defence has been raised  under  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998 (see paragraph 14 of Fitzroy George).

24.  There is no doubt here that the respondent's reasons for  revoking  ILR
    were cogent and properly reasoned:

    (i)  The appellant had made no  significant  effort  to  find  suitable
         employment and therefore he had a financial  incentive  to  further
         offend;


    (ii) He had a long way to go to prove that  he  was  not  a  threat  to
         society given the seriousness of his previous offence;


    (iii)    The Secretary of State alleged  that  the  appellant  had  not
         supplied evidence of the family life he claimed to  have  developed
         with his son, who had been both on 9th October 2013, despite having
         a number of opportunities to do so, although this was  disputed  by
         the appellant. In any event,  it  was  not  a  consequence  of  the
         present immigration decision that the appellant  would  be  removed
         from the UK and thus separated from his family, although  it  would
         mean that the appellant's status in the UK was more precarious;

    (iv)     Rather than address his offending the  appellant  had  made  a
         number of allegations against the respondent, including allegations
         of a racist conspiracy against black males (see paragraph 16 of the
         refusal). This undermined any suggestion  that  the  appellant  had
         come to terms with his offending and was taking steps to ensure  it
         did not occur again.

Conclusions

25.  In paragraph 16 of Fitzroy George the Supreme Court explained  why  the
    power that is in issue in this case had to be introduced or why  it  is
    necessary.  The effect of human rights' claims succeeding is to prevent
    actual deportation and in the words of the Supreme Court:

         "... it may make good sense to alter  his  status  from  indefinite
         leave to remain to limited  leave,  or,  more  likely,  conditional
         leave, which gives proper scope for controls on his  activities  in
         the public interest".

26.  Although the Immigration Judge was entitled to comment on the  mistaken
    reference to the power under Section 76 to revoke ILR being "mandatory"
    it was clear from the  whole  decision  that  the  respondent  properly
    exercised her discretion and took account of all the  relevant  factors
    in the case.  The Immigration Judge seems  to  have  assumed  that  the
    effect of the respondent's decision was to  permit  the  respondent  to
    remove the appellant from the UK (see the third line down of page 5  of
    the decision). This was not the effect of the decision.  The public are
    entitled to expect that some change in  status  will  follow  from  the
    commission of a serious offence by a foreign national.  I was concerned
    at the hearing by the delay but it is by no means clear how this  delay
    has been caused and how relevant it is to the ultimate outcome. I  have
    decided that no weight should attach to it in all the circumstances.

27.  I find that the respondent was entitled in all  the  circumstances  and
    justified in her decision to revoke ILR and the Immigration  Judge  was
    wrong to consider that simply because the appellant had  not  committed
    further offences this  meant  it  was  inappropriate  to  exercise  the
    discretion against the appellant.  no good reasons were  given  by  the
    Immigration Judge for rejecting the respondent's case but a  number  of
    wrong or inaccurate reasons were given,  such  as  asking  what  useful
    purpose the revocation of ILR served (see paragraph 16).   It is  clear
    from Fitzroy George that the reduction in status does  serve  a  useful
    purpose. The FTT should be slow to criticise the  respondent  when  she
    takes account of all relevant factors in deciding whether to  remove  a
    foreign criminal in the public interest. As a result of  the  reduction
    in status if the appellant committed further offences his removal would
    be very much easier.

Decision

28.  I find that there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    FTT. I substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal which  is  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and find that the  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

29.  No anonymity direction is made.

30.  I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     7 December 2016

