
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House, Newport  |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On: 1 August 2016                    |On: 30 August 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  SADIQ [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Paur, Counsel instructed by Gillman Smith Lee
Solicitors


                                  DECISION

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson in which  she  allowed  the
    appeal of Sadiq [K], a citizen of Pakistan, against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to grant leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    (Article 8 ECHR) grounds. For the sake of clarity, I will refer  to  Mr
    [K] as 'the Applicant'.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 April  2006  and  was
    given leave to remain as student. His leave to  remain  on  this  basis
    eventually expired on 14 January 2012.  A  subsequent  application  for
    leave to remain was refused and the  Applicant's  appeal  against  that
    refusal was  dismissed  by  Judge  Rowlands  on  21  August  2013.  The
    Applicant exhausted his appeal  rights  on  27  November  2013.  On  28
    January 2015 the Upper Tribunal granted a stay of removal  pending  the
    Secretary of State's consideration of  a  report  from  an  independent
    social worker. On 9 February 2015 the Secretary of  State  reconsidered
    and again refused the application to remain on human rights grounds and
    on 16 February  2015  removal  directions  were  given.  The  Applicant
    exercised his right of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    and this is the appeal that came before Judge Suffield-Thompson  on  30
    September 2015 and was allowed. The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.
    The application was granted on 1  April  2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kimnell in the following terms

         It is arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper
         balancing exercise having  regard  to  s.117B  of  the  Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and Mr Puar appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Submissions

 4. Mr Richards said that the grounds  are  fairly  brief  and  clear.  The
    previous appeal had been dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Rowlands) and permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  not
    granted. Whereas the Judge in the appeal now being challenged  was  not
    bound by the previous findings these  should  have  been  the  starting
    point.  The  Judge  failed  to  take  into   account   Judge   Rowlands
    conclusions. There is no record of his findings  in  her  decision  and
    this is a clear misdirection.  It  was  irrational  for  the  Judge  to
    conclude that the Applicant  was  a  "third  parent"  to  his  cousin's
    children. The Judge's overall conclusions in this respect  are  put  in
    extreme terms and are little more than hyperbole. The  Judge  has  also
    erred in her conclusions concerning section 117B.  By  concluding  that
    the Applicant, not currently claiming benefits for himself, was  not  a
    financial burden on the state the Judge has used  the  wrong  test  the
    correct  question  being  whether   the   Applicant   was   financially
    independent.

 5. For the appellant Mr Puar said that the Judge  correctly  self-directed
    to Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 00072 at paragraph 28. Judge Rowlands
    did not make any adverse factual findings, he  made  an  assessment  of
    proportionality. The Judge points to evidence that was not before Judge
    Rowlands. The Judge sets out her  reasoning  correctly  and  was  quite
    entitled to come to the conclusions that she did. So far as family life
    is concerned Judge Rowlands found that there were more than normal ties
    between the Applicant and the children.  There  is  nothing  irrational
    about the Judge's conclusions. When dealing with section 117 the  Judge
    points out at paragraph 45 that the Applicant speaks excellent English,
    has never been convicted of a crime, and is not claiming benefits.  She
    was right to point out  that  there  are  no  countervailing  features.
    Section 117 is not  exhaustive  and  the  Judge  correctly  takes  into
    account all relevant factors before reaching her conclusion.

Decision

 6. The factual matrix involved in this appeal is  unusual.  The  Applicant
    came to the UK as a student in 2006 and went to live  with  his  cousin
    Sohail before moving to live with his cousin Shakeel and his family  in
    2001. The Appellant and  Shakeel  had  been  very  close  as  children.
    Shakeel and his wife both have severe mental  health  problems.  Having
    moved in with Shakeel the Applicant very soon became an  integral  part
    of the household looking after Shakeel's four children and due to their
    health issues also looking after Shakeel and his wife.  The  extent  of
    the family responsibilities that the Applicant has taken on is detailed
    in the decision of judge  Rowlands  and  well  as  the  decision  under
    appeal.

 7. As Mr Puar rightly pointed out there were no adverse  factual  findings
    made by the previous Immigration Judge. In a decision made following  a
    hearing on 14 August 2013 Judge Rowlands recites the facts at paragraph
    12 i) and concludes that the Applicant has an established  family  life
    with Shakeel [S] and that his relationship with 'Shakeel's  family  and
    aunt and Lubna' form part of the Appellant's established  private  life
    in the United Kingdom. Judge Rowlands went on to find at  paragraph  12
    ii) that the Respondent's  decision  interferes  with  the  Applicant's
    family and private life sufficiently significantly to engage Article 8.
    At  paragraph  12  iv)  Judge   Rowlands   considers   the   issue   of
    proportionality at length before reaching the conclusion that it is not
    disproportionate for the Applicant to leave the United Kingdom.

 8. There is in my judgement nothing at  all  in  the  decision  now  under
    appeal to indicate anything  other  than  that  the  Judge  took  Judge
    Rowlands decision as the starting  point.  The  Judge  correctly  self-
    directs to Devaseelan (at paragraph 28) and refers to  Judge  Rowlands'
    decision (paragraphs 28 to 32). There is no error of law  apparent  and
    indeed with Judge Rowlands having found that the Respondent's  decision
    was an interference in the Applicant's established family  and  private
    life a review of proportionality taking into  account  the  passage  of
    time and events since Judge  Rowlands'  decision  was  undoubtedly  the
    proper approach. The first ground of appeal must fail.

 9. Equally the second ground of appeal cannot succeed.  The  Secretary  of
    State complains that the Judge's conclusion that the  Applicant  was  a
    third parent to his cousin's children  is  irrational  particularly  in
    circumstances where the family admit that they have  never  sought  the
    assistance of social services. In fact, the  Judge  carefully  examines
    the circumstances of this family, circumstances that Judge Rowlands had
    already found constituted a family life  in  which  the  Applicant  was
    involved, and reaches  the  conclusion  that  a  protected  family  and
    private life exists. Her assessment of the quality of that family  life
    is clearly shown by the conclusion that the Applicant is a third parent
    to the children. Whilst the wording of  this  conclusion  may  have  an
    element of hyperbole the facts behind it are quite clearly  and  indeed
    comprehensively set out. The Judge was  entitled  to  come  to  such  a
    conclusion having examined the facts and it cannot be described  in  my
    judgment as irrational.

10. The final ground of appeal suggests that the Judge's finding  that  the
    Applicant, not claiming benefits, was not a  financial  burden  on  the
    state and  so  the  Secretary  of  state  could  'only  rely  upon  the
    maintenance of immigration control'  was  a  misdirection  in  law  the
    correct test being whether he was financially independent.

11. There are a number of reasons in my judgement why there is no  material
    error in this respect. Firstly, the maintenance of immigration  control
    is of itself in the economic interests of the United Kingdom it is  not
    a distinct public interest. The Judge clearly  took  into  account  the
    economic interests aspect of the maintenance of immigration control  by
    considering whether the Appellant was a financial burden on the  state.
    Secondly and in any event the factors detailed in section 117B are  not
    exhaustive. It is not a requirement that an  Appellant  be  financially
    independent, this is a factor to be considered and  to  be  taken  into
    account when dealing with the issue of proportionality. Thirdly  it  is
    very clear that in reaching her decision the Judge took into account  a
    full panoply of reasons of which the fact that the Appellant was not  a
    financial  burden  upon  the  state  was  just  one.  The  decision  is
    comprehensive and thoroughly reasoned and the Judge makes it very clear
    in terms that are, in my  judgment  unassailable,  why  she  makes  the
    finding that the Secretary of State's decision is disproportionate.

Conclusion

12. There is no error of law material to the decision to allow the appeal.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:     Date: 30 August 2016

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
