
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2014                           |On 10 December 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Phuc Tam Dang Dang
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr A Swain of Counsel instructed by Dotcom
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Vietnam born on 8 April 1986.  On 13 October 2007 he arrived with leave
    to enter as a student which was extended until  31  January  2010.   An
    application for further leave as a student was made  out  of  time  and
    leave was granted until 4 April 2011.  Two further student applications
    failed and on 18 September 2012 the  Applicant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his relationship with A  Lenh  Sy.   They  state
    they have been living together since September 2010 and on 7 April 2011
    had married.  She was born in  Vietnam  on  25  October  1988  and  was
    brought to the United Kingdom at the age of about  3  years  and  is  a
    British citizen.

The SSHD's Decision

 2. On 21 August 2013 the Applicant was served with notice in form  IS.151A
    that he was a person liable to removal.  On 8 November and  2  December
    2013 his solicitors made further representations to the Appellant  (the
    SSHD).  On 23 January 2014 the SSHD refused the application and decided
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to  remove  the
    Applicant to Vietnam, although the destination  was  omitted  from  the
    Notice of Decision.

 3. On 11 February 2014 the  Applicant  through  his  solicitors  lodged  a
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002  Act).   The  grounds  assert  the
    Applicant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix
    FM and  in  particular  paragraph  EX1(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Additionally, they assert that to require the Applicant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom  would  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
    obligations to respect the private and family lives  of  the  Applicant
    and his wife protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 11 September 2014 following a hearing
    on 27 August 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Meah  allowed  the
    appeal under both the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8).

 5. The Judge found the Applicant and his  wife  were  credible  witnesses.
    They were in a genuine and subsisting marriage.  The Applicant had  two
    brothers in the United Kingdom and his mother and a half-sister live in
    Vietnam.  The wife's parents and siblings are in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She is very close to them and has an established social circle.  She is
    a beauty therapist and a nail technician.  She speaks  some  Vietnamese
    but does not read or write it.

 6. At paragraphs 19-21 of his determination the Judge found it would be  a
    "major and insurmountable obstacle"  if  the  wife  had  to  return  to
    Vietnam and to learn to read and write Vietnamese.  He also  found  she
    would  be  unable  to  follow  her  profession  there,  noting  she  is
    thoroughly English and has never lived outside London since the age  of
    3.  Her only experience of Vietnam was a one month long  holiday  which
    she took with friends at around the age of 18 and more recently  a  ten
    day visit with the Applicant to meet his mother.

 7. At paragraph 22 of his determination the Judge found:-

         .... the culmination of all these factors lead me to make the  firm
         finding that the obstacles that would be faced  by  the  spouse  in
         attempting to relocate to Vietnam would be insurmountable and  that
         she would face serious hardship as a result hence I also find  that
         the provision at paragraph EX.1(b) alongside the criteria  at  EX.2
         are satisfied.  Nagre.

    The Judge then went on to deal with the Applicant's claim under Article
    8 outside the Rules.  He referred to the judgment  in  R  (oao  MM  and
    Others) (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985,  noting  the  different
    consequences for a consideration of an  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules in the event the Rules provide  a  complete  code.   He  referred
    generically to the judgment in Huang and Kashmiri v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11
    and summarised the appropriate tests for assessment  of  an  Article  8
    claim at paragraphs 7-12 of EB Kosovo v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  He  found
    there were  significant  factors  making  the  case  of  the  Applicant
    "exceptional" which merited consideration.

 8. He noted the family life of the Applicant and his wife and  his  wife's
    roots and ties in the United Kingdom, that she had lived virtually  all
    her life here where she had a job and a career.  These circumstances he
    found:-

         ... in these circumstances the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  UK
         would cause a disproportionate interference with  both  theirs  and
         the spouse's family's Article 8 family life rights.

    Having made this finding the Judge then went on to say:-

         The Appellant also has two siblings in the UK and one of  them  has
         been supporting him financially alongside the support  he  receives
         from his spouse.  I find that this financial dependency  takes  the
         relationship they enjoy beyond the threshold  of  normal  emotional
         ties hence a breach would  also  occur  in  this  scenario  if  the
         Appellant were made to return to Vietnam.  Kugathas.

    The Judge noted the Applicant had been in the United Kingdom for almost
    seven years and residing with his wife  for  "the  best  part  of  this
    period".  At paragraph 30 he found:-

         They have sufficient funds to adequately maintain  and  accommodate
         themselves without recourse to public funds and the removal of  the
         Applicant would be a disproportionate interference with  the  right
         to a private and  family  life  of  himself,  his  wife  and  their
         respective family members when set against  the  need  to  maintain
         proper immigration control.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal.  The grounds of appeal assert the
    Court held in MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  that  the
    Immigration Rules are "a complete code that formed the  starting  point
    for the decision maker" and assert the Judge failed to have  regard  to
    the Immigration Rules.  The grounds also refer to the determination  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAC) and the judgment in R (oao  Nagre  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin). They assert  the  Judge  had  failed  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances  and  an  unjustifiable  harsh  outcome  to  support  his
    conclusion with regard to  the  Article  8  claim.   The  grounds  then
    challenge the  Judge's  assessment  of  insurmountable  obstacles  with
    reference to Appendix FM paragraph EX.1 and maintain that the Applicant
    and his wife could return and integrate into Vietnamese culture.

10. On 23 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal PJG  White  granted
    the SSHD permission to appeal because Judge Meah had arguably  made  an
    error of law for the following reasons:-

         "(a).    The judge allowed the appeal with  specific  reference  to
             Appendix FM, EX1 and Article 8.

           (b).   It is arguable that in  respect  of  EX1  the  judge  gave
             inadequate  reasons  as  to  why  there  were  'insurmountable
             obstacles' preventing the Appellant's spouse  from  relocating
             to Vietnam.

           (c).   It is arguable that in assessing  Article  8  outside  the
             Immigration Rules the judge failed to have regard to  Sections
             117A and 117B of the 2020 Act ... .

           (d).   It is  arguable  that  in  regard  to  the  issue  of  the
             Applicant returning to Vietnam  to  make  an  out  of  country
             application as a spouse, the judge failed to place  sufficient
             regard  to  the  comments  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Sabir
             (Appendix FM-EX1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC))."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Applicant  and  his  wife  attended  the  hearing.   The  Applicant
    appeared to have limited English because he needed his wife to  explain
    to him what was happening.

12. For the SSHD Mr Duffy submitted the Judge's finding that the  obstacles
    to removal were  insurmountable  was  inadequately  reasoned.   He  had
    failed to take account that the Applicant did not  have  the  right  to
    choose in which state he should pursue his private and family life. The
    Judge's findings at paragraphs 19-21 of his determination did not  show
    there would be any significant problems for either the Applicant or his
    wife or both of them, on return to Vietnam.

13. For the Applicant Mr Swain submitted the determination did not  contain
    an error of law.  There had been a thorough examination at the  hearing
    of the circumstances of  the  Applicant  and  his  wife.   The  social,
    cultural, linguistic and professional factors which had been identified
    as reasons for the Judge's decision were reflected in his determination
    and his reasons were sustainable.

14. The wife had very limited connection to Vietnam and the facts which the
    Judge found placed the  Applicant  within  the  scope  of  Appendix  FM
    paragraph EX1 were within his discretion and for the exercise of  which
    he had given sustainable reasons.

15. He referred to paragraph 31 of VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5  in
    which in the only reasoned judgment of the Court Sedley LJ said:-

         ... It is no longer  necessary  to  follow  their  (the  Tribunal's
         determination) scholarly tracing of the concept  of  insurmountable
         obstacles in the Strasbourg jurisprudence  or  their  endeavour  to
         reconcile it with domestic case-law, because - as is common  ground
         - the correct  test  is  now  to  be  found  in  EB  (Kosovo).  But
         recognition should be given ... to the conclusion ...  that,  if  a
         removal is to be held disproportionate, 'what must be shown is more
         than a mere hardship or a mere difficulty or mere  obstacle.  There
         is a seriousness test which requires the obstacles or  difficulties
         to go beyond matters of choice or inconvenience.'

    He then referred to the comments in Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
    [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) about how "insurmountable" should be construed.

16. The Judge had looked at the relevant factors and his determination  was
    within his ambit of discretion and did not contain an error of law.  Mr
    Duffy for the SSHD had no further submissions to make.

Consideration

17. Looking at the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  I  do  not  find  it
    necessary to address the  first  reason  given  in  sub-paragraph  (a).
    Turning to grounds (b) and (d) of the permission, The Judge's  findings
    that the need for the Applicant's wife  to  learn  to  read  and  write
    Vietnamese, a language in which she had some speaking facility, to be a
    major and insurmountable obstacle and that she would  not  be  able  to
    find employment are insufficiently reasoned to show that they amount to
    insurmountable  obstacles.   Further,   the   Judge   failed   in   his
    consideration  of  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  to   look   at   the
    circumstances of the Applicant and whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing his return to Vietnam.

18. The grounds referred to in (c) of the permission do reveal an error  of
    law.  The hearing was after 28 July 2014 and the Judge was required  to
    take into account the SSHD's view of Article 8  having  regard  to  the
    factors referred to in Sections 117A, B and D  of  the  2002  Act.   He
    failed to make any reference to  these  factors  or  to  the  statutory
    provisions.

19. The SSHD's grounds relying on MF (Nigeria), Gulshan and  Nagre  do  not
    disclose any arguable error of law.  None of  the  case  law  from  and
    including MF (Nigeria) has established that the Rules  are  a  complete
    code other than in deportation cases.  What has come to be known as the
    "Gulshan Gateway" has been shown to be an unnecessary  additional  step
    in consideration of Article 8 claims outside the Rules in  R  (oao  MM)
    and in R (Oludoyi) v SSHD (Article 8 -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
    [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC).

20. The Judge sought to allow the appeal by way of reference to Appendix FM
    paragraph EX.1.  The ground in the grant  of  permission  referring  to
    Sabir does disclose an error of law.  Appendix FM is an  appendix.   It
    must be read in conjunction  with  the  appropriate  paragraph  in  the
    Rules.  The Judge has not  considered  any  of  the  possible  relevant
    paragraphs 284 or 287  of  the  Rules  before  proceeding  to  consider
    Appendix FM.  The SSHD made a similar error in the reasons letter.

21. Paragraph 26 of the Judge's determination seeks to address the "Razgar"
    questions but fails fully so to do.  There is no  explanation  why  the
    Judge reaches his decision that the interference is disproportionate in
    paragraph 26 and then, having reached his decision, goes on to refer at
    paragraph 28 to consider further or additional facts about the  private
    and family life of the Applicant.

22. The circumstances of the Applicant and  his  wife  are  different  from
    those of the appellant in Chikwamba.  In that case  the  husband  could
    not return to Zimbabwe because he had been  recognised  as  a  refugee.
    Additionally, the appellant had a young child.  There was  no  evidence
    before the Judge how long it might take for the Applicant  to  complete
    an entry clearance application and obtain  a  decision.   There  is  no
    child whose best interests have to be considered.  He with his wife has
    returned to Vietnam. The Judge failed to show he had taken into account
    that the Applicant had originally come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student and so had no expectation of being able to  stay  indefinitely:
    see Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72. The Judge did not  consider
    the rest of the Applicant's immigration history.  These are matters  of
    which had he taken account of Sections 117A, B and D of the 2002 Act he
    would have been reminded.

23. For all these reasons, the determination contains errors  of  law  such
    that it cannot stand and should be set aside under Section  12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  I have considered  whether
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh.  The assessment whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  or
    that removal is disproportionate to the need  to  maintain  immigration
    control will require to be made  after  a  full  consideration  of  the
    evidence and the extent of any judicial fact finding necessary to reach
    such decision is such that, having regard to the over-riding  objective
    it is appropriate for the appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

ANONYMITY

24. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    papers in the Tribunal file and the likely issues and the issues raised
    by the appeal I do not find that any is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained  errors  of  law
    such that it should  be  set  aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh before a Judge other than Judge Meah.

    Vietnamese interpreter required.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 10. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
