
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08685/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                            |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                   Mrs YGK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ilahi, of Counsel instructed by Moorehouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ivory Coast, born  on  [  ]  1943,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davey who, in  a
    determination promulgated on  4  January  2017,  dismissed  her  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 3 March  2015  for
    leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   Judge Davey, in his determination set out the reasons for  the  refusal
    of the decision and in paragraph 13 of the determination stated:-

         "13.  Having  considered  the  matter  and  the  evidence  of   the
             Appellant, I do not find that the issues of  her  health,  put
             broadly, militate in favour of her  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  Similarly, the active role she is able still to play
             in the life of others is,  as  a  fact  significant,  but  the
             interference in it is not so significant as  to  amount  to  a
             breach of Article 8(1) ECHR".


3.   In paragraph 15 he wrote:-

         "15. The Appellant's circumstances are not of the kind  that  could
             be called exceptional or beyond those which would fall  to  be
             considered so as to militate in favour of her remaining in the
             United Kingdom.  The healthcare system in Ivory Coast may  not
             be equivalent to that in the United Kingdom but I do not  find
             that Article 8 ECHR is engaged outside the Rules".


4.   Although he expressed sympathy for the appellant  and  indeed  referred
    to her role in looking after her grandchildren, the judge  went  on  to
    say that there were no exceptional circumstances  nor  that  there  was
    evidence which would have  any  impact  on  her  grandchildren  if  she
    departed. He  ended  the  determination  by  stating  in  paragraph  18
    "Accordingly, I do not find that Article 8 ECHR is engaged".

5.   The grounds of appeal submitted that the judge had erred in failing  to
    accept that the appellant had a family life in  Britain  which  engaged
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR.  They referred to the comments of  the  judge
    in paragraphs 13 and 15 which I have quoted above and to  the  judgment
    in AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 which stated that:-

         "It follows, in our  judgment,  that  while  an  interference  with
         private or family life must be real if  it  is  to  engage  Article
         8(1), the threshold of engagement (the 'minimum level')  is  not  a
         specially high one.  Once the Article is engaged, the focus  moves,
         as Lord Bingham's remaining questions indicate, to the  process  of
         justification under Article 8(2).  It is this which, in  all  cases
         which engage Article 8(1), will determine whether there has been  a
         breach of the Article".


6.   The grounds then referred to various  definitions  of  family  life  in
    case law before asserting that the judge had  failed  to  carry  out  a
    proper balancing exercise as required by Article 8(2).

7.   The grounds of appeal were considered by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
    who granted permission on 27 October 2017.  She wrote:-

         "1.  The Appellant appeals against the decision of  the  Respondent
             dated 14 February 2015 refusing her leave to  remain  applying
             Article 8 ECHR and directing her removal to the  Ivory  Coast.
             The Appellant's appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Davey sitting at Taylor House in a decision  promulgated
             on 4 January 2017 ('the Decision').  Permission to appeal  was
             refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford in a  decision  sent
             on 4 October 2007.


         2.   The Appellant's Article 8 claim depends  on  her  relationship
             with her daughter  and  grandchildren,  her  age  and  medical
             conditions.


         3.   It is arguable that the Judge's  reasoning  fails  clearly  to
             identify  why  Article  8  is  not   even   engaged   in   the
             circumstances of this case.  There is arguably some  confusion
             about  the  various  concepts  under  the  Rules  as   between
             'insurmountable obstacles' (which applies in  the  case  of  a
             relationship where the consideration is  whether  family  life
             may be continued  abroad)  and  'very  significant  obstacles'
             which applies in  a  private  life  context  (and  raises  the
             question whether a person would be able to integrate in  their
             home country).  The latter was arguably the more  relevant  on
             the facts  of  this  particular  case  but  arguably  was  not
             considered (or not sufficiently so).


         4.   Even if the Judge may arguably have been entitled to  conclude
             that Article 8 was not engaged in the sense of  the  formation
             of and  interference  with  family  life  between  mother  and
             daughter/grandchildren, he arguably fails to explain  why  the
             Appellant's private life  does  not  engage  Article  8  ECHR,
             whether her case meets the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
             the Rules and, even if it does not, whether  the  consequences
             of removal would be 'unjustifiably harsh'  outside  the  Rules
             when balancing the interference against the public interest".


8.   At the hearing of the appeal I first asked Mr Avery to comment  on  the
    grounds of appeal.  He argued that the judge had not said that  Article
    8 was not engaged - what he had said was that  there  had  not  been  a
    breach.  It was clear, he argued, that the judge had taken into account
    all relevant factors in the balancing exercise and he  argued  in  fact
    that the  grounds  in  the  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    disingenuous and that there was no error of law in the decision.

9.   In reply Mr Ilahi emphasised that there had been a two-part test  which
    had not been considered by the judge.

10.  For the reasons given by Judge Smith  in  granting  appeal  I  consider
    that it is clear that the judge did make errors of law.  It is  not  at
    all clear that he did not find that Article 8 was not engaged:   indeed
    I consider that that is the tenor of what he wrote in paragraphs 13 and
    15 of the determination.  Moreover,  the  reality  is  that  Article  8
    encompasses both family and private life grounds.  It is  difficult  to
    consider that the appellant, over the last twelve years, has not  built
    up a private life here, let alone family life with her daughter and her
    family here.

11.  I consider that there is an error of law in this determination  because
    the judge has not carried out the appropriate structured approach  when
    considering the Article 8 rights of this appellant.  It is difficult to
    see  how  a  conclusion  could  be  reached  that  there  was  not   an
    interference with the appellant's rights under that Article and  having
    so found the judge would then surely have considered a proportionality,
    weighing up all relevant factors.  It may be well be, when taking  into
    account the family circumstances here and indeed the costs, if any,  in
    the  use  of  public  services  here,  let  alone  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's private life has been built at a time when she did not have
    leave to remain here and when her  situation  was  clearly  precarious,
    that the appellant's removal would not be found to be disproportionate,
    but that does not mean that such an assessment  should  not  have  been
    undertaken.

12.  For these reasons, having found  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    I direct that this appeal be remitted for a hearing afresh in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 13 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

