
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08545/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                          JOE FRANK IKECHUKWU ARALU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Amgbah, of UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Dineen who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  16  April
        2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal appeal against a  refusal  by
        the respondent to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of
        his right of residence as a result of his marriage  to  a  qualified
        person as  defined  in  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006. As a result of answers given by the appellant  and
        his spouse in a marriage interview the Respondent was satisfied  the
        appellant and his spouse were in  a  marriage  of  convenience.  The
        Judge reached the same conclusion.

Background

     2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria,  date  of  birth  15  August
        1970. He claims that he entered the UK on 11 May 2006. He  maintains
        that he met his spouse, Wanda Dyleswka, a Polish national who was 61
        years of age, in a  pub  in  early  2010,  that  their  relationship
        developed and that they began to co-habit in 2011. They  purportedly
        contracted a marriage by proxy in Ghana in May 2012. An  application
        for a residence card on the basis of their relationship was made  on
        10 October 2012 but this was refused. The appellant and  his  spouse
        were validly married on 15 May 2013 in the UK. Two  days  later  the
        appellant again applied for a residence card. The appellant and  his
        spouse were interviewed in respect of their marriage on 19  November
        2013. His application was refused on 02 December 2013.

     3. In  her  decision  refusing  the  application  the  respondent  made
        reference to a large  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
        between the appellant and the sponsor which the respondent  believed
        demonstrated that the  marriage  was  not  genuine.  The  respondent
        referred, inter alia, to answers given by the spouse suggesting  she
        was unaware of the proxy marriage.

     4. Aggrieved at this decision the appellant availed himself of his  in-
        country right of appeal and this was heard on 22nd December 2014  at
        Hatton Cross. The Judge had before him a bundle  of  documents  from
        the appellant that included statements from him and his spouse.  The
        Judge heard oral evidence and reserved his decision after  recording
        the submissions of the representatives.

     5. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant and his spouse were  in  a
        genuine marriage and dismissed the  appeal.  The  Judge  relied  on,
        amongst  other  matters,  some  of  the  inconsistencies  that  were
        apparent from the marriage interview record.  The  Judge's  decision
        was not promulgated until 16 April 2015, the  decision  having  been
        signed by the Judge on 14 April 2015. This was some 3 months  and  3
        weeks after the appeal was heard.

The Grounds of Appeal

     6. The Grounds argue that the Judge failed to make his decision  within
        a reasonable time. This, it was said, rendered his  decision  unsafe
        as the Judge failed, as a result of the delay, to address  oral  and
        written  evidence,   including   explanations   contained   in   the
        statements, provided  by  the  appellant  and  his  spouse.  It  was
        submitted that the Judge only referred to inconsistencies that arose
        from the marriage interview  and  made  no  reference  to  the  oral
        evidence at the hearing. The Judge was criticised for taking account
        of the language barrier between the appellant and the sponsor and by
        drawing an adverse inference  from  the  absence  of  statements  or
        evidence from other witnesses to the marriage. The  Judge  was  also
        criticised  for  finding  that  the  documentary  evidence   adduced
        relating to co-habitation was of a restricted nature.

     7. Permission was granted on all grounds, the First-tier Judge granting
        permission noting that it was arguable that the Judge's treatment of
        the evidence may have been affected by the nearly 4 month  delay  in
        promulgating the determination.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

     8. The appellant provided a bundle of further evidence that, were I  to
        identify a  material  error  of  law,  would  be  presented  on  the
        appellant's behalf. In his oral submissions Mr Amgbah emphasised the
        delay in making the decision and the absence of any explanation  for
        this delay. It was submitted that  the  delay  suggested  the  Judge
        failed  to  take  into  account  events  that  occurred  after   the
        respondent's decision. It was argued that the Judge focused entirely
        on the original marriage interview in rejecting the  genuineness  of
        the marriage.

     9. In his response Mr Tufan submitted that there  had  to  be  a  nexus
        between the delay and the unlawfulness of the Judge's decision.  The
        appellant had failed to identify  what  specific  oral  and  written
        evidence the Judge allegedly failed to take into account. The  Judge
        did consider the explanations provided  by  the  appellant  and  his
        wife,  this  was  apparent  from  paragraph  29   of   the   Judge's
        determination.  Nor  was  any  adequate  explanation  given  in  the
        statements.

    10. I indicated at the hearing that I was not satisfied the Judge  erred
        in his assessment of the  evidence  before  him  and  that  I  would
        provide a full explanation in my written decision.

Discussion

    11. It is unfortunate that the decision did not come to be written until
        some 3 months and 3 weeks after the hearing, and that no explanation
        was provided by the Judge in respect of this delay.  It  is  however
        clear from the authorities  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and Arusha and Demushi
        (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT  00080  (IAC)  that
        there must be a nexus between  the  delay  and  the  safety  of  the
        decision. It  is  therefore  necessary  to  carefully  identify  and
        examine the evidence that the appellant contends was not  considered
        by the Judge.

    12. It is entirely apparent from a holistic reading of the determination
        that the Judge did take full account of the  evidence  contained  in
        the appellants and his spouse's witness statements and of their oral
        evidence at the hearing. The Judge first noted at paragraph 10  that
        both the appellant and his spouse provided statements and gave  oral
        evidence, and indeed that they provide  a  bundle  of  documents  in
        support  of  their  appeal.  No  criticism  has  been  made  of  the
        chronological account  set  out  by  the  Judge  under  the  section
        entitled 'The Appellant's Case'. In this section it clear  that  the
        Judge did record the oral evidence of the appellant and his  spouse.
        The Judge recorded the explanation provided by  both  the  appellant
        and his spouse in respect of  her  apparent  ignorance,  during  the
        marriage interview, of the Ghanaian proxy  marriage  (paragraphs  17
        and 27). The Judge recorded oral evidence that was not dealt with in
        the statements,  such  as  whether  the  appellant  and  his  spouse
        intended to have children (paragraphs 20 and 28).  The  Judge  noted
        that the appellant answered various questions put to him during  the
        hearing concerning the time he and his spouse spent together in  the
        weekend preceding the hearing, their birthdays and details of  their
        residence (paragraph 21). The Judge recorded the  spouse's  evidence
        that she was able to work out the sense of what  the  appellant  was
        saying to her because she  could  understand  a  certain  amount  of
        English. The Judge provided a summary of the  explanations  provided
        in  respect  of  the  inconsistencies  arising  from  the   marriage
        interview. This included misunderstandings, ambiguities in questions
        and inaccuracies in translations (paragraph 29).

    13. Contrary to the Grounds of Appeal it is  immediately  apparent  from
        the above analysis that the Judge did  consider  the  oral  evidence
        from the appellant and his spouse, and the explanations advanced  by
        them in  respect  of  the  many  inconsistencies  contained  in  the
        marriage interviews.

    14. In respect of his findings the Judge first  indicated  that  it  was
        understandable that people giving true and honest accounts may reply
        differently to the same question as a result of different but  valid
        interpretations (paragraph 37). The Judge was not however  satisfied
        that the  explanation  given  by  the  spouse  for  her  answers  to
        questions  put  to  her  about  the  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  were
        plausible. The Judge noted at paragraph 41  that,  in  the  marriage
        interview, the spouse denied having ever seen any documents relating
        to the Ghanaian marriage  until  the  interview.  This  is  entirely
        inconsistent with the written evidence of the appellant who  claimed
        he had  shown  the  Ghanaian  marriage  certificate  to  his  spouse
        (paragraph 12 of his statement). The Judge  was  fully  entitled  to
        draw  an  adverse  inference  as  a  result  of   this   significant
        inconsistency.

    15. The Judge did not however confine his evidential assessment  to  the
        marriage interview. At paragraph  45  the  Judge  did  not  find  it
        plausible that, in respect of his 61  year  old  wife,  that  having
        children was a possibility for them, a point that was, in any event,
        completely contradicted by the spouse. The  Judge  was  entitled  to
        rely on this evidence in drawing an adverse inference. The Judge was
        further entitled to draw an adverse inference based on  inconsistent
        oral evidence as to when the  parties  to  the  marriage  first  met
        (paragraph 46).

    16. Contrary to the Grounds of Appeal I am entirely satisfied  that  the
        Judge was entitled to take into account the language barrier between
        the appellant and his spouse when assessing whether the marriage was
        one of convenience. The Judge was also entitled to take into account
        the absence of  any  evidence  whatsoever  of  any  witness  to  the
        genuineness of the relationship. Although there is no requirement of
        corroborative evidence in this jurisdiction a Judge may take account
        of the absence of evidence when that evidence  would  reasonably  be
        expected to be available. If the relationship between the  appellant
        and his spouse were genuine one  would  reasonably  expect  to  find
        evidence from friends, colleagues or family confirming the same. Nor
        did the Judge err in his approach to the evidence of  co-habitation.
        The documentary evidence before the Judge  may  have  supported  the
        claim by the appellant and his spouse that they resided at the  same
        address but the documentary evidence was silent  as  to  the  actual
        living arrangements within the address.

    17. The determination, read as a whole, does not disclose that the Judge
        omitted any significant explanation for  the  discrepancies  in  the
        evidence given at the marriage interview. The  Judge  fully  engaged
        with the evidence before him. Although the delay in the promulgation
        of the determination is lamentable it did not render this particular
        decision unsafe.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a material error of law.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]    31 July 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

