
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08476/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November  2015                |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     And

                    mrs Gabriella barreto carvalho afonso
                        (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None.  The appellant and her husband Dr Artur
                    Zanellato attended in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of  this  decision  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were described before the First Tier Tribunal, that  is
    Mrs Afonso as  the  appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil born on 5th March 1982.   On  10th
    October 2014 she made an application for a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   She  is  the
    spouse of Dr Artur Zanellato  an  Italian  national.   (They  are  both
    medical doctors and currently live in London W12).  Her application was
    refused by the respondent on 16th February 2015.  That refusal recorded
    that the G-mail AMEC UK job offer contract letter for the  sponsor  and
    the bank statements, could not be considered as  evidence  of  the  EEA
    national's treaty rights, as they were photocopies.  Further 'AMEC  oil
    and gas limited' the stated prospective employer could not be traced on
    the system.  Secondly and in the alternative, the appellant stated  her
    husband entered the UK as a jobseeker but  there  was  no  evidence  of
    comprehensive medical insurance.  There was no  evidence  submitted  to
    show that at the  date  of  the  respondent's  decision  the  appellant
    continued to be a jobseeker.

 3. First tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill determined the matter on the  papers
    on 12th June 2015 and allowed  the  appeal  on  19th  June  2015.    At
    paragraph 10 he recorded that

         'There was documentation from MediLink  Consulting  concerning  her
         sponsor/husband's  employment  at  Queen  Elizabeth   Hospital   in
         Woolwich in the capacity of a locum doctor.  He was working in fact
         as a Senior House Officer and Specialist Registrar in  the  surgery
         department.  The appellant also provided a bundle which contained a
         significant number of original documents, notably a document from a
         Public in  Brazil  which  confirmed  her  position,  amongst  other
         things, as a medical practitioner and  also  her  marriage  to  the
         sponsor.

 4. At paragraph 11 the judge found

         'What has been shown perfectly plainly by the appellant is that her
         sponsor/husband is now employed as a doctor'.

 5. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  by  the  respondent
    submitting  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  address  the  issue   of
    comprehensive medical  insurance  which  was  a  relevant  requirement.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge John Macdonald stating with regard to medical insurance

         '... the issue was clearly raised in the  refusal  letter  and  the
         Judge has made no findings in respect of it'.

 6. On reviewing this file and hearing Ms Sreeraman, I find that  there  is
    no arguable error of law.  The appellant stated that she  entered  with
    her husband as a jobseeker who was hoping to work with a company called
    AMEC.  He was however, the victim of a scam as there was no  job  offer
    from AMEC.  The judge noted this but found  clearly  that  the  husband
    subsequently found alternative work as a doctor with  MediLink  and  he
    was working by the date of the hearing.  The judge noted  the  original
    documentation  produced.  The   documents   included   payslips,   bank
    statements and a contract letter dated 21st April  2015  from  MediLink
    assuring work within the NHS for a 12 month period.   This  was  before
    the First tier Tribunal.

 7. The decision by the Secretary of State was taken on 12th February  2015
    but in line with Boodhoo and  another  (EEA  Regs:  relevant  evidence)
    [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC) a tribunal has power to consider  any  evidence
    which it thinks relevant to the substance of  the  decision,  including
    evidence which  concerns  a  matter  arising  after  the  date  of  the
    decision.  Although the appellant may have obtained a job  offer  which
    was not effective on his arrival and his appeal was then based on being
    a jobseeker, by the time of the appeal hearing he had clearly  obtained
    work and the judge accepted this on the evidence before him.

 8. The appellant is a family member further to Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, and those Regulations also set out as follows:

         ...

         Issue of EEA family permit

         12.- (1) An entry clearance officer must issue an EEA family permit
         to a person who applies for one if the person is a family member of
         an EEA national and-

             (a) the EEA national-

                  (i) is residing in the UK in accordance with these
                  Regulations;...

         ...

         Extended right of residence

         14.- (1) A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United
         Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person.

         (2) A family member of a qualified person residing in the United
         Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an EEA national with a permanent
         right of residence under regulation 15 is entitled to reside in the
         United Kingdom for so long as he remains the family member of the
         qualified person or EEA national. ....

         ...

          "Qualified person"

         6.- (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person who
         is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

             (a) a jobseeker;

             (b) a worker;

             (c) a self-employed person;

             (d) a self-sufficient person; or

             (e) a student.

         (2) [ Subject to [ regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4)...

         ...

          "Worker", "self-employed person", "self-sufficient person" and
         "student"

         4.- (1) In these Regulations-

             (a) "worker" means a worker within the meaning of [ Article 45
             of the treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ] 1 ;

             (b) "self-employed person" means a person who establishes
             himself in order to pursue activity as a self-employed person
             in accordance with [ Article 49 of the treaty on the
             Functioning of the European Union ] 1 ;

             (c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-

                  (i) sufficient resources not to become a burden on the
                  social assistance system of the United Kingdom during his
                  period of residence; and

                  (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United
                  Kingdom;...

 9. As Ms  Sreerahan  correctly  conceded  at  the  hearing  the  issue  of
    comprehensive medical insurance was  irrelevant  bearing  in  mind  the
    findings of the judge in relation to the  sponsor  which  was  that  Dr
    Zanellato was working and exercising his treaty rights at the  date  of
    the Judge Cockrill's decision.  The appellant is a family member  of  a
    qualified person who is residing in the UK in accordance with  the  EEA
    Regulations.

10. There is no error of law in the decision of Judge Cockrill and it shall
    stand.


Signed      Date 3rd November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
