
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08712/2014
     IA/08713/2014
     IA/08714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2014                    |On 31 December 2014                 |
|Oral judgment                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       SHAD ISMAIL NASFIR ABDUL RAHMAN
                         MOHAMED BELAL ABDUL RAHMAN
                            SHENAZ BIBI KHODABUX
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr De Sousa


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is a hearing of an application  by  the  Secretary  of  State  who
    seeks to challenge the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-
    Davies promulgated following a hearing at Richmond Magistrates Court on
    27 May 2014.

2.   There are three appellants,  all  nationals  of  Mauritius  who  are  a
    mother, father and their now adult son. The Judge allowed the appeal of
    the adult son, the second appellant, on the basis that,  on  the  facts
    the Judge found, he was able to satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv)(v)(vi) and was therefore entitled to leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   That decision was not challenged in the grounds seeking  permission  to
    appeal although Mr Tufan has raised before  us  today  the  possibility
    that that decision was in fact infected by an error of law as the Judge
    may have assessed the period of time in the  United  Kingdom  from  the
    wrong starting point i.e. that at the date of  decision  the  requisite
    period of time had not been earned rather than the position as  at  the
    date of the hearing.  There is no application for leave  to  amend  the
    pleadings late or for an adjournment to allow the Secretary of State to
    consider her position. She has the option of making an  application  to
    challenge the decision at a later date, in which case she would have to
    justify permission being granted considerably out of time.

3.   The decisions that are the subject of challenge relate to those of  the
    first and third  appellants,  the  mother  and  father  of  the  second
    appellant.  The Judge considered the evidence  made  available  and  in
    paragraph 31 refers to the five stage test in the case of  Razgar.   In
    paragraph  36  the  Judge   reminds   himself   that   when   assessing
    proportionality, he  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  first  and  third
    appellants do not satisfy the Immigration Rules  and  that  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control is as set out  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

4.   The Judge purports to note in that respect that  the  first  and  third
    appellants have to speak English and finds they do so, although he also
    finds they are not entirely at ease. That finding is not challenged  by
    way of a cross-appeal. The Judge also finds that the  first  and  third
    appellants  are  not  financially  independent  as  they  rely  on  the
    assistance of friends from time to time.

5.   While they otherwise appear to  be  a  good,  law  abiding  family  the
    appellants have remained without leave in the United  Kingdom  and  are
    overstayers. Their immigration history is a  factor  that  should  have
    been properly considered and factored into the equation  by  the  Judge
    although in his findings he appears to make very little mention of it.

6.   The Judge concluded that the proportionality exercise  fell  in  favour
    of the appellants because the second appellant was  permitted  to  stay
    and his status will be rendered academic if his mother and father  have
    to leave, as he remain dependent upon them within  their  family  unit.
    That does appear to have been  the  case  up  to  a  point  within  the
    evidence, namely when the second appellant was at school and  achieving
    a substantial level of achievement to his credit.  He  would  therefore
    have been a young  person  attending  school  and  dependent  upon  his
    parents.

7.   The evidence before the  Judge,  however,  indicates  that  the  second
    appellant's tertiary education had in fact concluded. He  had  achieved
    considerable attainment and wished to go to university.  There  appears
    no analysis within the determination of the factual situation as it was
    before the Judge so far as the second appellant's future  is  concerned
    that could allow us to find that adequate consideration  was  given  to
    this material element of the appeal.

8.   In paragraph 38 the Judge states  that  in  all  the  circumstances  he
    finds  that  the  situation  of  the  appellants  is  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Immigration Rules. That combined with the  finding
    in paragraph 36 that the first and third appellants could  not  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules indicates that it must have  been  accepted  that
    they were unable to  succeed  not  only  under  any  of  the  ancillary
    provisions that may or may not have been applicable to them but also in
    relation to the provisions relating to family and private life  in  the
    United Kingdom, including the  provisions  in  the  Rules  relating  to
    applications for leave to remain as parents or as partners.

9.   The Judge then proceeds to state  that  the  proposed  removal  of  the
    first and third appellants, which will mean the second  appellant  also
    having to leave, is disproportionate and would have  unduly  harsh  and
    unjustifiable consequences for the second appellant.   What  the  Judge
    failed to do was adequately to analyse the consequences or to  set  out
    what weight he thought it was appropriate to give to the fact that  the
    appellants could not succeed under the Immigration Rules or what  those
    harsh consequences were.

10.  This is quite important post-July  2012  where,  under  the  margin  of
    appreciation given to the Secretary of State she has set  out  how  she
    believes Article 8 should be interpreted within the provisions  of  the
    Rules and now within statutory provisions.  Such  statutory  provisions
    may have the effect of negating a lot of the earlier case law.

11.  The Judge appears to make no  reference  to  the  basic  principles  of
    Article  8  which  it  was  necessary  to   apply   if   conducting   a
    proportionality exercise.  These include the fact that Article  8  does
    not allow individuals to choose the place where they are going to  live
    or wish to live.  They also include the fact that it is necessary, in a
    dependency case, properly to analyse and set out  the  nature  of  that
    dependency and properly to analyse and set out the consequences of  the
    proposed action. Many  foreign  students  enter  the  UK  to  study  at
    university without their parents and the reality appears to be that the
    second appellant is of an age where he is starting to forge a  life  of
    his own, albeit initially in education.

12.  It goes without saying that when assessing  proportionality,  harshness
    or unjustifiable consequences, it is  necessary  to  look  at  the  end
    result and analyse and give reasons for such a finding.  The Judge  has
    found that the son would remain in the UK and his parents would have to
    leave.  It followed, therefore, that the son  might  choose  to  follow
    them.  But, standing that it was accepted that the appellants could not
    succeed under the Rules, we can find no analysis in this  determination
    setting out an adequate basis to allow  us  to  find  that  a  properly
    conducted Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, has been undertaken.

13.  For that reason we find that the Judge has materially erred in  law  to
    the extent that the  findings  in  relation  to  the  first  and  third
    appellants must be set aside but  only  so  far  as  the  human  rights
    grounds are concerned.

14.  The following directions shall apply to the future management  of  this
    appeal:

    i.   The appeal in relation to Article 8 ECHR outside  the  Rules  only
         shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
         Cross to be heard by a salaried judge of that tribunal nominated by
         the Resident Judge on the 6th May2015.  Time estimate 2 hours.


    ii.  The Appellants must file and  serve  a  consolidated  indexed  and
         paginated bundle containing all the evidence they  intend  to  rely
         upon no later than 22nd April  2015.   Witness  statements  in  the
         bundle must be signed, dated, and contain a statement of truth  and
         shall stand as the evidence in chief of the maker.


    iii. A French (patois) interpreter shall be provided by the Tribunal.


No anonymity order made



Signed        Date 25 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

