

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08417/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2015                            |On 23 November 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                             Jacqueline Edgehill
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
                     pursuant to Rule 17(1), (2) and (5)

    1. When this appeal was before the Court of Appeal as Edgehill & Anor v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 on  2
       April 2014, (Laws and Jackson LJJ and Lady Justice Black),  Laws  LJ
       (with whom the other  members  of  the  Court  agreed)  directed  in
       paragraphs 35-37 in relation to this appellant:


      1.      The Upper Tribunal reached its decision on 11th February 2013.
         By then JE had lived continuously in the UK for more than 14  years
         (the period specified in rule 276B of the old  rules).  As  can  be
         seen from paragraphs 31-33 of  its  decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         placed substantial weight on the fact that this was less  than  the
         period of 20 years specified in the new rules.
      2.      In my view the Upper Tribunal fell into error in treating  the
         minimum period of 20 years specified in the new rule  276ADE  as  a
         relevant consideration. If the Upper Tribunal  had  not  made  this
         error of law, it is far from clear that it would have  reached  the
         same decision.
      3.      In those circumstances, if my Lord  and  my  Lady  agree,  the
         Upper Tribunal's decision will be quashed and JE's appeal  will  be
         remitted to the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration.


    2. In Singh and Khalid v the Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2015] EWCA Civ 74 (12 February 2015), the  Court  of  Appeal  (Lady
       Justice Arden, Lewison and Underhill LJJ)  reconsidered  Edgehill  &
       Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department with reference  to
       HC 565 which came into force on 6 September 2012 and which  required
       decision makers to apply the Immigration Rules found in HC194 as the
       Tribunal had originally done.  Underhill LJ said:
      1.      The foregoing analysis has regrettably  been  somewhat  dense,
         but I can summarise my conclusion,  and  the  reasons  for  it,  as
         follows:
          (1) When HC 194  first  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012,  the
         Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
         provisions of the new Rules (either directly or by treating them as
         a statement of her current policy) when making decisions on private
         or family life applications made prior to that  date  but  not  yet
         decided.  That  is  because,   as   decided   in   Edgehill,   "the
         implementation provision" set out at para. 7  above  displaces  the
         usual Odelola principle.
          (2) But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by  the
         introduction of the new  paragraph  A277C  -  with  effect  from  6
         September 2012. As from  that  date  the  Secretary  of  State  was
         entitled to take into account the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and
         paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  in  deciding  private  or   family   life
         applications even if they were made  prior  to  9  July  2012.  The
         result is that the law as it  was  held  to  be  in  Edgehill  only
         obtained as regards decisions taken in the two-month window between
         9 July and 6 September 2012.
          (3) Neither of the decisions with which we are concerned  in  this
         case fell within that window. Accordingly the  Secretary  of  State
         was entitled to apply the new Rules in reaching those decisions.
      1.      I should observe that both the decisions with which this Court
         was concerned in Edgehill were made after 5  September  2012,  i.e.
         outside the window referred to above. It follows that, although its
         reasoning about the effect of HC 194 was, I believe,  correct,  the
         outcome would have been different if it had been  referred  to  the
         changes introduced by HC 565  -  which  it  was  not.  Mr  Blundell
         acknowledged that that was so when the point was put to him in  the
         course of his submissions. That is rather  remarkable.  It  appears
         that one of  the  (admittedly  many)  objects  of  HC  565  was  to
         "clarify" that the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-
         276DH should apply to pending applications; yet  in  a  case  which
         raised that very issue the Secretary of State neglected to rely  on
         it. That might prompt second thoughts as to whether  Mr  Blundell's
         submissions based on HC 565 can indeed be right. But  I  fear  that
         the true explanation is that the responsible officials in the  Home
         Office have at least some of the same difficulties  in  keeping  up
         with the consequences of the kaleidoscopic  changes  in  their  own
         rules as the rest of us do. There are other instances  of  that  in
         the confusions which occurred in relation to Haleemudeen (see para.
         39 above) and the failure to identify the form in which  the  Rules
         stood at the date of the decision in Ms Khalid's  case  (see  para.
         52).
    3. When I gave directions on 11 March 2015, I asked  the  appellant  to
       respond to this point which was raised by Mr Bourne QC in  his  note
       to the Tribunal at the Case Management Review.   The  appellant  did
       not respond.


    4. At the hearing before me on 2 November 2015, the appellant  did  not
       regard the continuation of these proceedings as serving  any  useful
       purpose and sought to withdraw her appeal.  I agreed to this.

    5. Mr Deller expressed the view that with  the  passage  of  time,  any
       assessment of the claim based on events which are now  past  history
       is likely to be unhelpful.


    6. The effect of this decision is that the challenge to the decision of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Kanagaratnam  dismissing  the  appellant's
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  her
       a certificate of a  right  of  abode  is  no  longer  pursued.   His
       decision will, accordingly, stand.   The appeal formally  stands  as
       withdrawn.

    7. The parties are now free to  agree  the  best  way  forward  or,  in
       default of agreement, for the appellant  to  rely  upon  such  legal
       rights as are now available to her.

    RULING


    The appeal before the Upper Tribunal stands as  withdrawn  pursuant  to
    Rule 17 (1) and (2) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008

                                                                [pic]

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            18 November 2015





