
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2014                          |On 8 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Nickie Ovien
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                                 Ex tempore

1.    This  is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 9 September 2014. The grounds of  appeal  are  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially misdirected itself in  law  by  allowing
    the appeal under Article 8 and, in doing so, making the finding that it
    would be unreasonable for the appellant's child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, and not, therefore, in the public interest for  the  appellant
    to be removed to Nigeria, while at the same time, when considering  the
    appellant's  case  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 finding that "it has not  been  established  that  the
    child could not live with his  father  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
    required to travel to Nigeria".

2.   The grounds go on to submit that  if  the  appellant  were  removed  to
    Nigeria the appellant's child would not be required to leave the United
    Kingdom, as he would be able to remain in the country in  the  care  of
    his father. It followed  that  the  judge  had  materially  misdirected
    himself in his assessment  of  the  public  interest  by  reference  to
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as
    amended).

3.   The grounds also submit that, while the best  interests  of  the  child
    are a primary consideration, in this case they  did  not  outweigh  the
    public interest in removing the appellant, who would be able to  return
    to Nigeria and apply for entry clearance under Appendix FM.

4.   Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted by Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 21 October 2014.  Granting permission  to
    appeal he recorded that the appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and  that
    her appeal in relation to a residence card as the primary carer  of  an
    EEA national child had been dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    that her appeal under Article 8 had been allowed.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray then summarised the grounds of  appeal
    which we have just referred to there was an arguable error  of  law  in
    the judge's determination. In  this  determination,  we  refer  to  the
    appellant, as she was below, as 'the appellant'.

6.    We  turn  to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    background is set out in paragraphs 2 to 8 of the  determination.   The
    Tribunal recounted that the appellant  apparently  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 and that the basis of her entry and stay  between  that
    date and 2011 was unknown, on the evidence before the Tribunal.  On  17
    August 2011 she was issued with a residence card as  the  spouse  of  a
    German national, the father of  her  son  Terence.   That  relationship
    broke down on 31 January 2014 and the Home Office revoked her residence
    card, as she was no longer considered to be a family member of  an  EEA
    national.

7.   On 25 October 2013 she applied through her legal representatives for  a
    residence card as the primary carer of  her  EEA  national  son.   That
    application was refused on 31 January 2014 by reference  to  Regulation
    15A(2) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    which we will refer to as the "EEA Regulations".  The  respondent  took
    the view that the evidence submitted did not show that the  appellant's
    son was self-sufficient,  or  that  the  appellant  and  her  son  held
    comprehensive sickness insurance.  The  respondent  further  considered
    that the appellant did not have sole responsibility for her son and had
    not sufficiently demonstrated that she was his mother.   The  appellant
    then  appealed  that  decision  raising  issues  both  under  the   EEA
    Regulations and under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

8.   The Tribunal  described  the  evidence  that  it  had  considered.   It
    recorded a concession by the Home Office that  the  appellant  was  the
    mother of an EEA national child and that that issue was  no  longer  in
    dispute.  The judge set out the history of the relationship between the
    appellant and her former  husband  and  the  evidence  about  insurance
    policy, who cared for the child, and so on.

9.   The findings of the Tribunal were set out in paragraphs  19  to  32  of
    the  determination.   In  short,  the  evidence  about  the   financial
    situation of the appellant was not very clear or satisfactory and  that
    led the Tribunal to conclude, at paragraph 23, that the  appellant  had
    failed to show that sufficient regular income would be available to the
    child to make the child self-sufficient, and, at paragraphs 22 and  25,
    to conclude that the  appellant  did  not  have  comprehensive  medical
    insurance as was required by the EEA Regulations.

10.  The Tribunal went on to consider whether the appellant was the  primary
    carer of the child. The Tribunal found that the appellant's evidence on
    this was clear and detailed, and had withstood cross-examination.

11.  The Tribunal concluded that it was more likely than not that the  child
    lived with his mother and had always done so, that it was  more  likely
    than not that she provided day-to-day care and support for her son, and
    that the father spent weekends with the child and  provided  reasonably
    regular financial support.  On that basis the  Tribunal  accepted  that
    the appellant was the primary carer of the child.  There  was  no  real
    dispute that the child was probably an EEA national, and  the  Tribunal
    so found.

12.  The next issue was what would happen to  the  child  if  the  appellant
    were to leave the United Kingdom. The Tribunal recorded that there were
    gaps in the evidence.  At paragraph 33 it said that the onus was on the
    appellant, and given that the father  of  the  child  provided  regular
    financial support, worked in the UK and lived with his son  over  every
    weekend the Tribunal considered that it had not been  established  that
    the child could not live with his father if the appellant  were  to  be
    required to travel to Nigeria.  That conclusion in paragraph 33, is one
    of the building blocks of the Secretary  of  State's  submission  about
    inconsistencies in the decision.  The Tribunal concluded on that  basis
    that the claim under the EEA Regulations failed.

13.  The Tribunal then went on to consider  whether  the  appellant's  claim
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights succeeded or
    not.  We interpose at this point that there  was  some  debate  in  the
    hearing about  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  this  issue.  We  are
    satisfied that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to  consider,  on  an  EEA
    appeal, the issue of whether or not section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    would be breached.  The reason for that is paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to
    the EEA Regulations, which incorporates by reference all the grounds of
    appeal in Section 84(1) of the 2002 Act,  save  grounds  (a)  and  (f).
    That means that the ground that the decision would breach Section 6  of
    the Human Rights Act is incorporated, and the Tribunal had jurisdiction
    to consider it.

14.  The Tribunal went on to consider Article 8.  It set  out  the  text  of
    Article 8 and it then set out the classic test in Razgar v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27  and  in  particular  the
    guidance given by Lord Bingham  about  the  structured  approach  which
    should be taken to Article 8 claims.

15.  At paragraph 38 of the  determination  the  Tribunal  rightly  directed
    itself in accordance with sections 117A and B of the 2002 Act which had
    recently been inserted in the 2002 Act by the Immigration Act 2014.  In
    particular,  the  Tribunal  paid  attention  to  the  public   interest
    considerations which now apply to all cases, as set out in section 117B
    of the 2002 Act.

16.  The Tribunal  noted  correctly  that  it  was  appropriate  for  it  to
    consider the effect of the decision not only on the appellant but  also
    on her son, who was not an appellant, by reference to the  decision  in
    the House of Lords in Beoku-Betts v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39.

17.  The Tribunal considered the  first  of  Lord  Bingham's  questions  and
    decided that there was no reason to question the presumption that there
    is family life between minor children  and  their  parents,  given  the
    finding that the appellant was the primary carer for her son.

18.  The Tribunal went on to find that family life was established and  that
    the decision would  interfere  with  it,  since  it  would  potentially
    separate the appellant from her son.  We interpose that  that  was  the
    correct approach.  Although the refusal of the EEA  residence  card  is
    not itself a decision to remove it is  one  which  potentially  engaged
    Article 8 nonetheless.  It would be a matter of sufficient  seriousness
    to engage Article 8, the  Tribunal  went  on,  the  threshold  in  such
    matters not being particularly high.

19.  The Tribunal went on to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life  and
    concluded that there was very little evidence  about  that  other  than
    that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 2004.  It  went
    on to say that the appellant had been  living  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully since 2011 although her status during the previous seven years
    was unknown.

20.  The Tribunal went on to say that her private life was not likely to  be
    particularly deep or rich  since  the  appellant  had  been  unable  or
    unwilling to particularise  its  content.   The  Tribunal  nevertheless
    accepted that the appellant would have established links over the  last
    ten years or so which would amount to private life.  The decision would
    therefore  interfere  with  her  private  life  and  be  of  sufficient
    seriousness to engage Article 8.

21.  The decision would clearly be in accordance with the law, the  Tribunal
    concluded, because the appellant did not satisfy the  requirements  for
    an EEA residence card.

22.  The Tribunal recognised the  public  interest  in  the  enforcement  of
    immigration control as an aspect  of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    United Kingdom, and that the decision was necessary, at paragraph 45 of
    the determination. The  Tribunal  then  analysed  whether  or  not  the
    decision was proportionate. In that  regard  the  Tribunal  considered,
    first of all, the best interests of the child, who was 7 years old.  At
    paragraphs 47 to 50 the Tribunal considered in  some  detail  what  the
    best interests of the child were and why. It concluded in paragraph  50
    that the return of the appellant to Nigeria would be  contrary  to  the
    best interests of this child.  We consider that the  reasons  given  by
    the Tribunal for that conclusion are sustainable and we see  no  reason
    to interfere with them.

23.   The  Tribunal  correctly  recognised,   at   paragraph   51   of   its
    determination, that the best interests of the child  are  not  a  trump
    card and may be overcome by the public interest.   At  that  point  the
    Tribunal referred in more detail to section 117B of the 2002 Act, which
    sets out clearly that it is not in the public interest to  require  the
    departure of a person where that person has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child and it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

24.  The Tribunal went on to say that the parental relationship was  not  in
    dispute, and the child was an EEA national who could not be required to
    leave the EEA and to travel to Nigeria.  If as  a  matter  of  law  the
    child could not be required to travel  to  Nigeria,  it  could  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to do so.

25.  The  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  child  could
    reasonably be expected to leave the UK  and  go  to  Germany  with  his
    father and concluded that that would not  be  reasonable  either.   The
    reasons were that the child had lived his entire  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and was probably embedded  in  the  community  here,  with  his
    schooling and relationships having been established here over the  last
    seven years.  Seven years was generally regarded as  the  period  after
    which it would not usually be reasonable to separate a child  from  its
    established life in this country.  Although the Tribunal  was  hampered
    by a lack of detailed and specific evidence in relation  to  the  child
    the Tribunal nonetheless considered that the yardstick of  seven  years
    was a reasonable one in relation to the child becoming embedded in  the
    community.

26.  The Tribunal repeated that it was not clear whether the  appellant  had
    been here lawfully since 2004, or only since 2011,  but  she  had  been
    here lawfully since  2011.   It  went  on  to  say  that  section  117B
    suggested that there was a reduced public interest in the departure  of
    this appellant to Nigeria since it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to go with them and the best interests of the  child  in  any
    case weighed against this conclusion.

27.  For those reasons, looking at the matter in the round, and taking  into
    account section 117B(6), the  Tribunal  concluded  that  requiring  the
    appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference both with her rights under Article 8 and with those of her
    son.

28.  It seems to us that there is no inconsistency, as had  been  suggested,
    between the findings of the Tribunal in relation to the  claim  for  an
    EEA residence card and the findings of the Tribunal  under  Article  8.
    It seems to us that the Tribunal was required under each  limb  of  its
    analysis to apply different tests and to take  into  account  different
    considerations and that under both limbs of  its  analysis  it  did  so
    correctly.  It follows  in  our  judgment  that  the  approach  of  the
    Tribunal was sustainable and we did not detect any error of law in that
    approach, let alone a material error of law.

29.  At the outset of the appeal we were handed  a  faxed  letter  from  the
    appellant's legal representatives indicating  that  the  appellant  had
    decided to withdraw her appeal, having submitted another application to
    the Home Office. It said "Please accept this letter as a withdrawal  of
    the appeal".  We considered that letter in the light of the  provisions
    of Rule 17 of this Tribunal's Rules of Procedure. On balance it  seemed
    to us that that Rule is concerned with actions taken by the person  who
    is the appellant before the Tribunal to withdraw his or her appeal.  It
    did not seem to us that that enabled a person who is not the  appellant
    to cause a case before the Tribunal to come to  an  end.   If  that  is
    wrong we would  not  in  any  event  have  given  our  consent  to  the
    withdrawal of this appeal. For these reasons, despite the  letter,  our
    conclusion is that the appeal by the Home Office is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date 4/12/14


Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE



