
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/08712/2014
                                                               IA/08713/2014
                                                               IA/08714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 October 2015                   |On: 6 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                      MR SHAD ISMAIL NAFIR ABDUL RAHMAN
                        MR MOhamd BELAL ABDUL RAHMAN
                          MRS SHENAZ BIBI KHODABUX
                       (anonymity directionS NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Waithe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department and  the  respondents  are  citizens  of  Mauritius
    citizen born on 10 February 1966, 11 June  1995  and  9  November  1968
    respectively.  However, for the sake of convenience, I  shall  continue
    to refer to the latter as the "appellants" and to the Secretary of  the
    State as the "respondent", which are the designations they had  in  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
    decision of the respondent to remove the appellants pursuant to section
    47 of the 2006 Act there after claim on human rights grounds  had  been
    refused.

 3. The appellants appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  29
    January 2014. It should be noted that there was a previous decision  in
    respect of each appellant, made on 20 May 2013.  Those  decisions  were
    not accompanied by a right of appeal. The appellants made a  claim  for
    judicial  review  which  resulted  in  the  respondent   remaking   the
    decisions, this time with an in country right of appeal. The respondent
    refused the appellants applications.

 4. This appeal arises from a decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  31
    December 2014 to remit the appeals of the first and  third  appellant's
    having been set them aside and for the appeals of the first  and  third
    appellant to be reconsidered only insofar as human rights grounds  were
    concerned.

 5. Upon remittal, a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Oakley  allowed  the
    appellants' appeals in a determination  promulgated  on  14  May  2015.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Coyler  in  a  decision  dated  9  July  2015
    granted the respondent permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  it
    being found to be arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
    law in allowing the first and  third  appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.

First-tier Tribunal's Findings

 7. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings which I  summarise.
    Applying the relevant law to the established facts  it  is  clear  that
    neither the first  nor  the  third  appellant  can  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules because  they  have  not  provided  any  evidence  of
    significant obstacles to them returning to live in Mauritius where they
    have lived for the majority of their respective lives. Whilst there may
    have been in the past family rifts, they clearly both have  members  of
    their family living in Mauritius when they came to the  United  Kingdom
    and they had no specific place to live but have in  fact  been  staying
    with friends and have been supported by friends in return for work that
    has been carried out  and  therefore  there  would  be  no  significant
    obstacles to their return.

 8. The first question to answer  is  whether  there  are  any  exceptional
    circumstances so far as the first and  third  appellant  are  concerned
    such  that  their  deportation  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for them or their family and that  the  deportation  would
    not be proportionate. To that extent the case of  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 which followed in Kabia  (MF:  para  398  -  "exceptional
    circumstances")  [2013]  UKUT  00569  (IAC)  paragraph  298  has   been
    considered. The case of Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)  has  been  considered  and  the  case
    Iftikhar Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC
    300 (Admin). There are sufficient exceptional circumstances in the case
    of the first and third appellant to consider their position outside the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

 9. In the case of Kugathas v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  a  case  which
    concerned an adult's relationship with his mother and  adult  siblings.
    In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  160  in
    which it is stated "a review of the jurisprudence discloses that  there
    is no general proposition that Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights can never be engaged when the family  life  is  sought  to
    establish is  between  adult  siblings  living  together.  Rather  than
    applying a blanket rule, with  regard  to  adult  children,  each  case
    should be analysed on its own facts, to decide whether  or  not  family
    life exists, within the meaning  of  Article  8.  1".  Furthermore,  in
    Kugathas Sedley LJ accepted that dependency was not limited to economic
    dependency.

10. The first and third appellants came to the United Kingdom with a  young
    son in 2004 and have always remained together. The first appellant  was
    let down by a person that can only be described as a rogue and the only
    criticism that might be made of the first appellant would be as to  why
    he did not report the loss of his passport and try  to  regulate  their
    immigration status at a much  earlier  stage.  At  that  juncture,  the
    second appellant had started to receive education in the United Kingdom
    and the first and third appellant's were being supported by Mrs  Ferozo
    in return for work that they undertook for her.  The  first  and  third
    appellant's account of what occurred to them is a credible one.

11. The first and third appellants have been effectively  remunerated  both
    in kind from  living  at  Mrs  Ferozo's  address  but  also  the  first
    appellant has undertaken gardening and  painting  jobs  and  the  third
    appellant has carried out cleaning for Mrs Ferozo  and members  of  her
    family for which they will have received some  monetary  consideration.
    In turn the second appellant has been supported by the first and  third
    appellant and there have been a tight family unit,  especially  bearing
    in mind the second appellant is an only child.

12. The second appellant has now received an offer of university  education
    in the United Kingdom and given the circumstances in  which  the  first
    second and third appellant  have  lived  there  is  still  family  life
    existing between them and clearly all three have established a  private
    life during the time they have lived in the United Kingdom.

13. The consequences of removal of the first and third appellants  will  be
    sufficiently grave to engage  Article  8  and  now  would  need  to  be
    considered is whether the decision is proportionate.  Section  117B  of
    the  Immigration  Act  2014  states  that  consideration  must  be  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control in the public interest. "I
    am aware it is also in the public interest that the  interests  of  the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom that person such as the first
    and third appellant who are seeking to enter or remain unable to  speak
    English because persons will speak English unless of a  burden  on  the
    taxpayer and better able to integrate into society.  Whilst  the  first
    and third appellant's did in the appeal before me use our interpreter I
    accept that they do have the ability to speak  English  and  I  see  no
    reason why they should not be  able  to  integrate  into  society.  The
    appellants have not shown to be a burden on the taxpayer and have  been
    throughout their time in the United Kingdom financially independent.  I
    am aware that less weight need to be given to their private life and it
    was established at a time when they were in the United Kingdom lawfully
    but it is mainly on the basis  of  their  family  life  of  the  second
    appellant that and considering their position."

14. It has been argued that the first and third appellants could return  to
    Mauritius leaving the second appellant to carry on with his studies and
    to obtain part-time work during the time that he is  studying  that  he
    would also be supported by  Mrs  Ferozo".  This  argument  is  rejected
    because the first and third appellants are in fact  providing  services
    to Mrs Ferozo in return for which they receive a sum  of  money  and  a
    roof over their heads. If they were to return to Mauritius  during  the
    time that their son is receiving his university education, there is  no
    evidence to suggest that the second appellant would be supported by Mrs
    Ferozo and in any event the second appellant, whilst he  may  have  his
    own friends for some support, would not have the family support and  he
    has enjoyed and has been dependent upon during the  time  that  he  has
    been growing up in the United Kingdom.

15. In conclusion and on the evidence, the second appellant's  position  so
    far as pursuing his university degree that he  will  need  the  support
    initially of his parents, namely the first and third appellant  support
    in terms of financial support in that he would have  a  roof  over  his
    head coupled with the emotional support that he might  also  need  when
    studying.

16. That support need not go on indefinitely and clearly  after  completion
    of his degree, even if  he  has  to  go  on  to  consider  postgraduate
    qualifications he would after a period of  study  of  three  years  and
    undertaking some  part-time  employment  during  that  study  be  in  a
    position to certainly stand on his own two feet whereupon  there  would
    be no necessity for his  parents  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore they should be granted leave of a limited nature  during  the
    period of the second appellant's degree only.

The grounds of appeal

17. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the  following  which  I
    summarise. The appellants' appeals were allowed under Article 8 and the
    Secretary of State does not seeking to challenge  on  the  decision  to
    allow the second  appellant's  appeal.  This  is  a  challenge  of  the
    decision to allow the first and third appellant's appeal.

18. The Judge has materially misdirected himself  in  finding  that  family
    life exists for the purposes of Article 8 in the appeal. The Judge  has
    incorrectly interpreted  the  findings  of  Kugathas  which  states  at
    paragraph 25 "because there is no presumption of  family  life,  in  my
    Judgement of family life is not established between an adult child  and
    his surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
    than normal emotional ties". There is  no  evidence  of  dependency  or
    exceptional circumstances evident in this case. The Judge conducted  an
    incorrect consideration of the mandatory public interest considerations
    outlined in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

19. The Judge misdirected himself when  finding  that  the  appellants  are
    financially independent and have an ability to speak  English.  Working
    without permission whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  is  not
    demonstrative of financial independence. Similarly, speaking Patois  at
    the hearing does not  demonstrate  and  ability  to  speak  English  as
    required by section 117B.

20. The Judge has made perverse or irrational findings on material matters.
    At paragraph 41 the Judge states that  although  the  first  and  third
    appellant spoke in their own language, he accepts that  they  have  the
    ability to speak English and he sees no reason why they should  not  be
    able to integrate into society. The Judge made this finding without any
    evidence and therefore it is irrational.

The hearing

21. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is  an  error
    of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Mr Tufan on behalf of the respondent adopted the grounds of appeal.  He
    stated that it is settled  law  set  out  in  SS  (Congo)  that  for  a
    freestanding Article 8 claim, compelling  circumstances  are  required.
    The Judge  in  his  determination  did  not  say  what  the  compelling
    circumstances in the appeal are.  In Singh and Nagre the rationale  was
    upheld.  There are no insurmountable obstacles for a 20-year-old man to
    go back to Mauritius or stay in this  country  and  continue  with  his
    education without his parents.

23. For the appellant Mr Waithe submitted that he relies on  his  response.
    He also relies on the case of Quila and another  (FC)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 45 and the  case  of  Ghising
    and others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) and stated that the law on Article 8
    remains the same and that it can be considered in the  round.  He  said
    what is different from the case of Kugathas is that the appellants came
    to this country lawfully in 2004. They contacted solicitors who  failed
    to apply to the Home Office. The Judge correctly stated that  a  family
    life exists and the second  and  third  appellants  have  nurtured  the
    appellant and established a family life in this country. In the case of
    Quila paragraphs 38- 43 were referred to  me.  The  second  appellant's
    appeal has been allowed and he has a right to live in this country  and
    I should look at all the factors in the round. It was accepted that the
    Judge that the appellant spoke English but preferred to speak in  their
    own language. There is no error of law.

Decision on the error of law

24. Having considered the determination as a  whole,  I  find  the  Judge's
    consideration of the first and third appellants appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 8 is materially flawed. There is no appeal in  respect  of  the
    second appellant who has been granted leave to remain.

25. The Judge accepted that the appellant does not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules and then went on to consider  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and allowed the appeal on the basis
    of the appellant's family life, with their son, the  second  appellant,
    in the United Kingdom.

26. It was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the Article 8
    assessment shall  only  be  carried  out  where  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules. In this case the
    Tribunal  has  failed  to  identify  the  nature  of  these  compelling
    circumstances that the first and third  appellants  should  be  granted
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

27. The Judge misinterpreted the case of Kugathas when he found that family
    life exists between the three appellants for the purposes of Article 8.
    The Judge did not set out what he considered to  be  more  than  normal
    emotional ties between an adult child and his parents.  The  judge  has
    obviously been motivated  by  sympathy  for  the  appellants  which  is
    demonstrated by him saying that the first and third appellant should be
    granted leave to remain until their son has graduated  from  university
    after which they can return. The judge  fell  into  material  error  by
    misinterpreting the case of Kugathas.

28. Also the Judge has erred while conducting an incorrect consideration of
    the mandatory public interest considerations outlined in  section  117B
    of the 2002 Act. The Judge fell into  material  error  when  he  placed
    significant weight on the appellants family life while attaching little
    weight to the fact that the  appellants  family  life  was  established
    whilst the appellants were in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The  Judge
    accepted that the First  appellant  should  have  reported  his  stolen
    passport earlier but still nevertheless went on to find that the  first
    appellant was not  responsible  for  not  regularising  the  appellants
    immigration status other than  the  appellants  own  evidence  that  an
    immigration adviser misled them. These are not sustainable findings.

29. The Judge also found that there was no element  of  dependency  because
    they were living with Mrs Ferozo and were working for her illegally. By
    working illegally  in  this  country  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    appellants were independent financially. The evidence does not  support
    Judge's finding that the first and  third  appellants  are  financially
    independent and the finding is therefore perverse.

30. The Judge also found that the  appellants  speak  English  and  without
    setting out the evidence that he considered for  making  this  finding.
    The Judge placed no reliance on the evidence that the  appellant's  did
    not give their evidence at the hearing in English but chose to speak in
    their mother tongue. The Judge added that he sees  no  reason  why  the
    appellants would be able to integrate into British society. This is not
    the  test  that  they  can  integrate  into  British  society  but  the
    appellants have to  show  that  they  have  knowledge  of  the  English
    language which makes it easier to integrate into British society.  This
    Judge's finding that the appellants speak English is a perverse finding
    which is not sustainable on the evidence.

31. Having considered the determination as a  whole  I  conclude  that  the
    Judge erred in law in his evaluation of the appellants appeal  pursuant
    to Article 8 and I therefore set aside the decision  in  its  entirety.
    The appellants do not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in
    any event.

32. It therefore follows that the respondent's appeal is allowed.

    DECISION

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    the 3rd day of November 2015
