









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08824/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 July 2016                       |On 22 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                           Mr Muhammad Monis Vohra
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:        Mr P Turner, counsel (instructed by MR Solicitors
(Larkshall Rd)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 11 August  1991.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 5  February  2014,
      refusing him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  student,
      was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a   decision
      promulgated on 26 October 2015.


   2. Neither party  attended  the  appeal  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge on 9 October 2015.


   3. The Judge found at [12] that on the basis of the evidence before  her,
      the appellant did not have limited leave to enter or remain in the  UK
      when his application was made and accordingly, he could  not  rely  on
      the 'dicta' in Patel (Revocation of sponsor licence - Fairness)  India
      [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC). The appeal was  accordingly  dismissed  under
      the Immigration Rules.


   4. In his grounds seeking permission to appeal, the  appellant  contended
      that he had leave when he made his application dated 5 September 2014,
      which was the subject of the decision on  appeal.  That  decision  was
      made on 5 February 2015. It was also  contended  that  the  respondent
      suspended and subsequently revoked his sponsor's licence and  that  he
      had no knowledge of such a suspension or revocation  and  accordingly,
      pursuant to Patel, the respondent should have  granted  him  60  days'
      leave in order to enable him to obtain another CAS.


   5. On 24 May 2016, Upper Tier Tribunal Judge Gill granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. She  found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      unclear  about  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  that  she
      considered that she did not have "evidence"  that  the  appellant  had
      leave when he made his application on 5 September 2014.


   6. Judge Gill found that it was arguable that she may have overlooked the
      fact that the decision  letter  dated  5  February  2015  specifically
      states that the appellant had a right of appeal and that  he  did  not
      need to leave the UK while the appeal is pending. That suggested  that
      the respondent's position was that the appellant  had  leave  when  he
      made his application. This in turn may have led the Judge  to  take  a
      different view as to whether Patel applied.


   7. Judge Gill directed that the respondent was to serve a written  notice
      setting out the appellant's immigration history.


   8. Mr Duffy referred to a "respondent's notice" filed on  behalf  of  the
      respondent in which his immigration history has been set out. From the
      UKVI Immigration database, the following was noted:


        i. The appellant made an application for leave to enter as a Tier 4
           Student on 10 January 2011. The application was granted and  the
           visa was issued on 3 March 2011. It was  valid  until  10  April
           2012. It was not known when he entered the UK.


       ii. On 10 April 2012, the appellant made an application for  further
           leave to remain as a Tier 4 student which was granted, and leave
           was given until 28 May 2013.


      iii. On 2 May 2013, he made a further application which  was  granted
           until 29 September  2015.  The  curtailment  letter  of  4  July
           confirms this action.


       iv. On 4 July 2014, the  respondent  curtailed  his  leave  until  7
           September 2014.


        v. On 5 September 2014, the appellant made  a  further  application
           for leave to remain as a Tier 4 student which was  refused.  The
           database indicated that the appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal
           against the decision.


   9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Turner  submitted  that  the  appellant
      should have been granted a period of 60 days to find a CAS. As at  the
      date of application, he had not been able to  obtain  one.  The  Judge
      should have "evaluated" whether he should be given time to obtain such
      a CAS. The Judge had stated at [12] that from the evidence before her,
      the appellant did not have limited leave to remain when  he  made  his
      application and thus Patel did not apply to him. A further  period  of
      leave to remain in order to enable him to present a CAS.


  10. Mr Duffy on behalf of the respondent accepted that the Judge's finding
      that the appellant did not  have  valid  leave  at  the  time  of  his
      application was  incorrect  as  his  leave  to  remain  expired  on  7
      September 2014. He had submitted an application prior to  that,  on  5
      September 2014.


  11. He submitted that the error was not  material  as  the  appellant  had
      failed to submit a valid CAS with his application and his appeal would
      have been refused in any event. No evidence had  been  submitted  with
      his grounds to establish that he was  in  fact  in  possession  of  an
      assigned CAS when his application was made.


  12. Mr Duffy further submitted that the appellant had submitted  an  offer
      letter from London College of Advanced Management which post dated the
      date of the decision. In making such an offer for a Level 6 Diploma in
      Management, which was to commence on  2  September  2014,  and  to  be
      completed on  2  September  2015,  the  latest  joining  date  was  30
      September 2014.


  13. The college stated that in order to confirm his admission,  they  must
      receive confirmation from the Home Office that he has valid  leave  to
      remain.


  14. Mr Duffy produced the decision letter from the  Home  Office  dated  4
      July 2014  which was sent to the appellant 2014, curtailing his  leave
      to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 7  September  2014.   He
      had been granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 (general)  student  until
      29 September 2015 in order to undertake a course of study at Stanfords
      College UK Ltd.


  15. The Home Office was informed by that college on 28 May  2014  that  he
      had ceased studying with them. Home Office records  were  checked  and
      there was no evidence that he had made  an  application  to  change  a
      sponsor or make a fresh application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to
      enter or leave to remain in the UK in any capacity.


  16. As he had been excluded or withdrawn from his  course  of  studies  as
      notified by the Tier 4 sponsor, his  leave  was  curtailed  under  the
      rules until 7 September 2014.


  17. He was informed that before his current leave to  remain  expired,  he
      should either leave the UK or submit a fresh application for leave  to
      remain.


  18. In the decision dated 4 July 2014 the appellant had in fact been given
      a period of 62 days to present a further application.


  19. Mr Duffy submitted that the appellant's current submission appears  to
      be that he should be given an additional 60 days over  and  above  the
      initial period.


  20. The appellant had in fact failed  to  have  a  CAS  assigned  to  him.
      Nevertheless, he had "put in a  holding  application".  There  was  no
      obligation on the respondent to extend his period of leave or give him
      a further 60 days.


  21. In reply, Mr Turner submitted that it had  been  open  to  the  Judge,
      after looking at the offer letter, to have  stated  that  she  accepts
      that it had been  difficult  for  him  to  obtain  a  CAS.  He  had  a
      conditional offer and she should have allowed him a further period  to
      present a valid CAS.


  22. Mr Turner accepted that the offer in  fact  post  dated  the  date  of
      decision.


     Assessment


  23. I have had regard to the decision referred to me by  Mr  Duffy  during
      the course of his submissions, namely  Marghia  (Procedural  Fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC).


  24. The Tribunal held that the common law duty of fairness is  essentially
      about procedural fairness. There is no absolute duty at common law  to
      make decisions which  are  substantively  fair.  The  Court  will  not
      interfere with decisions which are objected to as being  substantively
      unfair, except the decision in question falls foul of  the  Wednesbury
      test, i.e. that no reasonable decision-maker or public body could have
      arrived at such a decision.


  25. The respondent in her decision  dated  4  July  2014  noted  that  the
      appellant was granted leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
      until 29 September 2015 to take a course at Stanfords College UK  Ltd.
      However, the respondent had been informed by the  college  on  28  May
      2014 that he had ceased studying with them.


  26. Records were checked and there was no evidence that  he  had  made  an
      application to change his sponsor or to make a fresh  application  for
      leave to enter or remain in the UK in any capacity.


  27. As he had been excluded or withdrawn from his course  of  studies,  as
      notified by his sponsor, leave was curtailed until 7 September 2014.


  28. The appellant was informed that prior to his current leave  to  remain
      expiring, he would, inter alia, need to submit a fresh application for
      leave to remain. He was not entitled to appeal that decision.


  29. The appellant was accordingly granted a period in excess of 60 days in
      order to meet the requirement of the Rules, including his  entitlement
      to be awarded 30 points for the CAS.


  30. The appellant then made his application on 5 September 2014 which  was
      two days prior to his leave to remain expiring.  In  his  application,
      he stated that he did not have the CAS.


  31. I find that the appellant had already been given 60 days in  order  to
      submit an application where a CAS had been assigned to him.


  32. I do not accept that  the  respondent  was,  in  these  circumstances,
      required as a matter of procedural fairness, to afford him  a  further
      opportunity of obtaining a CAS. He had already been granted in  excess
      of 60 days which would include the production of a CAS letter.


  33. The appellant has sought to rely on an offer which post-dated the date
      of the decision and is not admissible.


  34. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on the basis  that  he  did
      not have limited leave to remain in the UK when  his  application  was
      made. That is incorrect. The Judge consequently found that as a result
      of not having such leave to remain, the dicta in Patel did  not  apply
      to him.  I do not find that the error of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      was material. The  decision  of  the  respondent  which  was  appealed
      against had, for the reasons referred to, been procedurally fair.


  35. I accordingly reject the submission that  the  appellant  should  have
      received a further period  in  which  to  produce  a  valid  CAS.  The
      appellant had been given this opportunity but failed  to  produce  the
      necessary confirmation.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date  20 July 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

