
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09058/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 BADAR ABBAS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Riaz, Manchester Legal Services

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Kempton made on the papers at North Shields on 25th April 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant was born on 5th March 1987 and is a national of  Pakistan.
    He was last given leave to remain in the UK on 26th February 2013 until
    26th August 2015 on a discretionary basis, since he could not meet  the
    requirements of the Rules, as the spouse of Anjum Sultana Khan.

 3. On 5th February 2014 the Secretary of State received  information  from
    the claimant's spouse that the couple were no  longer  living  together
    and a decision was made to curtail  his  leave  to  remain  under  Rule
    323(2) and 284(vi) and to remove him from the UK.

 4. The judge accepted that the claimant had no indication  that  his  wife
    had written to the Home Office about his marriage and had  received  no
    documentation from the UKBA until the curtailment decision.  The appeal
    was allowed with respect to Article 6 of the ECHR in order to allow the
    claimant the right to pursue matters relating to the divorce, including
    the supposed forging of his signature on divorce  documents  whilst  in
    the UK.

 5. It was, however, accepted that the parties no longer resided with  each
    other as man and wife.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in allowing the appeal under Article 6 of the  ECHR
    and permission to appeal was granted on that basis by Judge Scott-Baker
    on 2nd June 2014.

 7. Both parties agreed that the curtailment decision was unlawful in that,
    as the claimant had only discretionary leave, it could only  have  been
    curtailed under Section 3(3)(a) of the 1971 Immigration  Act,  and  not
    under the Immigration Rules.

 8. Both agreed that the proper course was to  remit  this  matter  to  the
    Secretary of State in order for her to make a lawful decision.

Decision

 9. The judge erred in law and the decision is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted.  The  appeal  is  allowed  insofar  as  it  is
    remitted to the Secretary of State.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


