
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA092022015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                                |On 25 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    L M V
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Lemer, instructed by Platt & Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. This is an application by the Secretary  of  State  but  nonetheless  I
    shall refer to the parties as they were described before the First-tier
    Tribunal, that is Miss L M V as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 28 June 1961  and
    she made an application on 5 December 2014 which  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 23 February 2015 under paragraph  322(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed  by
    Ftt Judge James on 22 September 2015.

 3. Essentially the appellant had been the carer  for  both  a  mother  and
    children and she made an application to remain in the  UK  outside  the
    rules in order to look after both the mother, who was dying of  cancer,
    and the two  children  S  and  R  born  on  [  ]  2002  and  [  ]  2006
    respectively, aged at the date of the hearing 13 years and 9 years old.
      Sadly their mother died on 21st May 2015.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered the appeal on the basis  of  Article  8  only  as  the
    application was made outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  allowed  the
    appeal although it was not clear on what basis the judge did allow  the
    appeal.

 4. The challenge by the  Secretary  of  State  ran  essentially  to  three
    grounds.  It was not clear whether the judge allowed the appeal on  the
    basis it was not in accordance with the law or whether it  was  allowed
    outright.  Secondly, that there needed to be  compelling  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under the Rules to allow  the  decision  to
    move on to an Article 8 assessment and, thirdly, that  Section  117  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had not been applied.

 5. These are unfortunate circumstances and I preserve the factual  finding
    that have been set out in the decision of Judge James but I  find  that
    there is an error of law in that the judge was  not been  clear  as  to
    how this appeal has been  determined.  For example at paragraph 47  the
    judge states

    'it is clear the  substantive  duty  has  not  been  performed  by  the
    respondent thus I do not find the reasons for refusal are in accordance
    with the law in regards to the two minor children  and  the  appeal  is
    also allowed on this ground alone'.

 6. If that were the case the judge would not be in a position under Razgar
    v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 to proceed to determine  the  proportionality  of
    the decision but would stop at the third question in  Razgar  which  is
    whether the Secretary of State's decision was made in  accordance  with
    the law.

 7. I find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  in  accordance
    with the law. The original refusal did acknowledge albeit cursorily the
    position of the children and in accordance with MK (Section 55  of  the
    Tribunal) Sierra Leone [2015] I find that the judge was in  a  position
    to, and should have, in  these  circumstances,  determined  the  appeal
    forthwith.

 8. The facts were not disputed in this case and there was no challenge  to
    credibility.  I preserve  the  following  findings  of  fact  from  the
    decision which were as follows;

    '11. The background to this appeal is that the appellant has worked for
    the L family for a number of years in Singapore and  Hong  Kong  (since
    2002), for a period of 13 years.  The appellant lawfully entered the UK
    with a domestic worker visa on 18 June 2014 when Mrs L's  [the  mother]
    cancer had spread and she required intensive care, so  Mrs  L  returned
    home.  The appellant's visa was valid to  5th  December  2014  and  she
    applied for leave to remain outside the rules prior to  the  expiration
    of that visa.

    12.The respondent refused the application, noting that  Mrs  L  was  in
    receipt of support from nurses and carers as well as childcare, and was
    eligible for NHS or private  health  care  if  required.  Other  family
    members could help out with support and daily tasks (such  as  shopping
    and cooking)...'

    ...

    16'Since the application was lodged, sadly Mrs L has died  leaving  the
    children motherless and her husband bereft.  The appellant is  also  in
    mourning for her employer who she lived with as  part  of  the  family.
    Significant life changes and decisions have  taken  place  so  that  he
    husband has now relocated to Edinburgh which allows him to continue  to
    undertake his international legal work...The father has  take[n]  steps
    to ensure that wherever possible  the  children's  lives  are  made  as
    stable as possible despite the loss of  their  mother.   This  includes
    ensuring that the appellant is in full time attendance, as  a  live  in
    carer for the children, to provide them with continuity of care  and  a
    continuity of their previous lives overseas.

    17. The appellant made a decision to enhance the opportunities  of  her
    own children's lives by making the sacrifice of separation, in order to
    obtain sufficient income to further their  own  educational  ambitions.
    Her children are now grown up and independent.  During this  period  of
    13 years, she has been continuous presence in the lives of the children
    of Mrs L [and] for the entirety of their lives.

    18.  Despite their tender  years,  the  children  have  both  submitted
    witness statements which confirm the following:

    S[Elder child]: "Auntie L  joined  our  family  when  I  was  5  months
    old...someone who loves us and takes care of us...my dad took  lots  of
    time off work to look after us but he had to get back to  work  and  he
    needs to travel.  Our family come and see us  when  they  can  but  our
    grandparents are old and my dad's sister and brother have busy jobs...I
    would be extremely upset if Auntie Lucita had  to  leave  us...I  don't
    think I would be able to cope if Auntie L left us now".

    R [Younger child]:  "I want Auntie L to stay with us  because  she  has
    always helped to look after me and I would  be  very  upset  if  Auntie
    leaves us...nothing has been right since mum went to heave.  Everything
    has changed but Auntie makes it easier for us to cope".

    19 That the father spent a lot of time at the hospital during  Mrs  L's
    treatment and illness, meant during this difficult time  the  appellant
    was the children's mainstay'.

     ...

    20. There are witness statements from the sister, brother and mother of
    the father who confirm their limited ability to provide the  24/7  care
    the children need.  The sister works full  time  as  a  social  worker,
    which involves extensive travel  in  the  Scottish  rural  areas.   The
    children will live 1.5 hours drive from where she lives, in  their  new
    home.  The brother confirms he is a  police  officer  (thus  presumably
    works shifts) and his job prevents him from caring for the children but
    he confirms the appellant's full involvement in the social life of  the
    family throughout her employment'.

    ...

    22. It is clear the appellant made Mrs  L  a  'death  bed  promise'  in
    regards to the care of her children'.

 9. The judge also noted that the appellant observed [23]  that

    'if my leave is not extended, the  children  would  suffer  significant
    additional trauma from losing another constant presence in their lives,
    at a time of great distress for the family.  Jackie [Mrs L]  wanted  me
    to look after the family'.

    And recorded

    '24. In his updated witness statement the  husband/father  states  :"My
    children continue to be very distressed as a result of  their  mother's
    death ... I have significant concerns that losing their second maternal
    figure at this stage - losing their Auntie L - would  cause  additional
    and significant trauma as she has been a central figure in their  lives
    throughout their childhood.  This has been particularly the case in the
    last 3 years when my wife was unwell  for  so  much  of  this  terrible
    time...her presence as a maternal figure after Jackie's death  is  even
    more essential to my children's psychological welfare...  we  genuinely
    consider her to be an immediate member of our family.  Her  loss  would
    significantly damage the well- being of our family.




    '26. It is clear to me that the appellant forms a strong part  of  this
    intertwined modern family structure, with ties of genuine affection and
    psychological dependency of the children on the appellant...

    '27. '... the appellant has fully complied with  immigration  rules  to
date...'

    '28. The appellant is  a  fluent  English  speaker...and  there  is  no
    question of any reliance on public funds'.

    '29.  The reasons for refusal simply puts forward a  misconceived  idea
    that people can be replaced simply by paying another person to  do  the
    same duties and that the husband/father can easily do  so  due  to  his
    income bracket; failing to take into account the long term genuine ties
    of affection this will have on the children at this precarious stage of
    their emotional  development  and  their  current  emotional  state  of
    bereavement.'

    '30. ... the family have lived outside the UK all their lives  and  the
    only continuity of relationship they have had is with their parents and
    the appellant'.

10. The judge accepted that the appellant played an important  role  within
    the family both emotionally and practically and acknowledges that at  a
    delicate stage in their life their mainstay  was  the  appellant.   The
    judge noted that the mother had stated

    '31 ...L also acts as full time carer for our children as my husband is
    often required to travel for his employment...'

    '36. This is corroborated by Dr Kinniburgh in his letter of 27 August
    2015 which confirms that the appellant is a "very important member of
    the family...the children are at a vulnerable stage in their lives and
    are obviously adjusting to the loss of their mother and I think it
    could be potentially detrimental to the children if L's visa was not
    extended. I think there would be significantly more emotional and
    psychological harm to the children".

    37.Dr Evelyn Millings in her letter of 31 August 2015, confirms she  is
    s clinical psychologist and had contact with the father  prior  to  the
    death of his wife about how to break the news she had  terminal  cancer
    to their children.  She goes on to state he contacted her  again  after
    his wife died and she arranged and appointment with his children.   She
    concludes:...

         ...Ms V's as a  maternal  figure  for  the  children  after  their
    mother's death is integral to the children's psychological welfare  and
    development'...'if the children lose their second  maternal  figure  at
    this early  stage  of  bereavement  this  could  cause  additional  and
    significant trauma as she has been a central   figure  in  their  lives
    throughout their childhood...'

11. As I noted at the hearing, before this was an appeal outside the  rules
    and thus any assessment with regard Article 8 would have to be 'outside
    the rules'. What therefore should be factored in is that  there  is  no
    provision for applications of this nature within  the  rules.   Pausing
    there, even if  compelling  circumstances  was  the  settled  test,  as
    submitted by the Secretary of State, further to SS Congo v SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 317, the factors set out before me, and which I  have  recited
    above  do  disclose  compelling  and  exceptional  circumstances.   The
    removal  of  the  appellant  would  on  the  facts  as  accepted  cause
    unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  on  both  the  children   and   the
    appellant.

12. Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 at  Paragraph  64  sets  out  when  the
    matter should be considered outside the Immigration rules.

    'In my view that is a mis-reading of Aikens LJ's  observation.  He  was
    not questioning the substantial point made by Sales J.  He  was  simply
    saying that it was unnecessary for the decision-maker,  in  approaching
    the "second stage", to have to decide first  whether  it  was  arguable
    that there was a good article 8 claim outside the Rules  -  that  being
    what he calls "the intermediary test" - and then, if he decided that it
    was arguable, to go on to assess that claim: he  should  simply  decide
    whether there was a good claim outside the Rules or not. I am not  sure
    that I would myself have read Sales J as intending to impose  any  such
    intermediary requirement, though I agree with Aikens LJ that if he  was
    it represents an unnecessary refinement. But what matters is that there
    is nothing in Aikens LJ's comment which casts doubt on Sales J's  basic
    point that there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
    article 8 outside the Rules where, in the circumstances of a particular
    case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under the
    Rules.

13. Further, I find that not all the factors had been  taken  into  account
    such as the death of the mother and the pressing needs of the children.
     The application was made by the appellant both on the  basis  of  care
    for the mother when she  was  alive  and  also  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship with the children and her role  within  the  family  unit.
    Sadly, their mother has passed away.    There was certainly a death bed
    wish on the part of  the  mother  that  the  appellant  stay  with  the
    children and look after them while their father who supports and  cares
    for the family when he can is earning to keep the family.

14. I  apply  the structured approach in the guidance given in R (Razgar) v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 (and  in  particular  at  paragraph  17)  and  most
    recently in Quila [2011] UKSC 45  and  have  regard  to  the  following
    questions:

         "In a case where removal is resisted  in  reliance  on  Article  8,
         these questions are likely to be:

         Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

         If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

         If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         ends sought to be achieved?"

15. On the basis of the findings which I have preserved from Judge  James's
    decision it is  clear  that  the  appellant  has  a  firm  and  settled
    relationship with the children in this case and which falls within  the
    ambit of protected Article 8 family and private life.  She  is  clearly
    central to the wellbeing of the children and their father and has  been
    a part of their family in a  role  more  akin  to  mother  than  merely
    employee or nanny.   She has looked after since  they  were  born.  She
    cares extensively for the children and I find  that  more  exists  than
    normal emotional  ties  between  an  employee  and  her  charges.   The
    appellant has cared for the children since they were born and  latterly
    in very distressing  circumstances  for  them.   The  children  clearly
    depend on the appellant and she is attached to them and is part of  the
    family unit.

16. There is an  interference  with  that  family  life  under  the  second
    principle of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    threshold is not high.  The decision was made in  accordance  with  the
    law.  I can appreciate that in the decision making by the Secretary  of
    State there is a legitimate aim in the protection  of  the  rights  and
    freedoms of others through the maintenance of immigration control.

17. However moving on to proportionality I find that the interests  of  the
    children although not paramount are of a primary  factor  to  be  taken
    into consideration. Following paragraph 25  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4

    "The important thing is to consider those best interests  'first'"  and
    this is what I have done.

18. ZH (Tanzania) established that consideration of the best  interests  of
    the child is an integral part of the Article 8 balancing exercise  (and
    not something apart from it), but it  is  a  matter  which  has  to  be
    addressed first and as a distinct stage of the inquiry.   The  decision
    maker has first to make a decision on  what  is  in  the  overall  best
    interests of the child and only then to assess whether those  interests
    are outweighed by countervailing factors such as those  concerned  with
    the rights and freedoms of others.

19. Within the bundle there is the evidence of the father, the evidence  of
    the psychologist and a  doctor  and  not  least  the  evidence  of  the
    deceased  mother  herself  who  has  stressed  the  importance  of  the
    relationship between the appellant  and  the  children.   I  take  into
    account the fact that there has never been a  breach  of  any  form  of
    immigration control and that  the  leave  required  was  for  temporary
    purposes.  Even if that were not the case I would still  consider  that
    the interests of these children are such that they demand consideration
    and the presence of the  appellant  in  order  to  care  for  them  and
    continue to play a central caring role in their  lives.   The  children
    are still young aged 13 and 9 years  old,  have  moved  recently  to  a
    country with which they are not familiar and away from friends  abroad.
    Most importantly their mother died less than a year ago  and  they  are
    still grieving.

20. I place emphasis on the report of the psychologist who alluded  to  the
    trauma that further separation could cause these children  should  they
    be parted from another mother figure.  The father needs to continue  to
    work in order financially maintain his family and cannot care  for  the
    children on a 'waking day' basis and even if he could the report of the
    psychologist makes clear that the  children  need  the  appellant  with
    them.   There was no challenge by the respondent to that report at  any
    stage.

21. I also apply Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 and have regard to the following factors.




    117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

22. There is no suggestion that the appellant cannot speak English.   There
    is no suggestion that she is reliant on any public funds  and  that  is
    quite clear from the evidence within the papers. As pointed out  by  Mr
    Lemer, the relationship between the appellant and the children for whom
    she has cared on a daily basis and since they were born, was not formed
    whilst she was in the UK but formed in  Hong  Kong  and  prior  to  her
    coming, legally, to the UK. Even if that were  not  the  case,  Section
    117B  (4),  makes  no  reference  to  family  life   established   when
    immigration status is precarious.  In this instance I have  found  that
    the appellant has established both family and private life. I give  the
    interests of the children significant weight.

23. I also take into account the impact that the removal of  the  appellant
    would have on the father who has no doubt undergone immense stress both
    through the loss of  his  wife  and  having  to  continue  to  work  in
    pressured circumstances  without  her  assistance  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39.

24. Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  makes clear the consideration  is  one  of
    proportionality.

    'In an article 8 case where this  question  is  reached,  the  ultimate
    question for the appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal
    of leave to enter or remain, in circumstances where  the  life  of  the
    family cannot reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking
    full account of all considerations weighing in favour of  the  refusal,
    prejudices the family life of the applicant in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a breach of the  fundamental  right  protected  by
    article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative,  the  refusal
    is unlawful and the authority must so decide. It is not necessary  that
    the appellate immigration authority, directing itself along  the  lines
    indicated in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case  meets
    a test of exceptionality'.

25. I am aware that the appellant applied outside the Immigration Rules and
    that she entered the United Kingdom as a carer for the deceased  mother
    and  children.   However,  I  find  that   there   are   very   limited
    countervailing factors that outweigh the interests of the  children  in
    the proportionality assessment.

26. For the reasons given above, I find that the decision by the  Secretary
    of State was disproportionate and the appeal of the appellant should be
    allowed.

27.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  materially  for  the  reasons
    identified.  I set aside the decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the
    decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007

Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal of Miss L M V under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
order is made because there are minors involved.


Signed                                  Date 20th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  a  full  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date 20th May 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

