
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/09660/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th  March 2016                |On 13th April 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                     MAO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Singh
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. A direction for anonymity  was  made  previously  as
   this case impinges on the rights of a child.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
   order should continue.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Nicol promulgated on  6  July  2015  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against a decision to remove her following a  decision
   dated 17 February 2015 refusing her application dated 20 October 2014 for
   leave to remain on family and private life grounds.
Background


4. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1972 and is a national of Nigeria, She  has
   a child who was born on 30 December 2006 in the UK and who was  therefore
   7 years old at the date of application, 8 years old at the  time  of  the
   hearing.
5.  The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant first entered the UK on 1 March  2004  using  fraudulent
      documents.
   b) 2 January 2008 was convicted of Possession of a False  Instrument  and
      sentenced to 5 months' imprisonment.
   c) 25 February 2014 the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  on
      Article 8 grounds which was refused on 10 June 2014 with no  right  of
      appeal.
   d) 16 September 2014 the  Respondent  confirmed  that  there  was  an  in
      country right of appeal.
   e) The Appellant could not meet the suitability requirements of  Appendix
      FM because of her conviction.
   f) The application was considered under EX.1  as  there  was  nothing  to
      suggest that it would not be reasonable for the child to accompany his
      mother in returning to the country of his nationality,  Nigeria  given
      that she had close family there with whom she had  maintained  contact
      and his private life relationships in the UK would  be  limited  given
      his age. The child's medical condition  was  taken  into  account  and
      there was nothing to suggest that medical services were unavailable in
      Nigeria that could treat him.. There is also a  functioning  education
      system in Nigeria that he could benefit from.
   g) The Appellant herself could not meet the private life requirements  of
      the Rules.
   h) There were no compassionate circumstances warranting a grant of  leave
      outside the Rules for either the Appellant or the child.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Nicol ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge :
   a) Set out the law and facts based on the documentary  evidence  and  the
      oral evidence before him.
   b) Found that neither Appellant could meet the requirements of the Rules.
   c) He considered the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules taking into
      account the best interests of the Appellants child.
   d) He found it was in the best interest of the child  to  stay  with  his
      mother, the father having never had a role in his upbringing.
   e) He found that if returned to Nigeria with his mother they  would  have
      her family to support them and he could be educated there.
   f) He took into account the child's medical condition but on the basis of
      the limited information available there was  nothing  to  suggest  the
      treatment he required would be unavailable in Nigeria.
   g) He noted that the Appellant herself was well educated having heard her
      evidence that she did  a  degree  in  Nigeria  and  had  overcome  the
      difficulties that arose from her imprisonment.
   h) He did not find that there were circumstances that warranted  a  grant
      of leave outside the Rules and found the removal to be proportionate
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  29  October  2015  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Mc William gave permission to appeal stating:
   "I have considered the grounds of appeal submitted on  her  behalf  which
   generally recite the law  and  legal  principles  without  identifying  a
   properly arguable error on a point of law.
   However, it is arguable that the appellant's son is  a  qualifying  child
   for the purposes of Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  and  if  so  it  was
   incumbent on the judge to consider reasonableness in this context and  it
   is arguable that he failed to do so."

8. A Rule 24 notice from the Respondent argued that paragraphs 30-34 of  the
   decision addressed all those issues that were relevant  to  the  test  of
   reasonableness of return to Nigeria at paragraphs30-34 0f the decision.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Singh  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) The issue was whether the Judges reasoning in relation  to  the  child
      was clear and precise. The Judge applied the wrong test in the case in
      that  in  paragraph  27  he  uses  suggests  the  test   is   one   of
      exceptionality  and  there  is  no  assessment  of  the   concept   of
      reasonableness.

   b) The Judge failed to assess whether the Appellant could meet EX.1.

   c) The Judge failed to consider the ties of a 8 year old child to the UK.

   d) It was unclear what factors he had taken into account.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Duffy submitted that :

   (a)The test was one of reasonableness of return whether inside the  Rules
   under EX.1 or under Article 8 outside the Rules.

   (b)The Judge assessed all of the family circumstances  in  paragraphs  29
   onwards.

   (c)While not specifically identifying the test as one  of  reasonableness
   he identified all of those factors that were relevant to the test so  any
   failure to refer to the reasonableness of return was not material to  the
   outcome in the case.

   (d) Mr Singh appeared to rely on the case of  Abdul  (section  55-Article
   24(3) Charter [2016] UKUT 00106 (IAC) but that case  only  refers  to  EU
   nationals and can otherwise be distinguished.

   (e) The Judge dealt with all of the evidence before him and  nothing  had
   been identified that he failed to take into account.

11. In reply Mr Singh on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) The Judge applied the wrong test.

   b) He conceded that Abdul did deal with an EU child paragraphs  14-15  as
      it emphasised identifying the best interests of a child  was  relevant
      to this case.

Legal Framework
12. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
13. The permission  in  this  appeal  relates  to  section  117B  (6)  which
   provides: (6)
   "In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the  public
   interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."



14. A "qualifying child" is a child who is either British (s.117D(1)(a))  or
   has lived in the United Kingdom for seven years (s.117D(1)(b)).


15. In relation to the granting of leave outside the Rules I  remind  myself
   of what was said in the Court of Appeal in SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
   in paragraph 33:

    "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does  not  apply
    in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is  accurate
    to say that the general position outside the sorts of special  contexts
    referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to  be
    identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in
    Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as  strict
    as a test of  exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of  "very  compelling
    reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the context  of  the  Rules
    applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives appropriate weight to
    the  focused  consideration  of  public  interest  factors   as   finds
    expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules  in
    Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at  para.  [29],
    which has been tested and has survived scrutiny  in  this  court:  see,
    e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ.
16. In relation to the materiality  of  any  error  I  have  considered  the
   decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD - v - AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ
   1636 where the court found  that  an  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal may be considered immaterial -


   " ... if it is clear that  on  the  materials  before  the  Tribunal  any
   rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion or if it is clear
   that, despite its failure to refer to the relevant legal instruments, the
   Tribunal has in fact applied the test which  it  was  supposed  to  apply
   according to those instruments."
17. In relation t the adequacy of reasons I note that in MK  (duty  to  give
   reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it was held that  (i)  It  was
   axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a
   tribunal's decision. (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be
   implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight
   whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination and for  such
   findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness  was
   not believed or that a document was afforded no weight  was  unlikely  to
   satisfy the requirement to give reasons.
Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made errors of law that were material to the outcome.

19. The grant of permission in this case identified only one arguable  error
   of law that the Judge had failed to assess whether the  Appellants  child
   was a qualifying child for the purpose of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
   and therefore whether it was reasonable for the child to return with  his
   mother to Nigeria the country of their nationality.

20. The Judge acknowledged that he was obliged to take  into  account  those
   factors set out in section 117B in the assessment he did under Razgar  in
   paragraph 8-9 of the decision. I accept that  while  the  Judge  did  not
   specifically address whether section 117B(6) applied to the Appellant  in
   this case the exercise he did conduct can only be read as  an  assessment
   of whether it was reasonable and in the best interests of  the  child  to
   return to Nigeria with his mother against the undisputed fact that he had
   been in the UK for more than 7 years at the date  of  hearing.  While  he
   used the word 'exceptional' he also referred to the need  for  compelling
   circumstances where an Appellant, as in  this  case,  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules(paragraph 7)

21. The Judge identified a number of factors that the Appellant  had  raised
   as to why in their case her and her child could not return to Nigeria and
   then analysed them against an unchallenged finding at paragraph  30  that
   it was in the best interest of the child to remain with  his  mother  who
   had no right to be in the UK and whose  father  played  no  role  in  his
   upbringing and. I am satisfied that these are the same factors that would
   have been taken into account of the  Judge  had  specifically  identified
   that he was assessing the reasonableness of return:

   a) He considered the fact that the  Appellants  child  was  born  out  of
      wedlock and her family's attitude to this at paragraphs 26  and  found
      that there was no evidence beyond a letter in 2008 to suggest that her
      family would not be supportive if she returned.

   b) He addressed the claim that her sons medical conditions  would  impact
      on his return. in respect of which he  heard  oral  evidence  and  had
      documentary evidence (paragraphs 16-17 and 31  of  the  decision)  and
      concluded that 'on the basis of the limited information  available  to
      me it does not appear that he requires specialist  medical  care  that
      would not be available in a country like Nigeria.'

   c) He addressed the private life of the Appellants child in so far as  it
      related to his education. He would have been  entitled  to  note  that
      there was no evidence from  an  independent  social  worker  or  other
      professional that suggested that the child's best interests  would  be
      adversely  affected  by  a  move  to  Nigeria  or  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable for him to return there with his mother.

   d) He identified that the Appellant herself was  well  educated  and  had
      faced  nd  overcome  those  problems  associated  with  her   criminal
      convictions and while not explicitly stating it  the  implication  was
      that she could assist her  son  in  dealing  with  the  challenges  of
      relocation.




22. I note that neither in the grounds nor in arguments before me was  there
   any factor identified that the Judge failed to  take  into  account  that
   would have been  relevant  to  an  assessment  of  reasonableness.  I  am
   therefore satisfied that failing to use the  term  'reasonable'  made  no
   material difference to the outcome of the decision in this case based  on
   the evidence before the Judge. There was no evidence that would have  led
   a Judge to  conclude  that  in  the  facts  of  this  case  it  would  be
   unreasonable for the Appellant and her son to return to Nigeria.

23. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote  (1):  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

24. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

