

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/09497/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th October 2014                          |On 7th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                   HARRIES


                                   Between

                             MRS JIRAPON DOIDGE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms E Willsteed
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Details of the Appellant and Proceedings


  1. The appellant is a  Thai  national,  born  on  19th  August  1977.  She
     appealed before First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray (the Judge)  against
     the decision of the respondent to refuse to vary her leave to remain as
     a spouse on grounds that she did not meet the requirements of paragraph
     R-LTRP.1.1(d) and EX1 of Appendix FM,  or  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
     Immigration Rules. In a determination promulgated on 30th May 2014  the
     judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of
     the ECHR.


  2. On 14th July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers granted permission
     to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  for the following reasons:


         It appears to be common ground that the appellant was only  outside
         the Immigration Rules regarding leave to remain as a spouse because
         she  did  not/does  not  have  the   requisite   English   language
         qualification regarding Appendix O of the Rules (see  paragraph  19
         of the determination).  Having  assessed  the  evidence  the  Judge
         concluded that the appeal did not succeed through  the  application
         of Article 8 of the ECHR.


         In effect the crux of the complaints advanced through  the  grounds
         on which the appellant seeks permission to appeal is that the Judge
         has misunderstood when the  appellant  was  first  aware  that  the
         English language  qualification  that  she  had  obtained  was  not
         sufficient for  the  purpose  of  the  Rules  (and  therefore,  has
         misunderstood the amount of time that  the  appellant  has  had  to
         correct the deficiency). And has erred  when  proceeding  with  the
         assessment of proportionality in this case.


         The grounds are arguable.


  3. The matter accordingly came before me to determine  whether  making  of
     the decision in the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
     on a point of law.





My Consideration of the Submissions and Issues


  4. It was not disputed before the Judge that the appellant  did  not  have
     the requisite English language qualification as required by Appendix  O
     of the Immigration Rules.  She had achieved the NOCN Functional  Skills
     qualification in English at Entry 1, a test not included in Appendix O,
     and she therefore failed to meet the requirements of  E-LTRP.4.1.   The
     Judge found no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant  continuing
     family life outside the United Kingdom with  her  British  husband  and
     found EX.1 not to apply.


  5. The Judge then took account of the relevant case law, including Gulshan
     (Article 8 - new rules- correct approach [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC),  and
     found arguably good grounds for leave outside the Rules as  aspects  of
     the claim were not covered by Appendix FM.  She found that in the light
     of the appellant's leave to remain as a spouse in the  UK  since  2008,
     the focus of the Rules being around the practicalities  of  relocation,
     there was insufficient consideration of the appellant's family ties  in
     the United Kingdom.   She accordingly undertook a full consideration of
     the appellant's protected family rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR,
     adopting the 5-step Razgar approach.


  6. The grounds of appeal assert firstly that the Judge erred  in  fact  by
     finding that the appellant had not taken steps to undertake the correct
     English language test after April 2013; the Judge erred in stating that
     the refusal decision was made on 29th April 2013 because  the  decision
     appealed against was in fact made in February 2014. The Judge therefore
     erred in finding that the appellant had ample opportunity to  undertake
     the correct test. Ms Willsteed therefore submitted  for  the  appellant
     that following the refusal in April 2013 the appellant had, as  far  as
     she was aware, undertaken the correct test by July 2013.


  7. The appellant is submitted not to have been  aware  that  anything  was
     wrong until February 2014 when her next application  was  refused.  The
     wording of the respondent's 2014  refusal  is  submitted  not  to  have
     clearly stated that the  wrong  test  certificate  had  been  provided,
     rather than none at all.   Ms  Willsteed  further  submitted  that  the
     appellant has demonstrated that if the February 2014 decision had  been
     clear she would have rectified the problem as soon as possible and  the
     Judge has failed to take this into account.


  8. Mr Richards opposed the appeal on all the submitted grounds  on  behalf
     of the respondent.   He  submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  judge
     discloses no material error; she has correctly considered case law  and
     considered the Immigration  Rules  first;  she  has  properly  directed
     herself in accordance with Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  rules-  correct
     approach [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) by embarking on an analysis  of  facts
     in the appellant's favour before looking outside the Rules at Article 8
     of the ECHR.  If  anything,  Mr  Richards  submitted,  there  had  been
     generous findings on the part of the Judge in favour of the  appellant.
     In conclusion he submitted  that  the  Judge  had  done  all  that  was
     required of her.


  9. I accept that the Judge has erred in referring to the decision appealed
     against being that made on 29th April 2013. However, I  do  not  accept
     that the error was in any way material. There was a  refusal  decision,
     the details of which were before the Judge, made in  April  2013.   The
     refusal letter for that decision states that the respondent:   "is  not
     satisfied that you have provided  an  original  English  language  test
     certificate in speaking and listening from  an  English  language  test
     provider approved by the Secretary of State for these  purposes,  which
     clearly shows your name and the qualification obtained (which must meet
     or exceed level A1 of the CEFR)."


 10. The refusal letter dated February 2014 states that the  appellant  has:
     "failed to provide an original English  language  test  certificate  in
     speaking and listening from an English language test provider  approved
     by the Secretary of State, therefore you fail to meet the  requirements
     of paragraph 281(ii) stated above." I have  no  doubt  that  the  Judge
     considered the relevant substance of the decision appealed against  and
     I do not accept that the wording of either decision was unclear.  There
     is clear reference to the need for the provider to be approved  and  it
     cannot be the responsibility of the respondent that the  appellant  was
     wrongly advised by her college.


 11.  The  Judge  clearly  took  into  account,  in  paragraph  35  of   her
     determination,  the  appellant's  evidence  that  her  college  wrongly
     advised her about which test to take.  I accept  that  the  Judge  then
     weighed in the proportionality balance the ability of the appellant  to
     have corrected the situation from April 2013  onwards,  but  I  do  not
     necessarily accept that this was wrong, although the  appellant  claims
     not to have understood the basis of refusal until February 2014. If the
     Judge has erred in this respect I find that it was not material because
     it did not tip the balance against the  appellant  in  any  event.  The
     Judge took into account a range of other factors which stand apart from
     the time the appellant may or may not have had to correct her position.
      In particular, the Judge found that it would not be  unreasonable  for
     the appellant to  relocate;  she  found  that  there  may  be  initial,
     practical, difficulties but she would nonetheless  be  likely  to  find
     employment in Thailand.  The Judge took into  account  the  appellant's
     strong connections to Thailand and the presence of her immediate family
     there.


 12. The second ground of appeal asserts that the Judge failed adequately to
     consider whether the decision was a proportionate breach of the  rights
     of the appellant  and  her  husband.   In  particular,  she  failed  to
     consider factors such as the length of the  spouse's  work  as  an  HGV
     driver for over 25 years in the United Kingdom; his close  family  ties
     with his daughter and granddaughter living a short  distance  from  him
     and his close family ties with his nephew who suffers from autism.  The
     Judge is submitted not to have adequately considered that the appellant
     was only in breach of the Rules in relation to English language because
     her college gave her misleading information  and  that  she  meets  the
     purpose of the Rules because  she  does  speak  English,  works  in  an
     English-speaking environment and is integrated into the community.


 13. The third ground of appeal asserts that the Judge  failed  to  consider
     whether the breach of Article 8 was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
     aim.  She failed to consider matters including the appellant living and
     working in an English-speaking environment  for  5  years,  undertaking
     adequate education albeit not at an approved institution, and acting on
     the advice of her college.


 14. I find no merit in grounds two or three as set out above. Ground  three
     in my view represents a continuing argument, without  merit,  that  the
     appellant in effect meets the requirements of  the  Rules  because  she
     does speak English and that it was not her fault that her test was  not
     from an approved provider. The Judge took full account of  this  factor
     from the outset and has  set  out  a  clear  record  of  the  evidence,
     starting in paragraph 8 of the determination, when  the  appellant  was
     asked about her failure to obtain the correct English language test. In
     paragraph 11 of the determination the Judge sets  out  the  appellant's
     evidence that she believed that she had done the right  course.   These
     matters are carried forward into the  proportionality  assessment  with
     extensive references to case law relevant to the public  interest;  the
     judge took account of lawful requirement to obtain the  requisite  test
     in accordance with R (on the application of Chapti  &  Others)  v  SSHD
     [2011] EWHC 3379 (Admin).

 15. The Judge was obliged to deal with the  appellant's  situation  on  the
     basis of the fact that she failed to meet the necessary requirements of
     the Rules because she did not. The Judge in my view correctly and fully
     directed herself in relation to Article 8 from paragraph 27 onwards  in
     her  determination,  starting  with   the   Razgar   5-step   approach.
     Thereafter, where the balance fell was a finding of fact to be made  by
     the  Judge,  absent  perversity,  and  the  grounds  do  not  rely   on
     perversity.

 16. Looking at the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the  judge  has
     given sufficient reasons to explain why the particular circumstances of
     this appellant in the context of Article 8 led her to conclude  as  she
     did. I am satisfied that the proportionality balance  paid  due  regard
     both to the public interest in the enforcement of the Immigration Rules
     and the particular and individual circumstances of the family rights of
     the appellant and her husband in the context of that  public  interest.
     Having considered the case of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 the Judge
     concluded that this is not a case on all fours in relation  to  whether
     the appellant would be allowed to enter the UK to live with her  family
     in the long term.


 17. The fourth and final ground of appeal  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to
     consider that in all the circumstances it  would  be  proportionate  to
     grant leave to the appellant for a short period of time to  enable  the
     appellant to take the necessary test; the Judge  should  have  extended
     leave accordingly. I find no merit in this ground. In  accordance  with
     the response from Mr Richards made on behalf of the Secretary of  State
     I find that the appeal was properly dismissed under Article  8  of  the
     ECHR and it was not within the Judge's power to extend  leave  for  the
     appellant on any basis.

 18. I accordingly find that there is no material error of law requiring  me
     to  set  the  decision  aside  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
     dismissing the appellant's appeal stands.   The  appeal  to  the  Upper
     Tribunal fails.



Summary of Decisions

 19. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
     the making of a material error of law on a point  of  law.  It  follows
     that the First-tier Tribunal decision dismissing the appellant's appeal
     stands.

 20. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.


Anonymity


No party has applied for  an  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 in these proceedings and none is made.

Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 5th November 2014



Fee Award


The position remains that there is and can be no fee award.

Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 5th November 2014
