
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09135/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18th August 2016                  |on 2nd September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            ashwinder singh arora
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Upadhyay, of Norman Lawson & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 5th January 1989.   He  has
    not asked for anonymity.  His  case  has  an  unusual  and  unfortunate
    procedural history.  He had leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  until
    28th October 2013.  By application dated 24th October  2013  he  sought
    further such leave.

 2. In a letter  dated  30th  January  2014  the  respondent  refused  that
    application.  A bank statement relied upon by  the  appellant  was  not
    accepted as evidence of funds because it had been "proven to be false".

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, maintaining  in  his
    grounds that the respondent had not  established  the  document  to  be
    false.  He did not attend the hearing.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid
    dismissed his appeal by determination promulgated  17th  October  2014,
    stating that the appellant had not  persuaded  him  that  he  had  been
    wrongly accused of deception and that without cogent rebutting evidence
    he could not succeed.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   His
    grounds included the assertion that the judge had gone wrong by  taking
    the burden of proof to be upon the appellant.

 5. On 8th December 2014 Designated FtT Judge Macdonald granted  permission
    to appeal.

 6. In a rule 24 response to the grant of permission the respondent  argued
    that the appellant had been aware of the allegation, had  not  attended
    the hearing and had provided no evidence to counter it,  and  that  his
    complaint about the burden of proof was disingenuous.

 7. The case came before Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on  27th  March  2015.
    The hearing was at  Glasgow  (although  the  heading  of  the  decision
    erroneously states that it was at Field  House,  London).   Again,  the
    appellant did not appear.  In his decision, promulgated on  28th  April
    2015, Judge Dawson found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  gone  wrong
    regarding the  burden  of  proof,  but  he  set  out  his  reasons  for
    considering the appeal had been in any event  bound  to  fail,  and  so
    concluded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal need not be  set
    aside.  He dismissed the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. It then emerged that the appellant had provided the Upper Tribunal with
    details of a change of address on 25th February 2015 but the notice  of
    hearing sent out two days later  had  not  been  sent  to  his  updated
    address.  In a decision dated 14th and issued on 15th July  2015  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor applied paragraph 43 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, set aside the decision of UT Judge Dawson,
    and directed that the appeal be listed for hearing before another judge
    of the UT to decide afresh.

 9. The case accordingly came before me on 18th August 2016.  Mrs Pettersen
    took the position that the First-tier Tribunal decision  was  wrong  in
    law and, as it now emerged that the appellant did wish  to  pursue  the
    issue, it would have to be set aside and remade.

10. It is not yet apparent, even after all this time,  that  the  appellant
    has any substantive case  to  make  in  response  to  the  respondent's
    document verification report.  However, he now has representatives  and
    time available to enable him to make any case which may be open to  him
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of  law,
    as set out above, and as conceded.  No previous findings are to  stand.
    The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for an  entirely  fresh
    hearing.  (Judge Majid is excluded from the remaking of the decision.)




                           [pic]


                           1 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


