
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09335/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 29 October 2013                        |On 11 November 2013         |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |

                                   Before
                            THE RT HON. LORD BOYD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                               CHARANJIT SINGH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant



                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant:     no appearance
For the respondent:    Ms L Ong, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND NOTICE


1. On 2 September  2013,  the  appellant  was  given  permission  to  appeal
   against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Warner  promulgated  on
   31 July 2013 dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent
   made on 28 March 2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to
   directions under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2. We note that the appellant had, subsequent to the decision  of  28  March
   2013, the appellant made an application for asylum, submitting also  that
   his removal to India was contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
   pursuant to articles 2, 3, and 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.  That
   application was refused on 2 May 2013, and certified by the respondent as
   manifestly  unfounded  pursuant  to  section  94  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. There is no  in-country  appeal  against
   that decision.

3. When the matter came before us, we were informed that the  appellant  had
   refused to be brought to Field House. We also received  a  fax  from  his
   representatives, indicating that they were no longer representing him.

4. Ms Ong explained  that  in  light  of  the  subsequent  decision  of  the
   respondent on 2 May 2013, the respondent wished to withdraw the  decision
   which has now  been  done.   We  can  have  no  objection  to  that.  The
   consequence of that,  is  that  the  respondent  no  longer  resists  the
   appellants appeal within the Upper Tier and we allow that appeal  on  the
   basis of the grounds upon which appeal was granted, and direct that it be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

5. We now reconstitute ourselves as a  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
   decision which has been set aside.  We are therefore bound by the  Asylum
   and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules.  Rule  17  of  those  rules
   provides that where the respondent ( as here) notifies the Tribunal  that
   the decision to which the appeal relates has been withdrawn,  the  appeal
   is to be treated as withdrawn.

6. Accordingly, there is no valid appeal before us.   The decision of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Warner is therefore of no effect.


SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

     1. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  We
        remake the decision by treating it as withdrawn


     2. This disposes of the proceedings.




Signed:                                      Date:  5 November 2013
[pic]

J K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge
