
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/13968/2014
                                                               IA/09838/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2016                 |On 28th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                      Mr Prakash [C] (first appellant)
                      Mrs K.C. [S]  (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Singer, Counsel for Paul John & Co Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal born on 28th August 1978  and  7th
    November  1984  respectively.   The   First   Appellant   appeals   the
    Respondent's decision of 10th March 2014 refusing to vary his leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of ten years'  residence  and
    to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   The  Second  Appellant  appeals  the
    Respondent's decision of 20th  February  2015  refusing  her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  her  family  life  under
    paragraph 284 of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1).  The appeals were
    heard together by Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shaerf
    and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cassel as a panel,  on  4th  March
    2016 and dismissed on immigration grounds and human rights grounds in a
    decision promulgated on 24th March 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth  on
    1st September 2016.  The permission states that there  is  an  arguable
    error of law which has arisen in the application of Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  the  duty  of  the
    Tribunal  relating  to  the  Appellants'  young  child  and  his   best
    interests.  The child is less than 4 years old and has been  undergoing
    tests for a medical condition. There is a possibility that the juvenile
    arthritis diagnosis which was given is wrong and  the  child  has  been
    referred for an urgent bone biopsy following an abnormal MIR scan.  The
    permission states that it is arguable that  the  Tribunal  should  have
    caused enquiries to be made in order to  ascertain  the  diagnosis  and
    prognosis of such a young child before reaching a final  conclusion  as
    to what was in the child's best interests.

 3. There is a Rule 24  Response  which  states  that  the  panel  properly
    considered the appeal in respect of  paragraph  276A  relating  to  the
    First Appellant as there was a break in his continuous residence.   The
    Response goes on to state that the panel properly considered the  issue
    of Section 55 at paragraph 43 to 46 of  the  decision  and  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to be returned with his parents
    to Nepal.  It goes on to state that no adjournment  request  was  made.
    There was no up-to-date or pending  medical  evidence  put  before  the
    Tribunal and the Appellants cannot now seek to rely  on  events,  post-
    hearing, to suggest that the Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  the
    consideration of the best interests of the child.

The Hearing

 4. There is now new evidence about the child's health.  The child has been
    diagnosed  with  acute  lymphoblastic  leukaemia  and   is   undergoing
    chemotherapy at the Royal Marsden Hospital.  The  treatment  is  highly
    specialised and is due to last for over three years.  It requires close
    monitoring as he could relapse and the cancer could spread.

 5. Both parties agreed that Section 55 now requires to be dealt with based
    on this new evidence.  Both parties asked me to remit this  claim  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal with all the  evidence,  including  the  new
    evidence on the child's health, to be produced for that hearing.

 6. Counsel for the Appellants asked that at  the  First-tier  hearing  the
    child's parents, being the two Appellants in this claim, be recalled to
    give evidence.  He submitted that in the decision  there  is  no  clear
    finding as to what is in the child's best interests  and  that  further
    enquiries should have been suggested.  He also submitted that there  is
    no reference to policy guidance relating to the discretion which  might
    enable the gap in the ten year residence of the First Appellant  to  be
    ignored because of the extreme circumstances in this case,  which  were
    beyond the First Appellant's control.

 7. Counsel referred to the first Appellant previously requesting  a  grant
    of student leave to enable him to remain in the United Kingdom until he
    had  his  degree  certificate  but  the  Respondent  refused  this  and
    suggested that the First Appellant  made  an  out-of-time  application.
    Counsel submitted that this is why there is the ten month  gap  in  his
    legal  residence.   He  submitted  that  had  this  been  granted  this
    particular issue would not have arisen.

 8. Based on the new evidence before me  about  the  child's  health  I  am
    prepared to refer  this  claim  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    requested.   The 2 appellants in this case should be recalled  to  give
    evidence on all issues, in particular  the  health  of  the  child  and
    section 55 and the new evidence  referred  to  herein  on  the  child's
    health will form part of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider  the
    case are not to include Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shaerf and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cassel.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         28th October 2016


