
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09297/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 September 2013                            |On 12 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                 MARK ANING
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms Vidyaharan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1982.  He appealed  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 March 2013 to refuse to
    grant a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  as  the
    spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the   UK
    (Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  reg 7 and 17).

 2. The Appellant claimed  to  have  married  Virginie  Godelive  Lunda,  a
    citizen of France, under Ghanaian customary law by proxy.

 3. The Respondent  stated  that  it  is  permitted  to  marry  under  such
    customary law by proxy if the marriage certificate is accompanied by  a
    statutory declaration which must state the names of the parties to  the
    marriage; the places of residence of the parties at  the  time  of  the
    marriage; and that the conditions essential  to  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in accordance with  the  applicable  customary  law  had  been
    complied with.

 4. However,  in  the  Appellant's  case  the  statutory  declaration  that
    accompanied the marriage certificate did not state where he and the EEA
    national (the parties to the marriage) were residing at the time of the
    marriage.  As such the declaration was not valid and by inference,  the
    marriage  certificate  was  not  valid  without   a   valid   statutory
    declaration.

 5. Accordingly, the Respondent did not accept the marriage certificate  as
    proof that the Appellant is related to Ms Lunda.

 6. He appealed stating in the grounds, in summary,  that  the  information
    about residence had to be included in the 'registar office  application
    form' and not the statutory declaration.   Their  places  of  residence
    were shown on the  'registrar's  application  form'  which  'is  always
    retained by the registrar but the registrar will indicate our places of
    residence on the  Customary  Marriage  Certificate.'   The  information
    required on the statutory declaration is  the  consent  of  the  family
    members of the parties to the marriage.

 7. His appeal was determined without a hearing by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal McDade.  His determination was promulgated on 25 June 2013.

 8. In his brief determination, having noted the comments by the Respondent
    stating the requirement that the marriage certificate be accompanied by
    a statutory declaration 'which must  include,  inter  alia,  places  of
    residence of the parties  at  the  time  of  the  marriage'  the  judge
    continued:

         'It is unarguable that this information was not  contained  in  the
         statutory declaration  made  on  18  December  2012.   Despite  the
         Appellant producing a further  bundle  of  evidence,  none  of  the
         evidence appears to me  to  contain  the  information  required  to
         satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  Apart from he and his  wife
         stating that they "have been living in London" it takes the  matter
         no further on the matter of where the parties were residing at  the
         time of the marriage.  This is fatal to the appeal.'

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal giving the following reasons.
     First, the judge had ignored documents provided by the Appellant  from
    the Office of the Metro Chief Executive,  Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly
    where the marriage was registered which certify that the  marriage  was
    correctly registered and all documents relating  to  the  marriage  are
    genuine.

10.  Second,  the  Respondent  did  not  provide  the  background  material
    supporting the assertion that the statutory declaration  had  to  state
    the place of residence of the parties at the time of marriage.

11. Third, nowhere in the 'applicable customary marriage law' was it stated
    that the 'statutory declaration should indicate our places of marriage'
    and that their 'places of  marriage  can  be  found  on  the  customary
    marriage certificate itself'.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on 11 July 2013 by a judge who stated:

         '2.  The Appellant claimed that he and the  relevant  EEA  national
             had entered into a customary proxy  marriage  in  Ghana.   The
             Respondent did not accept the marriage as genuine because,  it
             was  said,  Ghanaian  customary  law   requires   a   marriage
             certificate in relation to a proxy marriage to be  accompanied
             by a statutory declaration  which  must  state  the  place  of
             residence of  the  parties  at  the  time  of  marriage.   The
             statutory declaration did not contain such  information.   The
             judge accepted the Respondent's argument.

         3.   The grounds of appeal, drafted by  the  Appellant  in  person,
             contend that there is no such requirement in  the  case  of  a
             customary marriage such as this and that, in  any  event,  the
             above information is contained within the  customary  marriage
             certificate.  Further, complaint is made that the judge  erred
             in simply accepting the Respondent's  view  as  to  the  legal
             position.

         4.   Albeit with hesitation, I have concluded it  is  arguable  the
             judge erred in accepting the  Respondent's  view  of  the  law
             without the Respondent providing evidence of it, as opposed to
             mere assertion.  It does not appear that  the  Respondent  has
             produced the relevant legal provisions or any  other  form  of
             corroborative evidence.

         5.   Permission is granted and all the grounds may be argued.'

13. At the  error  of  law  hearing  before  me  Ms  Vidyaharan  sought  an
    adjournment.  She understood that a case had been  heard  by  the  Vice
    President on customary marriage by proxy.  A decision was awaited.  The
    issue was whether the domicile  of  parties  was  relevant  in  such  a
    marriage.  I refused an adjournment because that was not a  point  that
    was in issue in this case.

14.  The  Appellant,  through  an  interpreter,  submitted  brief   written
    submissions which largely repeated what he  said  in  the  grounds.  In
    addition, he submitted that the reference  in  the  1985  Ghanaian  law
    which states that a statutory declaration accompanying the  application
    for the registration of the marriage must state the places of residence
    of the parties at the time of the marriage was not a reference  to  the
    husband and wife but rather to  their  respective  fathers  who  stated
    their residence in the declaration to be in Ghana.

15. They were called 'the parties' because they were swearing the affidavit
    not the Appellant and his wife.  As for  the  places  of  residence  of
    himself and his wife, these  were  stated  on  the  customary  marriage
    certificate.  There was 'clear evidence' from the judicial services  of
    Ghana, the Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  and  the  Accra  Metropolitan
    Assembly, confirming the validity of the marriage.

16. In reply Ms Vidyaharan disputed that  'the  parties'  referred  to  the
    residence of parents of the couple.   The  applicable  law,  which  was
    referred to in a RALON report, clearly indicated otherwise.

17. In considering this matter the Appellant referred to documents which he
    said supported his claim to be lawfully  married.   There  is  an  item
    entitled 'Form of Register of Customary marriages' containing 'Part A -
    Particulars of husband' and 'Part B - Particulars  of  wife'.   It  was
    agreed at the hearing that such was the purported marriage certificate.
     One of the categories is 'Place of residence of husband' and 'Place of
    residence of  wife'.   In  each  the  entry  is  'UK'.   The  statutory
    declaration (18 December 2012) is in the names of  Ansu  Geabour  Aning
    and Jose Lunda, both of Accra, the fathers of Mark Aning  and  Virginie
    Godelive Lunda.  It is stated that 'being the fathers (they) have  full
    authority to represent (their) son and daughter  in  the  matters  that
    affect them both legally and customarily'; that on 15 October 2012  the
    'above mentioned couple were  married  in  Accra  in  our  presence  in
    accordance with the Ghanaian customary Marriage Laws and usages in  the
    Republic of Ghana' and that 'after the customary rites  were  performed
    they lived together as husband and wife'.  Mr Aning and Mr Lunda signed
    the declaration 'testifying the genuineness of the  Ghanaian  Customary
    marriage between Mark Aning and Godelive Lunda now existing'.

18. There is also a document from Accra Metropolitan Assembly  (18  October
    2012) signed by  the  Registrar  of  Marriages  which  states  that  it
    confirms  the  authenticity  of  the  customary  marriage   certificate
    belonging to Mark Aning and Virginie Godelive Lunda.  It adds:

         'We confirm that the marriage was customary marriage by proxy which
         the families of the bride and groom have every right  to  represent
         them in matters that affect  them  both  legally  and  customarily,
         wherefore we confirm them as legally binding husband and wife ...'

19. I note also a UKBA  document  (17  January  2012)  entitled  'Customary
    Marriage and Divorce/Proxy Marriages Contracted  in  Ghana'  by  RALON,
    Accra (Risk and Liaison  Overseas  Network).   In  the  section  headed
    'Registration of Customary Marriages' (P3) the report states:

         '1.  ...

         2.   After the customary rites have been performed, parents of  the
             couple or persons standing in "loco parentis" to the  spouses,
             or any adult (18 years and above) witness of  choice,  can  be
             delegated to support a  statutory  declaration  affirming  the
             completion of the customary rites.  The statutory  declaration
             can be made separately by either family or  could  be  jointly
             made by both families.

         3.   The declaration states the following:

             (a)  Names of the parties to the marriage;

             (b)  The places of residence of the parties at the time of the
                  marriage;

             (c)  That the conditions essential  to  the  validity  of  the
                  marriage in accordance with the applicable  customary  law
                  have been complied with.'

20. Later, under the heading 'Proxy Marriages (Mainly Customary Marriages)'
    it is stated:

         'Customary marriage rites are sometimes  performed  by  proxy.   In
         this case, one or both parties are not present at the time  of  the
         ceremony.  Consequently registration can be done by proxy  ...   In
         this case the registration form (First Schedule) can  be  completed
         on behalf of the couple by any adult delegated by them and only the
         names  of  the  couple  are  stated  on  the  form  without   their
         signatures.  Alternatively, the form can be sent to the  couple  or
         either party where they  reside  to  complete  their  portions  and
         return the completed and signed form to the Registrar'.

21.  It  seems  clear  from  the  information  referred  to   above   under
    'Registration of Customary Marriages' that while the  'parents  of  the
    couple  ...  can  be  delegated  to  support  a  statutory  declaration
    affirming the completion of the customary rites', the requirements  (at
    paragraph 3) to be stated in  the  statutory  declaration  include  the
    married couple's details.  As indicated these requirements include:

         '(a) Names of the parties to the marriage;

         (b)  The places of residence of the parties  at  the  time  of  the
             marriage ...'

22. I see no reason not to take the clear and ordinary meaning of the  word
    'parties' in the context it is used.

23. The parties to the marriage  were  Mark  Aning  and  Virginie  Godelive
    Lunda.  The places of residence of the parties to the marriage  at  the
    time of the marriage were, according to the marriage certificate, UK.

24. I see no reason why  I  cannot  rely  on  the  contents  of  the  RALON
    document.  It conforms exactly with what  is  stated  in  the  Ghanaian
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985 referred  to  by
    the Appellant in his written submissions lodged for the  error  of  law
    hearing and, indeed, in the initial grounds of appeal. I thus   see  no
    merit in the submission that the reference to the 'places of  residence
    of the parties at the time of the marriage' refer to the parents of the
    parties to the marriage and not to the parties themselves.

25. I have considered what appeared to be the submission  that  information
    about residence was included in the marriage application  form  to  the
    registrar and, consequently, in the marriage  certificate  itself  (the
    Form of Register of Customary Marriages) and that the  certificate  was
    ex facie evidence that the  marriage  was  valid,  and  that  such  was
    sufficient to remedy any defect in the  statutory  declaration.  In  my
    judgement it does not. The onus is on the Appellant  to  establish  the
    validity of the marriage. The statutory  declaration  was  not  in  the
    terms required by Ghanaian law. It is not a reliable document. As  such
    it cannot be shown that the marriage certificate on which  reliance  is
    placed  is  reliable,  nor  indeed  the  documents   from   the   Accra
    Metropolitan Assembly and other Ghanaian sources.

26. Ms Vidyaharan did not know whether the  RALON  report  was  before  the
    First tier judge. Even if  it  was  not,  in  the  circumstances  which
    included that the case  was  dealt  with  at  the  Appellant's  request
    without a hearing, and  in  the  absence  of  any  submissions  to  the
    contrary, the judge was entitled to accept that the content and  effect
    was as  the  Respondent  claimed.  Further,  the  documentary  evidence
    containing the relevant legal provisions subsequently produced  confirm
    the situation to be as the Respondent claimed it to  be.  As  indicated
    such evidence is contained not only in the RALON  report  but  is  also
    clearly stated in the 1985 legislation to which the report refers  (and
    which the Appellant put before the Tribunal in the original grounds).

27. I conclude that the First-tier Judge did not materially err in  law  in
    finding that information  which  was  required  to  be  stated  in  the
    statutory declaration was not contained therein  with  the  consequence
    that the declaration was not valid and thus  the  marriage  certificate
    not valid without a  valid  statutory  declaration.   Accordingly,  the
    relationship with Virginie Godelive Lunda had not been established  and
    the case failed under the EEA Regulations.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a  material  error  of
law and that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


