
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/09253/2015

                                                 IA/09260/2015

                                                 IA/09270/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 15 April 2016                    |        On 26 April 2016          |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr ASHITHA INDIKA JAYAWARDENA
                                                            First Respondent

              Mrs WICKRAMAARACHIGE PRIYANKA SUWINI JAYAWARDENA
                                                           Second Respondent

                       Miss JANITHMA VINUGI JAYWARDENA
                                                            Third Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr K Wyn, Liyon Legal Ltd

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley, promulgated  on  29  September
2015, which allowed the Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The Appellants are all members of the same family.  The  third  appellant
is the child of the first and second appellants.  The  first  appellant  was
born on 3 April 1972. The second appellant was born  on  27  February  1975.
The third appellant was born on 18 November 2004. All three  appellants  are
Sri Lankan nationals.

4. The first appellant entered the UK as a student in 2007,  accompanied  by
the second appellant as his dependent spouse. They have remained in  the  UK
since then. The third appellant was born in the UK. She  has  now  completed
her primary education and started at secondary school. On 19  February  2015
the Secretary of State refused the Appellants'  applications  for  variation
of leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Oakley ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and,  on  23  February  2016,  Judge
Grimmett gave permission to appeal stating inter alia


   "It is arguable that the Judge erred in the consideration of the  child's
   position by dealing with her as  being  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  without
   taking into account that she would be  following  her  parents  to  their
   country of origin."

The Hearing

6. Mr Clark, for the  respondent,  adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told me that an error of law could clearly be seen  at  [33]  and
[34] of the decision. He told me that those paragraphs demonstrate that  the
Judge failed to take account of the guidance given in EV  (Philippines)  and
Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and PD and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined
family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108  (IAC).  He  told  me  that  the
Judge's error is created by considering the third  appellant's  case  before
separately considering the cases of the first and second appellant; he  told
me that the Judge  only  allowed  the  first  and  second  appellants  cases
because of his findings in relation to the third appellant,  and  that  that
is a material error in law.

(b) Mr Clark told me that the cases of EV  (Philippines)  and  PD  &  Others
make it clear that the tribunal must look at whether or not  the  first  and
second appellants could independently succeed under the  immigration  rules,
and the Judge  has  not  done  that.  He  argued  that  there  has  been  no
meaningful assessment of the cases of the second  &  third  appellants,  but
what the Judge  has  done  is  find  that  the  third  appellant's  case  is
determinative of all three appeals. He  argued  that  an  holistic  approach
taking account of the potential of the third  appellant  to  return  to  Sri
Lanka (with her parents) is the correct approach. He argued that there is  a
material  error  because  the  Judge's  error  of  logic  has  significantly
influenced the appeals. He urged me to set the decision aside.

7. Mr Wyn, for the appellant's, told me that the decision does  not  contain
any errors of law, material or otherwise. He told  me  that  the  Judge  has
clearly followed the guidance set out in the case of PD and others, and  has
taken careful account of section 117B of the 2002  Act.  He  emphasised  the
findings of the expert report discussed  in  the  Judge's  findings  between
[27] and [32] of the decision. He told  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
beyond criticism and should be allowed to stand.

Analysis

8. In PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka  [2016]
UKUT 00108 (IAC) it was held that when considering the conjoined  Article  8
ECHR claims of multiple family members, decision-makers should  first  apply
the Immigration Rules to each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,
then consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.  This  exercise  will  typically
entail the consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so  as  to
ensure that all material facts and considerations are taken into account  in
each case.

9. The Judge clearly sets out, at the start of [34] the  decision,  that  he
reached the conclusion that the third appellant fulfils the requirements  of
the immigration rules before considering the cases of the first  and  second
appellants. It is clear from what is said at [34] of the decision  that  the
Judge's decision that the third appellant fulfils the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules is a factor which weighs heavily in his decision  for  the
first and second appellants.

10. From the case of PD and others  it  is  clear  that  any  countervailing
factors must be taken into account. It is not clear from  [33]  or  [34]  of
the decision that the countervailing factors  (that  the  first  and  second
appellants probably could not succeed under the immigration rules  if  their
cases are considered in isolation) have been taken  into  account.  At  [34]
the Judge makes it clear that the factor that weighs most heavily in  favour
of the first and second appellants is that the  third  appellant  meets  the
requirements of the immigration rules and should not be separated  from  her
parents. Does that approach amount to a material error of law?

11. The grounds of appeal make it clear that the respondent does not  accept
third appellant should succeed  under  the  immigration  rules  because,  in
accordance with EV (Philippines), the Judge has not asked whether or not  it
is reasonable to expect the third appellant to follow her parents  to  their
country of origin.

12. Between [24] and [33] the Judge clearly considers the interests  of  the
third appellant taking account of all of the evidence, including  an  expert
report dated 10 December 2014. At [28] and [29] the Judge quotes  from  that
expert report. At [32] the Judge clearly relies on the expert's  conclusions
that return to Sri Lanka would  have  a  detrimental  effect  of  the  third
appellant's education and development.

13. The Judge does not, at any point in the decision, consider  whether  the
third  appellant  would  return  to  Sri  Lanka  alone.  The  Judge  clearly
considers that, because of the third appellant's age, she  would  return  to
Sri Lanka with her parents. It is against that  background  that  the  Judge
reaches a conclusion that it is not  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  be
removed from the UK - and so finds that  the  third  appellant  fulfils  the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the rules.

14. In reaching that conclusion, the Judge correctly directs himself in  law
and reaches a conclusion based on findings of fact which were  open  to  the
Judge on evidence placed before him. The decision reached by  the  Judge  is
in line with the case of EV (Philippines). The  Judge's  decision  that  the
third appellant fulfils the requirements of the  immigration  rules  is  not
tainted by an error of law.

15. The real challenge in this case is as to whether or not the decision  in
relation to the third appellant is  determinative  of  the  appeals  of  the
first and second appellants.

16. The first sentence  of  [34]  is  probably  not  correct.  It  might  be
considered to be ambiguous for the Judge to say "I  then  need  to  consider
the situation with regard to the first and  second  appellants......"  after
he has concluded that the third appellant fulfils the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules.  The  problem  with  that  sentence  is  it  creates  the
impression that the focus in this case  is  almost  entirely  on  the  third
appellant. That sentence could be interpreted as giving the impression  that
the Judge might have  considered  the  appeal  of  the  third  appellant  in
isolation and effectively made the first and second  appellants  simply  the
dependents of the third appellant.

17. It is, however, wrong to place  undue  emphasis  on  that  one  solitary
sentence. A fair reading of the decision as a whole makes it clear that  the
Judge considered all three appellants' cases jointly. What the judge did  is
entirely in keeping with the rubric to the case of PD others. The Judge  has
applied the immigration rules to each individual appellant. I find that  his
conclusion at [33] (that the third appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules) is  beyond  challenge.  At  [34]  (&  throughout  the
determination)  the  Judge  clearly  considers  countervailing   factors   -
including the immigration status of the first  and  second  appellants.  The
difference between this case and the facts  and  circumstances  recorded  at
[41] of the case of PD and others is that the parents of  the  child  in  PD
and others were unlawful over-stayers. The first and second appellants  have
consistently benefited from grants of further leave to remain in the UK  and
made the application which was refused by the respondent before their  leave
to remain expired.

18. The result is that the Judge has considered the  circumstances  of  each
appellant against the immigration rules, and then consider the  entirety  of
all claims jointly, so that all material facts and considerations are  taken
into  account.  The  Judge  first  applied  the  immigration   rules,   then
considered article 8 ECHR out-with the rules separately. In  doing  so,  the
Judge adhered to the guidance given in PD and others.

19. The third appellant was born in the UK in 2004 and has lived in  the  UK
all her life. She is a qualifying child in terms of s.117B of the 2002  Act.
The first & second appellants are not  liable  to  deportation  and  have  a
genuine parental relationship with the second  appellant.  The  Judge  takes
account of  the  impact  that  removal  is  likely  to  have  on  the  third
appellant. The Judge's fact finding exercise is not flawless, however, as  I
have already indicated, he clearly identifies the  crucial  aspects  of  the
established family and private life enjoyed by the appellants.

20. At [39] the Judge draws those  findings  of  fact  to  a  conclusion  by
applying the correct test in law. The Judge has regard to  part  5A  of  the
Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  Judge   draws   the
conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect the third appellant  to
leave the UK. That is  the  correct  test  in  law.  The  decision  contains
sufficient findings of fact to support the conclusion that the  Judge  comes
to. The correct test in law has manifestly been applied.

21.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

22. In this case, there is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact  finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

23.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

25. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                                                              Date 18
April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
