
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09605/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS ESTHER GYABAH-BOADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Present but not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro allowing an appeal by Ms Esther Gyabah-
   Boadi (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant").

2) The appeal was allowed under paragraph 276ADE(vi) prior to the  amendment
   of this provision by HC 532 with effect from 28  July  2014.   The  judge
   found that the appellant was 48 years old and had lived in the UK for  16
   years.  Since arriving in the UK she had not been back  to  Ghana,  which
   was her country of origin, and in that time her marriage had broken down,
   her parents had died, and all of her siblings had  migrated  to  the  UK.
   The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that she had  lost  all  ties
   with Ghana and there  was  no-one  there  to  whom  she  could  turn  for
   emotional and financial support if she returned.  The judge was satisfied
   that the appellant had lost her connection to life in Ghana in  terms  of
   Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060.

3) The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of
   grounds.  The first of these was that the judge should have  applied  the
   version of paragraph 276ADE(vi) in force at the date of  the  hearing  in
   September 2014.  The second ground  was  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
   finding that the appellant had no ties  with  Ghana.   According  to  the
   Presenting Officer's minute of the hearing  the  appellant  still  had  a
   nephew living in  Ghana.   The  appellant  spoke  the  language  and  had
   professional qualifications which would assist  in  finding  work  there.
   The third ground was that the judge had  failed  to  resolve  a  material
   conflict in the evidence.  At  paragraph  26  the  judge  recorded:  "The
   appellant's evidence is that she has lost all ties to Ghana and  I  guess
   she means the people she would  have  been  able  to  turn  to  for  both
   emotional  and  financial  support  if  she  was  returned  there."   The
   application criticised the use by the judge of the word "guess".  It  was
   submitted that the judge had failed to resolve  a  conflict  between  the
   appellant's evidence and the legal  test  in  Ogundimu.   Permission  was
   granted on these grounds.

4) At the hearing, Mr Clarke, for the Secretary of  State,  referred  me  to
   the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Bossadi [2015]  UKUT  00042,  which
   enlarged on the test as  stated  in  Ogundimu  in  respect  of  paragraph
   276ADE(vi).  In relation to whether the  judge  applied  the  Immigration
   Rules which were in force at the appropriate time, Mr Clark very properly
   acknowledged that this was not an issue he would pursue.  I note that the
   implementation provisions of the relevant Statement  of  Changes  (HC532)
   state that the  change  would  take  effect  on  28  July  2014  for  all
   applications to which paragraph 276ADE applied which were decided  on  or
   after that date.  In this particular appeal the application  was  decided
   by the Secretary of State on 6 February 2014 and therefore fell under the
   previous version of paragraph 276ADE(vi), as found by the judge.

5) Mr Clarke indicated that he would address me  on  the  second  and  third
   grounds in the application.  He  referred  to  the  Presenting  Officer's
   minute and said that he also had  before  him  the  Presenting  Officer's
   notes of cross-examination, although these had not  been  produced.   The
   son of one of the claimant's siblings in the UK was living in  Ghana  but
   the judge had failed to take this into account.  In terms  of  paragraphs
   15 and 16 of Bossadi, ties that were dormant could be revived.  The judge
   should not have sought to "guess"  what  was  meant  by  the  appellant's
   evidence.  It was fatal to  the  decision  for  the  judge  not  to  have
   acknowledged the claimant's family ties, particularly as these  could  be
   revitalised.  The test in paragraph 276ADE(vi) was not satisfied and  the
   decision should be remade on that basis.

6) The claimant did not address me  directly  but  she  was  assisted  by  a
   friend from her church, Mr Chris Vanderpuije.  Mr  Vanderpuije  submitted
   that Ms Clarke's assertion that dormant relationships  could  be  revived
   was speculative.  The claimant had no relationship with her nephew  apart
   from a blood tie and she could not foist herself on him.  In  any  event,
   the nephew had since relocated to the UK.

7) I note that according to the decision  in  Bossadi,  the  requirement  in
   paragraph 276ADE(vi) requires  a  rounded  assessment  as  to  whether  a
   person's familial ties could result in support of him or her in the event
   of their return,  taking  into  account  both  subjective  and  objective
   considerations and also consideration of what lies within the  choice  of
   the claimant to achieve.  It seems to me that this  aptly  describes  the
   approach taken by the judge to the assessment of whether the requirements
   of paragraph 276ADE(vi) were met in this appeal.  The judge accepted that
   at the age of 32, when she came to the UK, the claimant  still  had  ties
   with Ghana through her parents, her husband  and  her  home.   The  judge
   found there was no question that the appellant would have  forgotten  her
   language or her culture but, in terms of Ogundimu, these were links which
   were remote or abstract without a  more  direct  connection  to  life  in
   Ghana.  In the 16 years the claimant has spent in the UK her marriage had
   broken down, her parents had died and all  her  siblings  had  left.  The
   judge found that the claimant had no real connection to  life  in  Ghana.
   The judge further had regard to country information stating that women in
   Ghana lacked  capacity  to  engage  in  viable  economic  activities  and
   remained in a vicious circle of poverty.  The judge  found  that  without
   family ties to support the claimant on her return to Ghana, she would  be
   very vulnerable and not able to sustain herself.

8) As I read the decision, the judge was not suggesting  that  the  claimant
   had any expectation of encountering serious harm on return to Ghana, such
   as might satisfy the threshold of Article 3, but was  acknowledging  that
   without active social or family ties to Ghana the claimant would find  it
   very difficult to re-establish herself there.

9) It is unusual to find a judge using the word "guess" in  making  findings
   but the judge's use of informal language in this context does not  amount
   to an error of law.  The judge was required to  take  into  account  both
   subjective and objective considerations and was simply  seeking  to  give
   meaning to the claimant's subjective assessment of her situation.

10) In the findings the judge did not mention the claimant having  a  nephew
   in Ghana at the date of the hearing.  If there were any  suggestion  that
   this was a material factor, I would have expected the judge to  refer  to
   the matter.  I am not at all persuaded, however, that the presence of the
   claimant's nephew in Ghana was a material factor and  by  the  judge  not
   having referred to this it may be assumed that the judge did not consider
   it a material factor either.  I accept the point made on  behalf  of  the
   claimant that in order to rely  on  the  support,  whether  emotional  or
   financial of her nephew, she would have to have some  greater  connection
   to him than merely the "blood tie"  referred  to.   It  is  difficult  to
   imagine a strong connection between a woman of  the  claimant's  age  and
   circumstances and her nephew, even though he happened to be in  Ghana  at
   the relevant time.  I am satisfied the judge was  entitled  to  disregard
   this factor.

11) In short, I am satisfied that the judge made no error of law in  finding
   that the claimant satisfied the terms of paragraph 276ADE(iv) as it stood
   at the date of the Secretary of State's decision.

Conclusions

12) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

13) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

14) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   It  has
   not been argued before me that such an order should be made and I see  no
   significant reason for making one.





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


