
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2015                 |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD TANVEER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 1st December  1986.
    He first arrived in the UK on 3rd May 2011 when he was given  leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  until  20th  August  2012.
    That leave was subsequently extended until 27th December 2013.  On 23rd
    March 2013 the Appellant  married  by  way  of  a  traditional  Islamic
    ceremony the Sponsor, Misbah Nasar and on 18th  December  2013  applied
    for further leave to  remain  as  her  spouse.   That  application  was
    refused for the reasons  given  in  a  Notice  of  Decision  dated  4th
    February 2014 when the Respondent also decided to remove the  Appellant
    under the provisions of Section 47 Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Osborne (the Judge) sitting at Stoke  on  Trent  on
    17th  June  2014.   She  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given in a Decision dated  27th  June
    2014.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  5th
    November 2014 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. In dismissing the appeal, the judge considered the relevant  provisions
    of Appendix FM of HC 395.  Whilst the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was validly married to Misbah Nasar, and that the application
    for leave to remain satisfied some  of  the  relevant  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, the judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(c)(ii) because he did not meet
    all of the requirements of paragraph E-LTRP, for example, the financial
    requirements.  Therefore the  judge  considered  paragraph  EX.1.   The
    judge  was  satisfied  that  there  was  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and  his  wife  who  was  a  British
    citizen and present in the UK, but she was  not  satisfied  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant  continuing  his  family
    life with his wife outside  the  UK.   The  judge's  reasons  for  that
    conclusion are given at paragraphs 26 and  27  of  the  Decision.   The
    judge found that Pakistan was the country  of  the  Sponsor's  cultural
    heritage, and that she had close  family  members  living  there.   The
    judge accepted that the Sponsor preferred to remain living  in  the  UK
    where she had been born and  raised,  but  the  Appellant  himself  had
    immediate family members resident in Pakistan who could provide him and
    his wife with support.  Both the Appellant and the Sponsor  were  young
    and in good health.  There were no  children  to  consider.   Both  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor had the benefit of an education in the UK.

 4. Having decided that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of HC 395, the judge decided that she was not  required  to
    undertake any further assessment of  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights following the decisions in Gulshan (Article  8  -  New  Rules  -
    Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin).

 5. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.  I  was  not  supplied  with  any  explanation  for  his
    absence.  I was satisfied that the Appellant had been notified  of  the
    hearing in accordance with the provisions  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and therefore I decided to proceed to  hear
    the appeal.

 6. Mr Smart made a short submission in which he said that  the  judge  had
    considered all the relevant evidence and had made findings of fact open
    to her upon  that  evidence.   The  judge  had  correctly  applied  the
    provisions of Appendix FM of HC 395.  The judge had been correct not to
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 rights outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for the reasons explained in SSHD v SS(Congo) and  Others  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the judge.  Although
    leave to appeal was granted, the grounds of application do not seek  to
    identify an error on a point of law, and  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    repeat of the arguments which were put to the judge.  I agree with  the
    submission of Mr Smart that the judge made proper findings of fact upon
    the evidence before  her,  and  correctly  applied  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM.  Having dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,
    I again agree with the argument of Mr Smart  that  the  judge  was  not
    obliged to consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights  outside  the
    Immigration Rules following the ruling in SS (Congo).  It  is  apparent
    from what the judge wrote that bearing in mind the public interest, the
    Appellant did not have a reasonably arguable case under Article 8 which
    had not already been sufficiently dealt with by  consideration  of  the
    appeal under the substantive provisions of the Immigration  Rules.   In
    any event, from the findings made by the judge, it is  clear  that  had
    she considered the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules, she  would  have  found  the  Respondent's  decision
    proportionate, and therefore any error of law in this  respect  by  the
    judge is not material.

Notice of Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  That  decision  is  not  set
    aside.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  find  no
    reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

