

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/09652/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12 January 2015                     |On 12 January 2015        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                              MR KULWANT SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel
      (instructed by Bhogal Partners Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission  granted  on  1  December
           2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish against the dismissal
           of his appeal seeking  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  under
           regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
           Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations") by  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin in a determination promulgated on 15
           October 2014.  The Appellant is a national of India, born  on  5
           September 1968.  He had denied that his marriage to a  Hungarian
           national, i.e. an EEA citizen, was one of convenience.


      2.    Judge Baldwin found that (a) the Appellant's marriage was one of
           convenience, i.e., was a  sham  and  (b)  that  the  Appellant's
           spouse had not shown that she  was  a  qualified  person  within
           regulation  6  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
           Regulations 2006.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Frankish  because  he
           considered it arguable that the judge had reached  an  incorrect
           assessment of the evidence, given that  the  Appellant  and  his
           wife were having a child (as yet unborn),  taking  into  account
           the  decision  in  Papajorgji  (EEA   spouse   -   marriage   of
           convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
           in the form of a letter dated 10 December 2014,  the  Respondent
           (the  Secretary  of  State)  indicated  that  she  opposed   the
           application for permission to appeal.


      5.    Ms Jones for the Appellant submitted that the judge had erred in
           his credibility findings, on which his decision under regulation
           7 turned.  There was a problem in the judge's use  of  language,
           who was disapproving of the Appellant's immigration history: see
           [20]  of  the  determination.   The  judge  had  paid  too  much
           attention  to  the  marriage  interview  record.   There  was  a
           rebuttable presumption, not here rebutted by  the  Secretary  of
           State, that the child of a married couple was theirs.  The child
           had since  been  born  and  the  birth  certificate  showed  the
           Appellant as the father.   Too  much  had  been  made  of  other
           matters. The judge's decision should be reversed.


      6.    Mr Melvin for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) relied  on
           the rule 24 notice.  There was no bias and the  judge  had  used
           appropriate language.  His decision was neither  irrational  nor
           perverse.  There were, of course, no Removal Directions  so  the
           Appellant was free to make a fresh EEA application based on  the
           facts as they now stood.  The Secretary of State was not willing
           to concede the appeal in the light of the changed circumstances.
            The determination contained no material error of law.


      7.    In reply Ms Jones reiterated her  submissions.   The  judge  had
           taken too narrow a view of what constituted  a  sham  for  these
           purposes.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  might  incidentally
           benefit from his wife's status did not invalidate the marriage.


      8.    At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal  stated  it  found
           that there was no material error of law by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Baldwin in his determination. The  tribunal  reserved  its
           decision which now follows


      9.    It seems to the tribunal  that  the  judge  adopted  a  measured
           approach and allowed the facts  which  he  found  to  speak  for
           themselves.  Clearly the evidence as to the child has  moved  on
           since the hearing, but the tribunal must look at the position at
           the date of the hearing.  The judge heard and saw the  witnesses
           for himself, a highly relevant advantage given that one  of  the
           issues was the ability of the spouses to  communicate  with  one
           another, which went to the substance of their relationship.  The
           judge was entitled to find that their medium  of  communication,
           English,  was  so  weak  that  their  claimed  relationship  was
           improbable.  It followed that there were doubts over  the  civil
           ceremony relied on.  Similarly, the immigration history  of  the
           Appellant was relevant for all of the reasons  which  the  judge
           explained at [20] of  the  determination.  While  weight  was  a
           matter for him, the judge explained why he gave little weight to
           minor or peripheral matters: see [21] of the determination.  The
           judge identified a number of matters which  he  considered  were
           significant.  Those findings were open to him.


      10.   The child had not been born as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
           There was no independent evidence of the  Appellant's  paternity
           produced and the judge explained why he was not satisfied  about
           many elements of the evidence given before him.   There  was  no
           reason why  the  judge  should  have  believed  the  Appellant's
           evidence as to paternity in the face of the  many  discrepancies
           and deficiencies which the judge had identified in the  evidence
           as a whole.  The presumption that the child was the  Appellant's
           could not arise before the child had in fact been born, at least
           in the immigration law context  where  different  public  policy
           issues arise compared with the family law context.    The  judge
           addressed that issue and explained  his  reasons  adequately  in
           [22] of the determination.


      11.   Article 8 ECHR was, of course, for another day, as was  accepted
           on the Appellant's behalf.


      12.   For the reasons given above, no material error of law  has  been
           shown.   The  Appellant's   onwards   appeal   fails   and   the
           determination stands.








      DECISION


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
























































































































































































































































































