
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09130/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 November 2013                           |On 4 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                       PALANIVEL MARUTHAMUTHU UDAIYAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India where he was born  on  15  January
    1977.  He appeals with permission the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Deavin who dismissed his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  made  7  March  2013  refusing  the   appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  In that
    decision the Secretary of State refused to vary leave  and  furthermore
    made the decision to remove the appellant.  There was no appearance  by
    the appellant nor his representatives at the hearing before  me  on  26
    November nor any explanation for this absence.  I proceeded to hear the
    appeal at 10.15 am and gave my oral determination.

 2. The grounds of appeal by the appellant against the Secretary of State's
    decision were that (i) the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules; (ii) the decision was  unlawful  under  s.6  of  the
    Human Rights  Act  1998;  (iii)  the  decision  was  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law;  (iv)  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
    exercised her  discretion  differently  conferred  by  the  Immigration
    Rules; (v) removal of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention
    and/or otherwise would be unlawful under s.6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998 as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.

 3. The application made by the appellant had been  for  further  leave  to
    continue in  the  employment  of  India  Eateries  Limited  trading  as
    Saravana Bhavani, a specialist South Indian vegetarian restaurant  with
    branches worldwide of which six are in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 17  November  2009  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 2 (Intra-Company Transfer) for employment for
    three years by this employer.  The application leading to the  decision
    under appeal was made on 12 December 2012  for  two  further  years  to
    remain.

 5. The respondent awarded the points sought by the appellant in respect of
    sponsorship (30 points), appropriate salary (20 points) and maintenance
    (funds) (10).  None of the points sought  was  awarded  in  respect  of
    English language.  The reasons given by the Secretary of State  was  as
    follows:

         ".   You were first granted  leave  as   a  Tier  2  (Intra-Company
             Transfer) Migrant on 17 November 2009.  You  have  applied  to
             extend your leave for a period that combined with the time you
             have already spent in the United Kingdom as a Tier  2  (Intra-
             Company Transfer) Migrant will take you beyond three years  in
             the United Kingdom in this category.

         .    You were therefore required to satisfy  the  English  language
             requirements as specified under Appendix B of the  Immigration
             Rules

         .    You have made on your application form that your evidence  has
             previously been submitted.  This has been  noted  and  checked
             with your file but no evidence can be found.

         .    Evidence of English language  was  requested  on  26  February
             2013. No evidence to  establish  that  you  meet  any  of  the
             provisions for the award of points for  English  language  has
             been provided."

 6. I pause there to observe that  in  an  email  dated  26  February  2013
    addressed to the appellant's advisors, the Secretary of State explained
    that as the appellant had sought to extend his leave to remain  over  a
    three  year  period  he  would  need  to  meet  the  English   language
    requirement.  He was invited to provide evidence to satisfy the English
    language requirement within the next five working days.

 7. The appellant's representatives responded in an email on 4 March  2013.
    They made reference made to paragraphs 27, 28 and  29  of  the  Tier  2
    policy guidance which "clearly states" that  where  the  applicant  had
    obtained Tier 2 ICT under the Rules prior to  6  April  2010  he  could
    apply to extend the leave beyond five years and the job  should  be  at
    NQF Level 3.

 8. The representations go on to state that the applicant had got the  Tier
    2 ICT leave for three years on the basis of the Rules prior to 6  April
    2010 and was therefore allowed to extend his leave beyond  three  years
    and not required to  satisfy  the  English  language  requirement.  The
    representative  also  referred  to   three   other   applicants   whose
    applications had been  recently been  approved,  providing  details  of
    their names and their case numbers.  The Secretary  of  State   however
    proceeded  to  make  her  decision   on   7   March   without   further
    correspondence.

 9. The appellant was represented by Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal
    when the judge heard evidence from him and  his  employer,  Mr  Dhanesh
    Frederick.   The  respondent  was  also  represented  by  a  Presenting
    Officer, Miss Leyshon.  After summarising the evidence he heard and the
    submissions from the parties, the judge noted that  the  appellant  and
    his employer had been incorrectly advised by the  representatives  that
    an English language certificate was not  required.   He  observed  that
    that representative had chosen to contest what had  been  said  by  the
    Secretary of State in the email dated 13  February  2012.    The  judge
    then proceeded to state his conclusions at paragraphs 58 and 59 which I
    quote:

         "58.     I find that there was, at the time of this application,  a
             requirement  that  an  English  test  certificate  should   be
             provided and  none  was.  That  means  that  the  respondent's
             decision was the correct one and was in  accordance  with  the
             law  and  the  Immigration  Rules  and  I  come   to   similar
             conclusions myself, for like reasons.

         59.  The test certificates that have been provided cannot assist as
             they were not in existence were not provided at  the  time  of
             the application and, in  any  event,  they  are  not  from  an
             approved provider."

10. The grounds of application for permission to appeal that decision  are,
    in summary, that the judge failed to take into account or give adequate
    reasons in relation to the appellant having been in employment with  an
    UK company for more than three years and that the refusal of the  leave
    interfered with the rights of the UK based employer to employ the staff
    needed by the business.  It is argued that Mr Frederick's evidence  was
    very relevant to the question whether Article 8 was engaged. It is also
    argued that the judge  failed  to  determine  the  Razgar  question  3,
    whether the decisions were in accordance with the law.  Finally  it  is
    argued that the judge failed to take into account that the  immigration
    decision of 7 March 2013 included a decision to remove the appellant by
    way of directions under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    who in a decision dated 16 September 2013  summarised  the  grounds  of
    application before him and reached this conclusion in paragraph 4 which
    I quote:

         "4.  It is arguable that in the circumstances that  the  judge  did
             err on this issue [being a reference to the  removal  decision
             made concurrently with a decision refusing  further  leave  to
             remain] and permission is therefore granted on this ground]. I
             do not refuse permission on the remaining grounds which relate
             to Article 8 the ECHR although Article 8 itself appears to  be
             devoid of merit."

12. Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal on the grant of permission
    to appeal inviting the parties  to  take  certain  steps  in  order  to
    prepare for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  In particular,  the
    parties were directed to serve on the Upper Tribunal not later than  21
    days after the date of  those  directions,  an  indexed  and  paginated
    bundle containing all documentary evidence relied on pursuant  to  Rule
    15(2A) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.    The
    parties were warned that a failure to serve evidence  as  required  may
    lead to the Upper Tribunal refusing to admit that evidence.  There  has
    been no compliance.

13. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Tarlow accepts  that  the  judge
    had not reached a conclusion on the Article 8 grounds.  He observed the
    observation of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson that the  Article  8
    case appeared to  be  devoid  of  merit  and  maintained  that  as  his
    submission.  Whilst accepting that there was an error by the  judge  in
    failing to reach a concussion on the Article  8  grounds,  he  did  not
    consider the error to be material.

14. I raised with Mr Tarlow the other limb on  which  permission  had  been
    specifically granted relating to the concurrent decisions  refusing  to
    vary leave and to remove the appellant.  In this regard I have noted  a
    letter from the Secretary of State of 4 October 2013.  This  letter  is
    the Rule 24 response provided for under the  Procedure  Rules.   It  is
    argued that the judge's failure  to  address  Article  8  or  make  any
    findings needs to be considered in the context of the appellant  having
    been  fully  represented  at  the  hearing  by  Counsel  and  that  the
    determination recorded no submissions whatsoever regarding  Article  8.
    It is suggested that this was wholly unfair and  did  not  make  out  a
    material error capable of having  a material impact on the  outcome  of
    the appeal and amounted  to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings.

15. With reference to s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006, it is explained in the  response  that  without  the  benefit  of
    access to the respondent's file it was not clear whether there had been
    a s.47 refusal. It is submitted that if there had been  such a  refusal
    the respondent respectfully submitted that  this  was  not  a  material
    error capable of having a material impact on the outcome of the appeal.

16. I observed to Mr Tarlow that aside from the Article  8  issue,  it  was
    clear to me that the decision to remove the appellant was  an  unlawful
    one and in the event that I decide to remake the  decision  the  appeal
    would need to be allowed on that basis.  As I  understand it Mr  Tarlow
    accepted that to be the position.

17. I reach these conclusions on the submissions from  Mr  Tarlow  and  the
    matters raised in the grounds of application for permission to  appeal.
    I shall deal first with the Article 8 grounds.

18. In this regard I referred Mr Tarlow  to  the  recent  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.  In particular
    the observations of Lord Carnwath at paragraph 57 which I quote:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the Rules which
         may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits  of  the
         decision not to depart from the Rules are not reviewable on appeal:
         s.86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in  Pankina  for
         commonsense in the application of the Rules to graduates  who  have
         been studying in the United Kingdom for some years:  see  paragraph
         47 above.  However such considerations do not by themselves provide
         grounds of appeal under Article 8 which is concerned  with  private
         or family life, not education  as  such.   The  opportunity  for  a
         promising student to complete his course in  this  country  however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8."

19. There is no dispute  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    consider Article 8.  There has been  no challenge to  the  findings  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  The question I must  ask  is  whether  that
    failure is an error on a point of law.  I  am  satisfied  it  is.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was required to consider pursuant to  s.86  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 any  matter  raised  as  a
    ground of appeal.

20. The next question is whether the decision as a consequence requires  to
    be remade pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007.  The appellant has not taken the opportunity of producing any new
    evidence.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal is  set  out  in
    the determination and I have also had regard to the witness  statements
    of the appellant and Mr Frederick.  In  his  statement,  the  appellant
    explains at paragraph (g) that he had established a private life in the
    United Kingdom and that any removal would  constitute  disproportionate
    interference with that private life.   He  refers  to  his  success  in
    having passed an English test with EMB Qualifications Limited  and  his
    disappointment  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  reconsider  her
    decision.   The statement by Mr Frederick refers to his frustration and
    difficulty he would encounter as the appellant is a key member  of  the
    Key Operations Restaurant.  Without the appellant,  the  business  will
    suffer very badly and they may have to cut down their operations due to
    the severe shortage of skilled staff that it is impossible to  find  in
    the local employment market.

21. Although the guidance given in Patel and Others relates to the  quality
    of private life of somebody who has been granted permission  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom in order to pursue a course of study, by analogy,
    the same  principles  can  be  applied  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant before me he was granted permission to work in  this  country
    for three years with an opportunity  for  an  extension  of  two  years
    provided he met  certain  English  language  requirements.   There  was
    nothing in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show  that  a
    private or family life has been established by  the  appellant  of  the
    kind that requires protection under Article 8.  Furthermore  article  8
    (disregarding whether a company can acquire protected rights) does  not
    entitle an employer to select whom he wishes for his business  activity
    without regard to the Immigration Rules and law.

22. I am not persuaded that even if the judge had addressed the  Article  8
    argument he could have come to a decision other  than  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on the basis that Article 8 was not  engaged.   The  observation
    has been made by the appellant and his advisers  that  other  employees
    were successful in obtaining an extension of leave to remain.  There is
    no argument that there is a policy in play by the  Secretary  of  State
    which was not engaged. Mr Tarlow observed that there  was  no  evidence
    regarding the circumstances of the five employees  whose  details  were
    provided in Mr Frederick's statement.

23. As observed by Lord Carnwath in Patel and others, the decisions not  to
    depart from the Rules are  not  reviewable  on  appeal.   Whatever  the
    reasons for the Secretary of State for  deciding  to  grant  the  other
    applications, I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  created  a  legitimate
    expectation for the appellant to benefit likewise.

24. There has been no complaint by the appellant regarding a failure by the
    Immigration Judge to address the refugee  law  grounds.   This  is  not
    surprising.  There was no evidence before the judge regarding the basis
    of ground.

25. My conclusion in respect of the Article 8 and lawfulness  grounds  (but
    for what I have to say below) is such that the error by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not require the  decision  in  that  regard  to  be
    remade.

26. I turn now to the impact of the combined  decisions.   I  am  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to reach a decision
    on the decision to remove the appellant. There is no dispute  that  the
    Secretary of State was not entitled to make  that  decision  concurrent
    with the decision refusing to vary leave to remain.  There has  been  a
    change in legislation to permit this (s. 51 of the  Crimes  and  Courts
    Act 2013) but this was after the decision under appeal on 8 May 2031.

27. Accordingly I remake the decision solely in respect of the error by the
    judge in failing to determine the removal decision and allow the appeal
    against the decision to remove the  appellant.   The  decision  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing the appeal against  the  variation
    decision stands.



Signed                                  Date 27 Nov. 13
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
