

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09533/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 06 April 2016                              |On 14 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                             MARVIN SALVA AQUINO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 20 August 2014  with  entry  clearance
    as a visitor, which was valid until 31 January 2015. On 08 January 2015
    he applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.    The respondent refused the application in a notice of  decision  dated
    22 February 2015 on the ground that the appellant applied to  vary  his
    leave to remain for a purpose not  covered  by  the  immigration  rules
    (paragraph  322(1))  and  there   were   no   particularly   compelling
    circumstances  to  justify  granting  leave  to  remain   outside   the
    immigration  rules.  The  respondent  considered  the  fact  that   the
    appellant had family members in  the  UK  but  concluded  that,  as  an
    independent adult, the nature of his  family  ties  were  not  such  to
    justify granting leave to remain. The respondent  noted  that  he  said
    that he had no job to return to in the Philippines. Even if  there  was
    damage to certain areas after the typhoon he could return  to  an  area
    that was not affected.

3.    The appellant appealed the decision. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keith
    ("the judge") dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules  and  on
    human rights grounds. He heard and noted  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and several members of his family. He took into  account  the
    nature and extent of the various family  relationships,  including  the
    appellant's relationship with his younger brother. With regard to  that
    relationship he also took into account the best interests of the child.
    He noted a number of inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to his intentions when he came to the UK and with reference to
    what relatives he still had in the  Philippines.  The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant had sought to mislead the Tribunal as  to  where  he
    was living before he came to the UK in an attempt to suggest  that  the
    typhoon had greater significance. In fact he was living in Manila.  The
    evidence showed that the typhoon lost much of its force as  it  reached
    Manila. The judge found that there was no good reason why the appellant
    could not find work and continue to support himself as he did before he
    came to the UK. He concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  fulfil  a
    "caring role" for his younger brother, which was  carried  out  by  the
    appellant's father.

4.    The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to adequately assess  the  extent
           and nature of the appellant's family life in accordance with the
           principles outlined in Ghising (family life -  adults  -  Ghurka
           Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160.

      (ii)  In particular, the First-tier Tribunal failed to  give  adequate
           consideration to the appellant's relationship with  his  younger
           brother and the best interests of the child.

      (iii) The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  carry  out  a
           balancing exercise in accordance with  the  five  step  approach
           outlined in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

6.    In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the Court of  Appeal  considered
    the circumstances in which the right to family life  would  be  engaged
    under Article 8 of the European Convention:

           "Generally  the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent  minor  children.  Whether   it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year old
           son in the present  case,  would  not  necessarily  acquire  the
           protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without  evidence  of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than  the  normal
           emotional ties."

7.    In Ghising (family life-adults-Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  00160  the
    Tribunal considered the authorities relating  to  family  life  between
    adult relatives  in  some  detail.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    decision in Kugathas had been read too restrictively in  the  past  and
    ought to be read in the light of subsequent decisions of  the  domestic
    and Strasbourg courts [56]. The  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Strasbourg
    court found that family life  existed  between  adult  relatives  in  a
    number  of  cases  without  evidence  of  exceptional   dependence   or
    necessarily the need for cohabitation [60]: see for example  Boughanemi
    v France (1996) 22 EHRR 228. A significant factor was whether the adult
    child has founded a family of his own. If he is still single and living
    with his parents he is likely to enjoy family life with them [61].  The
    Tribunal emphasised that the assessment of whether family  life  exists
    for the purpose of Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made clear findings of fact as  part  of
    his overall assessment of the credibility of the evidence given by  the
    witnesses. The underlying reasons for those factual findings  have  not
    specifically been challenged in the appellant's grounds of appeal or in
    submissions at the hearing save  to  assert  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusion that the appellant's family  circumstances  did  not
    give rise to the level of family life required to engage the  operation
    of Article 8.

9.    It became clear from the evidence given by the  witnesses  during  the
    hearing that the appellant's father and mother had lived in the UK  for
    some time [15]. The appellant's mother visited him in  the  Philippines
    at least once a year [18].  The  appellant  lived  in  the  Philippines
    during that time. It emerged that he lived independently and worked  to
    support himself in the Philippines [12-13 & 19]. The appellant's father
    said that he did not work because "he needed to look after and  collect
    his youngest son from school. When it was put to him  that  the  reason
    that he did not work was because of  childcare  responsibilities,  [his
    father] confirmed that this was correct." [15]

10.   In the context of this evidence it was open to the judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant came to the UK with no intention of returning to the
    Philippines. The judge made clear and sustainable  findings  that  were
    open to him on the evidence when he concluded that  the  appellant  did
    not fulfil any significant caring role for  his  younger  brother.  The
    evidence showed that at most he helped to pick him up from  school  but
    his father's evidence was that he was the main carer for  his  youngest
    son. There was no evidence to  show  that  the  appellant  performed  a
    caring role for his brother that was akin to parental responsibility or
    that his attachment to his brother, after a short period  of  only  one
    year, was so close that his removal would be detrimental to the  child.
    The appellant could  continue  his  relationship  with  his  family  as
    before. While the appellant is  financially  dependent  on  his  family
    members since he arrived in the UK that is because he has no permission
    to work. While it is understandable that the appellant and  his  family
    would prefer to live  together  no  particular  elements  of  emotional
    dependency were in fact disclosed on the evidence.  The  appellant  was
    living independently from his family for some time before coming to the
    UK.

11.   The judge came to  his  conclusion  with  specific  reference  to  the
    decision in Ghising [35]. His statement  that  it  was  unnecessary  to
    consider  the  appellant's  case  outside  the  immigration  rules   is
    incorrect (Mr Karim accepted that the  appellant  could  only  rely  on
    Article 8 outside the rules). However, it is quite clear that the judge
    considered whether family life had been established within the  meaning
    of Article 8 with reference to the correct legal framework. Even if the
    last sentence in paragraph 35 is technically incorrect it is immaterial
    to the judge's overall conclusion, which was legally sound and was open
    to him on the evidence.

12.   The judge made reference to section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 and the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    younger brother earlier in the decision [27].  He  concluded  that  the
    appellant's relationship with his brother was not such that he played a
    significant role in his life. Although the judge did not make  detailed
    findings relating to the best interests of the child  I  conclude  that
    any omission isn't material to the overall outcome of the appeal. It is
    quite clear that the child's best interests were to remain  in  the  UK
    with his parents who are his main carers. The appellant and his younger
    brother will no doubt have developed some form of sibling  relationship
    in the short period of time since he arrived in the UK but there was no
    evidence to suggest that the relationship could  not  continue  through
    telephone/internet calls or visits as it had done before. The judge was
    entitled to conclude that the relationship between  adult  sibling  and
    minor sibling was not sufficiently  close  that  it  would  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.

13.   Mr Karim accepted that the focus of his challenge was to  the  judge's
    findings relating to family life and not to his conclusions relating to
    private life. I consider that this concession was correctly made  given
    the very short period of time that the appellant has lived  in  the  UK
    and the terms of section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"), which would compel any  judge  to  place
    little weight on a private life that had been  established  at  a  time
    when the appellant's immigration status was precarious.

14.   For the reasons given above I find that it was open to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the particular facts of this case did  not  disclose  the
    additional elements of emotional or other dependency that gave rise  to
    'family  life'  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. As such the appellant did not even satisfy  the  first  two
    questions of the five stage test in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]  3
    WLR 58. In the circumstances it was not necessary for the judge  to  go
    on to consider in detail whether removal would be proportionate.  While
    the judge's final conclusions were brief they were open to him  on  the
    evidence. The decision did not involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law.

15.   As an independent adult child and sibling the appellant does not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules relating to family life.  The
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  recognised
    that it is possible for cases that fall  outside  the  requirements  to
    engage Article 8 but only if there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the rules.  While  it  is  understandable
    that the appellant and his family would prefer him to remain in the  UK
    a desire to remain does not necessarily equate to a  right  to  remain.
    Nothing in this case discloses the  kind  of  compelling  circumstances
    that would breach Article 8 of the European Convention if the appellant
    were required to leave the UK to continue his life in  the  Philippines
    as before.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 11 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

