
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th July 2014                               |On 11th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           ranjith reddy gudipati
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Vatish of Counsel instructed by Bright Star
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Wallace promulgated on 7th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant is an Indian citizen born 2nd April 1986 who applied  for
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  Student.   The
    application was refused on 11th February 2014, the Respondent making  a
    combined decision to refuse to vary leave to remain, and to remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 3. In refusing to  vary  leave  to  remain,  the  Respondent  relied  upon
    paragraph 245ZX(d) with reference to paragraph 13 of Appendix C of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant claimed  to
    be financially sponsored by his father, but the Appellant had  provided
    no evidence of his relationship to the Sponsor.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, requesting that  his
    appeal be determined on the papers.  The appeal was considered by Judge
    Wallace (the judge) on the papers and dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  paragraph  9  of  his
    determination in finding the Appellant's passport did not show the name
    of the Appellant's father.

 6. It appears to have been accepted that the Appellant did not provide his
    birth certificate with  the  application,  but  this  was  subsequently
    provided and it was contended that the judge had erred in  paragraph  9
    by finding material, the fact that different places of birth were given
    in the passport and in the birth certificate.  It  was  contended  that
    the passport and the birth certificate both showed  the  names  of  the
    Appellant's parents, and this was sufficient to prove the relationship,
    and the judge had erred in not accepting this.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davies and I set out below paragraphs 2-4 of the grant of permission;

         "2.  The judge in an exceptionally  brief  determination  makes  no
             reference whatsoever to the burden and standard of proof which
             is a fundamental requirement of every  determination  made  in
             this jurisdiction.
         3.   The judge did not apply the correct  burden  and  standard  of
             proof as he makes no reference to the burden and  standard  of
             proof whatsoever.
         4.   The grounds and the  determination  do  disclose  an  arguable
             error of law."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the judge had not erred and it was clear that  the
    judge had correctly applied  the  burden  of  proof  as  being  on  the
    Appellant, and the judge was entitled to find that  the  Appellant  had
    not discharged the burden of proof.

 9. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

10. Mrs Vatish had not seen the rule 24 response and so was provided with a
    copy.

11. I asked the representatives whether it was agreed that the  Appellant's
    birth certificate and  the  letter  from  his  parents  confirming  the
    relationship, both of which were required  to  be  submitted  with  the
    application by paragraph 13B of Appendix C, had not been submitted with
    the application.

12. Both representatives confirmed that this was agreed.

The Appellant's Submissions

13. Mrs Vatish said that while it was  accepted  that  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's  parents  had  not  been  submitted,  there  was  a  letter
    submitted with the application from United Bank  of  India,  confirming
    that the Appellant's father had deposit accounts  with  that  bank  and
    that the funds could be used  for  the  Appellant's  education  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant's passport had been submitted  with  the
    application for leave to remain, this showed the names of his  parents.
    Mrs Vatish submitted that if the judge had applied the  correct  burden
    and standard of proof, he would have found that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence of relationship between the Appellant and his Sponsor, who was
    his father.

14. In addition Mrs  Vatish  submitted  that  the  Respondent  should  have
    applied the evidential flexibility  policy.   She  clarified  that  she
    meant that the Respondent should have applied paragraph  245AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular 245AA(b)(i) on  the  basis  that  a
    document in a sequence had been omitted, and therefore  the  Respondent
    should have pointed this  out  to  the  Appellant  and  given  him  the
    opportunity to produce his birth certificate which was required to have
    been submitted with the application.   The  Appellant  had  received  a
    letter from the Respondent acknowledging  his  application,  indicating
    that he should not contact the Respondent again unless he heard further
    from the Respondent requesting any further information.

15. Mrs Vatish submitted that the judge had erred because  he  should  have
    taken into  account  that  the  Respondent  failed  to  properly  apply
    paragraph 245AA, and therefore the judge should  have  found  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

16. In relation to the other grounds referred to  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, Mrs Vatish accepted that there should  have  been
    no reference in those grounds  to  the  1951  Refugee  Convention,  but
    reliance was placed upon Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  I was asked to accept that this had  been  raised  as  a
    Ground of Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  and  therefore  should
    have been determined by the judge.  Miss Vatish accepted that the  only
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article  8,  was
    paragraph 2.9 of the Grounds of Appeal which is set out below;

         "2.9 The decision of the Respondent breached Article 8 of the Human
             Rights Act because of her (sic) private life in UK."

The Respondent's Submissions

17. Mr Walker accepted that the judge had made an error in finding that the
    Appellant's father's name was not in the passport  but  contended  that
    overall there was no material error in dismissing the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules as the Appellant's birth certificate should have been
    submitted with the application.  Mr Walker accepted that there  was  no
    reference in the application form to the requirement to submit a  birth
    certificate.

The Appellant's Response

18. Mrs Vatish asked that I place weight upon the  concession  made  by  Mr
    Walker that there was no reference in the application form to  a  birth
    certificate being required, and that  I  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant submitted his application without  the  assistance  of  legal
    representation.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I deal firstly with the burden and standard of proof which  appears  to
    have been raised by the judge  granting  permission,  rather  than  the
    Appellant in his grounds of application, which  were  prepared  by  his
    previous representatives.

20. The judge does not set out in terms that the burden of proof is on  the
    Appellant and the standard a balance of probabilities.  However this is
    not, without more, an error of law.  I find no indication, having  read
    the determination, that the judge has erred in relation to  the  burden
    of proof.  It is clear in my view that the judge found  the  burden  of
    proof  to  be  on  the  Appellant.   I  find  no  indication   in   the
    determination that the judge considered that the standard of proof  was
    anything other than a balance of probabilities.  I  find  no  error  on
    this issue.

21. The application was initially refused because the Appellant was relying
    upon financial sponsorship from his father, which is permitted, but  he
    had provided no evidence of the relationship between  himself  and  the
    Sponsor.  The relevant paragraphs in Appendix C are 13 and 13B.

22. Paragraph 13 states  that  funds  will  be  available  only  where  the
    specified documents show or where permitted by the rules, the Appellant
    confirms that funds are held or provided by;

    (ii) the applicant's parent(s) or legal guardian(s), and the  parent(s)
         or legal guardian(s) have provided written consent that their funds
         may be used by the applicant in order to study in the UK.

23. I set out below paragraph 13B;

    13B  If the applicant is relying on the provisions in paragraph  13(ii)
         above, he must provide:
         (a)  one of the following original (or notarised copy) documents:
             (i)  his birth certificate showing names of his parent(s),
             (ii) his certificate of adoption showing  the  names  of  both
                  parent(s) or legal guardian, or
             (iii)    a Court document naming his legal guardian;
             and
         (b)  a letter from his parent(s) or legal guardian, confirming:
             (i)  the relationship between the applicant and his  parent(s)
                  or legal guardian, and
             (ii) that the parent(s) or legal guardian give  their  consent
                  to the applicant using their funds to study in the UK.

24. Therefore in this case the Appellant should  have  submitted  with  his
    application his birth certificate showing the names of his parents, and
    a letter from his parents confirming their relationship, and that  they
    give their consent to the Appellant using his funds to study in the UK.
     The requirement to provide these documents  with  the  application  is
    mandatory.  If they are not provided then the Immigration Rules are not
    satisfied.

25. It is accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he has never provided  a
    letter from his parents confirming the relationship  and  giving  their
    consent to him using their funds to study in the United Kingdom.  It is
    also accepted that the Appellant did not submit his  birth  certificate
    with his application, and his birth certificate was  submitted  on  8th
    April 2014, after the Respondent  had  refused  the  decision  on  11th
    February 2014.  The birth certificate was issued on 1st April 2014.

26. Therefore the Respondent was correct to find that the Appellant had not
    provided evidence of relationship to his Sponsor,  and  the  judge  was
    correct to find that the appeal must be dismissed under the Immigration
    Rules.

27. The most  obvious  reason  for  this,  is  that  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's parents had never been submitted.  Therefore  even  if  the
    Respondent was wrong not to consider paragraph 245AA, and the judge was
    similarly wrong, in relation to the birth certificate, that  would  not
    have availed the Appellant because a mandatory document, that being the
    letter from his parents had never been submitted.

28. However I do not find that  the  Respondent  was  wrong  not  to  apply
    paragraph 245AA(b)(i) which applies if;

         "Some of the  documents  in  a  sequence  have  been  omitted  (for
         example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);"

29. This is not a case where a document in a sequence has been omitted.  In
    this case the Appellant did not submit two specified documents with his
    application, those being his birth certificate, and a letter  from  his
    parents.  The judge therefore did not err because he did not  find  the
    Respondent's decision to be not in accordance with the law.

30. Although the Appellant's birth  certificate  was  submitted  after  the
    Respondent's decision, I find that it was not admissible in evidence by
    virtue of section 85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 which states that, subject to certain  exceptions,  if  an  appeal
    relates to an application under the points-based system,  the  Tribunal
    may only consider evidence adduced by the Appellant  if  that  evidence
    was submitted in support of and at the time of making  the  application
    to which the Immigration Decision related.  I do not find that  any  of
    the exceptions  to  this  principle  apply,  and  therefore  the  birth
    certificate  was  not  admissible.   Alternatively,  even  if  it   was
    admissible, the appeal could still not have succeeded  because  of  the
    absence of the letter from the parents.

31. The judge erred in considering the birth certificate, and comparing the
    birth certificate to the Appellant's passport.  This was not  relevant.
    The judge should have found that specified  documents  that  must  have
    been submitted with the application had not  been  submitted,  and  for
    that reason the appeal had to be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.
     The judge has erred in referring to immaterial matters.

32. However the error is not material, because the appeal  could  not  have
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules for the reasons given above.

33. Article 8 was raised as a Ground of Appeal.  The judge did not consider
    it.   This  is  an  error  of  law  because  section  86(2)(a)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states that  the  Tribunal
    must determine any matter raised as a Ground of Appeal.

34. However the error is not material.  This is because the only  reference
    to Article 8 that was before the First-tier Tribunal, was paragraph 2.9
    of the Grounds of Appeal.  There was  no  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellant and no other evidence as to how it was contended that Article
    8 was engaged, and how  it  was  contended  that  Article  8  would  be
    breached if the Appellant's application was refused.  The  judge  could
    not have allowed the appeal under Article  8  in  the  absence  of  any
    satisfactory evidence.

35. I therefore conclude that the judge has erred  in  law  in  considering
    this appeal.  I do not find the errors to be material because  for  the
    reasons given above, the appeal could not have succeeded  under  either
    the Immigration Rules or on human rights grounds.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    has a discretion under section 12(2)(a) of The  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, that states that if an error of law is found, the
    Upper Tribunal may, but need not, set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In this case I  have  decided  not  to  set  aside  the
    decision because the errors are not material and the appeal  could  not
    have succeeded.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  an  error  of  law
such that the decision must be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date: 30th July 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 30th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


