
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09717/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 14 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MERCY [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Al-Rashid (of Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on  14  May  1954,  as  the
    appellant herein.  She arrived in this country on 10 October 1998 on  a
    spouse visa valid until 10 October 1999.  She and her husband had  four
    children, Eugene born in 1977 who has indefinite leave to remain, Allan
    born in 1980, Hannah born in 1983, and Sylvia  in  1984.   These  three
    children are British citizens.

2.   The appellant's husband was dominating and violent and very harsh  with
    the children especially Allan who was punished and  beaten  on  regular
    occasions.

3.   The appellant's husband spent much time away  from  home  and  left  in
    2003 and the last the appellant saw of him was in 2005.   She  remained
    at the matrimonial home with her children although  her  daughters  are
    married and live elsewhere.  A key  issue  in  the  case  is  the  care
    provided by the appellant for her son Allan who has been diagnosed with
    paranoid schizophrenia.  The appellant acts as his carer.

4.   The appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain in February  2005.
     The application was refused with a right of appeal on 11  April  2007.
    The appellant's appeal was unsuccessful  and  her  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted  on  28  July  2007.   The  appellant  made   three   further
    unsuccessful applications before applying on 23 February 2015 on  human
    rights grounds.  The respondent refused the application on 24  February
    2015.  The appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules in the light of the age of  her  children  and  even  if  it  was
    accepted that she had entered the UK  in  1998,  she  would  only  have
    completed a total of seventeen years of residence.  The respondent  was
    not satisfied on the evidence that the appellant was a carer for  Allan
    and there were question marks over  the  validity  of  the  appellant's
    whole story about the collapse in  the  relationship  with  her  former
    husband.  It would be reasonable for the appellant to return  to  Ghana
    and there were no exceptional circumstances.

5.   On 2 February 2016 the respondent gave  further  consideration  to  the
    appellant's circumstances following new evidence  presented  at  appeal
    proceedings on 8 January 2016.

6.   The respondent no longer disputed that  the  appellant's  son  suffered
    from schizophrenia in the light of a detailed psychiatric report.   The
    report also confirmed that Allan relied on  the  appellant's  care  and
    support.  However, he had other family members to care for him  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He was a British citizen and would be able to  receive
    help and care from his local social services and the NHS.

7.   The Secretary of State added  that  while  the  report  confirmed  that
    Allan was lucky to have the appellant "doing such a good job caring for
    him and supporting him" and although it was accepted that the appellant
    was clearly a great help to Allan -

         "This does not mean that he cannot survive without  you  there,  as
         stated above he has other  family  members  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom who he would be able to turn to for help and he would  also
         be able to receive help from the NHS and social services as he is a
         British citizen".


    Supportive statements from the appellant and  his  sisters  were  given
    little weight.  There were no exceptional circumstances in the case.

8.   The appellant  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision and following an adjournment mentioned  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her letter the appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge  on  22
    June 2016.  The judge directed  himself  in  uncontroversial  terms  in
    relation to Article 8 in paragraphs 9 to 12 of his  decision  referring
    to Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and in paragraph 13 he stated:

         "Consideration also has to be given to the relevant parts of 5A  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and which contains
         sections 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D.  Part 5A only applies where the
         Tribunal considers Article 8(2) of the ECHR directly".


9.   The  judge  then  summarised  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for
    refusing the appellant's application.  He then turned to  consider  the
    appellant's case and summarises Allan's position  and  the  appellant's
    care for him as follows:

         "20. Allan has been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.  This is
             an unequivocal diagnosis.  He has  persecutory  delusions  and
             frequent  hallucinations.   He  is   acutely   psychotic   and
             clinically depressed.  He has  had  a  history  of  aggression
             towards family members and medical staff.   He  has  expressed
             ideas of killing himself through medication of by hanging.  He
             is at high risk of committing suicide in the long term.


         21.  Allan is having regular treatment  and  this  is  with  Merton
             Adult Mental Health Services.   He  is  being  treated  by  Dr
             Michael Yates a consultant psychiatrist and who has prepared a
             psychiatric report dated 8 December 2015.


         22.  The Appellant is being treated  with  Clozapine.   This  is  a
             restricted medication with severe side  effects  and  is  only
             prescribed   by   consultant   psychiatrists   under   special
             monitoring.  This drug causes high incidence  of  bone  marrow
             suppression and fall of white blood cells.  It  is  associated
             with serious cardiac  complications.   If  it  is  temporarily
             discontinued and recommenced after 48-hours, then there  is  a
             significant risk of cardio respiratory collapse and death.


         23.  Allan has to have blood tests on  a  regular  basis  sometimes
             twice a week sometimes once a  month.   He  is  forgetful  and
             neglectful.   His  mental  state  is  exceedingly  likely   to
             deteriorate into acute psychosis if Clozapine is  discontinued
             or reduced.  A relapse would  lead  to  considerable  risk  to
             himself and others.


         24.  Allan is very much supported and cared for by  the  Appellant.
             She spends most of her time with him.  Whilst he has  his  own
             accommodation at  16  Octavia  Close,  Mitcham  he  spends  an
             average of five nights a week at the  family  home.   Whenever
             Allan does stay  at  his  one-bedroomed  accommodation  at  16
             Octavia Close his mother the Appellant stays with him.


         25.  As Allan is not able to recognise he is unwell if  his  mental
             health deteriorates and the Appellants help in monitoring  him
             is all important.  Her support is a significant factor in  the
             stability of his mental health.  She ensures he is taking  his
             Clozapine and the importance of  this  cannot  be  overstated.
             She is observant of early warning signs of relapse and is able
             to check for specific psycho-social stresses.  She prompts his
             attendance at college and sports as well as  providing  cooked
             food for him and encouraging healthy  eating.   She  plays  an
             important role in  prompting  medication,  his  attendance  at
             appointments, blood tests etc.  She also prompts him  to  wear
             appropriate clothing and maintain personal hygiene.


         26.  Allan values the support that is available  from  his  mother.
             He is very much dependent on her and with the support of other
             members of the family.  Without this he would quickly get into
             social difficulty.  The Appellant's vigilance  and  dedication
             to Allan mitigates against the very serious risks he  can  and
             has exposed himself and others to in the past".


10.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant which he found  to  be
    credible and consistent and not overstated.  He  also  had  before  him
    written statements from her two daughters.  The judge notes that it was
    accepted that the appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM with regard to family life or paragraph 276ADE with  regard
    to private life and the issue was whether the appellant was entitled to
    a freestanding Article 8 assessment outside the Rules.  The judge found
    there were numerous reasons to  consider  she  was  so  entitled.   The
    determination concludes as follows:

         "34. I find that family life does exist between the  Appellant  and
             her son Allan even though he  is  now  aged  35.   He  suffers
             serious mental ill health and this is detailed in  the  report
             of Dr Michael Yates consultant psychiatrist.  This confirms he
             has an unequivocal diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia.  There
             is a relationship between them that does go far beyond  normal
             emotional  ties  of  that  expected  between  relatives.   The
             Appellant has been caring long term for Allan and who has been
             known to the mental health services since July 2004.  He has a
             history of aggressiveness towards family members  and  others.
             This has extended to incidents of physical assault on a sister
             as well as the Appellant.  Dr Yate's report  refers  to  Allan
             having  threatened  to  kill  his  mother  on  more  than  one
             occasion.  Also, he has  been  highly  threatening  to  mental
             health staff and has required  treatment  in  the  psychiatric
             intensive care  unit  on  more  than  one  occasion.   He  has
             destroyed property both at home and  in  hospital.   Also,  at
             times he has had  a  suicidal  mind  set.   Despite  this  the
             Appellant is his full-time carer.


         35.  In deciding that family life does  exist  I  have  taken  into
             account the decisions  in  Kugathas  [2003]  INLR170,  Mansoor
             [2011] EWHC 832, RG [2010] UKUT 273, AP  (India)  [2015]  EWCA
             civ 89 and Singh [2015] EWCA civ 639.


         36.  The dependency of Allan on the Appellant is extensive and also
             profound.  Without it he would be vulnerable and at  risk  and
             in the light of his past behaviour others would be at risk  as
             well.


         37.   In  dealing  with  the  Appellant's  freestanding  Article  8
             assessment I have to have regard  to  the  judgement  of  Lord
             Bingham in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and the series  of
             questions which it was suggested an Immigration  Judge  should
             consider in deciding a convention reason.


         38.  I have already come to the clear conclusion that  family  life
             does exist.  I find that  the  Appellant's  removal  to  Ghana
             would result in interference with that family life that  would
             be of such gravity as to engage Article 8.


         39.  The object of the Respondent's decision is the maintenance  of
             effective immigration control by the state.   This  is  not  a
             criminal deportation and the only criticism that can  be  made
             of the Appellant is that she has overstayed in the past.


         40.  The last step is whether the extent  of  the  interference  is
             necessary in the interest of a democratic society in order  to
             fulfil  this   legitimate   aim   of   maintaining   effective
             immigration control and further that it is proportionate.


         41.  The Respondent's case and as  set  out  in  the  supplementary
             refusal letter of 2 February 2016 is that in  the  Appellant's
             absence her son should be able to turn to those other  members
             of family for help and support and also he could receive  help
             and care from his local social services and NHS.  This  is  an
             argument I do not accept.  The Appellant is on the spot at all
             times monitoring and looking after her son.  His siblings  are
             not in a position to provide the same level of care because of
             work, family or other commitments.  I have no doubt they would
             want to play their parts but they would not be able to do what
             the Appellant is now doing.


         42.  If Allan was to get the similar help and care from  his  local
             social services and NHS, then this would require almost  full-
             time monitoring.  This would be a severe drain on much  needed
             resources.  This is  care  that  the  Appellant  is  providing
             without charge and given her experiences  with  Allan  in  the
             past she is no doubt the best one qualified to  do  this.   It
             has not been suggested exactly by the  Respondent  as  to  how
             local social services and NHS would provide this care.   There
             has been no care plan or anything like that prepared.


         43.  I find that the advantages of the Appellant continuing to look
             after Allan  far  outweigh  the  need  to  maintain  effective
             immigration control by removing the Appellant to Ghana.   This
             is  a   unique   situation   with   unique   and   exceptional
             circumstances and one where the right to  respect  for  family
             life for the  Appellant  and  her  son  Allan  outweighs  this
             legitimate objective".


11.  The judge accordingly allowed the appeal.

12.  The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  pointing  out
    that the judge had failed to take into account  Section  117B  and  the
    fact that the maintenance of effective immigration control was  in  the
    public interest and  no  finding  had  been  made  as  to  whether  the
    appellant  was  financially  independent.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 21 October 2016.

13.  Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds and while it  was  acknowledged  that
    reference to Section  117B  had  been  made  in  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination, between paragraphs 40 and 43 of the determination  there
    had been no  reference  to  the  issue  of  financial  independence  as
    required by Section 117B(3).  Section 117B(1) made it  clear  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  was  in  the  public
    interest.  It was accepted that Section  117B(5)  referred  to  private
    life cases and that little weight  should  be  given  to  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    was precarious.  However, the question  would  be  of  relevance  under
    Article 8 jurisprudence as made clear  in  Rajendran  (s117B  -  family
    life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC) at paragraph 39.  The Tribunal  had  said
    in paragraph 40 precariousness was a criterion of relevance  to  family
    as well as private life cases.  The Tribunal had referred to an extract
    from Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at paragraph 41:

         "The approach explained in the Strasbourg case law  indicates  that
         where family life is established when the immigration status of the
         claimant is precarious, removal will be  disproportionate  only  in
         exceptional cases ...".


    Accordingly it was submitted that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to
    take into account Section 117B and the issue of precarious family life.
     The decision should be set aside.


14.  Mr Al-Rashid submitted that the case had initially been  listed  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in January 2016 when the  Home  Office  applied
    for an adjournment to reconsider the case in the light of the evidence.
     The refusal had been maintained, however.

15.  This was an error of law hearing and it was submitted  that  the  judge
    was not required to recite "chapter and verse" and he had set  out  the
    relevant parts of Section 117.  This  was  adequate  in  a  specialised
    jurisdiction.  The appellant was undoubtedly a  vulnerable  person  and
    the judge had set out the evidence concerning the diagnosis.  The judge
    was clearly aware of the provisions of Section  117.   He  had  clearly
    referred  to  the  importance  of  effective  immigration  control   in
    paragraph 39 of his decision.  It was  noteworthy  that  the  appellant
    spoke English and had given evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  in
    English.  English  was  spoken  in  Ghana.   The  appellant  was  being
    supported by her three children out of their earnings, and she lived in
    the family home.

16.  The judge had  found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  credible  and
    consistent and she relieved the burden on the taxpayer  by  caring  for
    her son.  The rationale of the Rules  was  satisfied.   The  judge  had
    directed himself by reference to relevant  authority  including  Razgar
    and Huang.  There was no error of law.

17.   In  response  Mr  Whitwell  replied  on   the   issue   of   financial
    independence, referring to Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803 where at paragraph 63 Lord Justice Sales considered the meaning
    of the phrase "financially independent" in Section 117B (3) and stated:

         "This is an ordinary English  phrase,  and  the  FTT  gave  it  its
         natural  meaning,  as  indicating  someone   who   is   financially
         independent of others.  This is the  correct  interpretation.   The
         FTT was also entitled on the evidence to find  that  the  appellant
         was not financially independent in this sense, and that this was  a
         factor which  counted  against  her  in  the  Article  8  balancing
         exercise".


18.  It was submitted further that the judge had downplayed  the  importance
    of the public interest.  He submitted that if a material error  of  law
    was identified the medical evidence could be re-assessed and the appeal
    approached with proper regard to  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.
    There were others to care for Allan.  He  had  had  employment  in  the
    past.

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision if it was flawed  by
    a material error of law. As I have  pointed  out  the  judge  correctly
    addressed himself in relation to Article 8 and in paragraph 10 in  part
    of his self direction he notes in relation to the legitimate  interests
    of the state "the courts have regularly found that the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control by the state  is  a  justifiable  way  of
    furthering those legitimate aims".  There is no doubt  that  the  judge
    made express reference to Section 117B, as is accepted by Mr  Whitwell,
    in paragraph 13 of his decision.

20.  Paragraph 39 of the decision, which I have set  out  above,  refers  to
    the maintenance of effective immigration control being  the  object  of
    the Secretary of State's decision and he adds "this is not  a  criminal
    deportation and the only criticism that can be made of the appellant is
    that she has overstayed in the past".  Read  fairly  and  as  a  whole,
    paragraph 39 is strongly indicative of the  fact  that  the  judge  was
    referring to Section 117B (1) as distinct from Section 117(C).

21.  There is no challenge to the judge's finding that  family  life  within
    the meaning of Article 8 was established.  Further, his assessment that
    Article 8 was engaged is not the subject of challenge.  He  then  turns
    to consider in paragraph 40  whether  interference  was  necessary  and
    proportionate.

22.  It is quite clear that the judge had  well  in  mind  the  respondent's
    case  and  rejected  it.   The  judge   concluded   that   the   unique
    circumstances of the case outweighed the legitimate  objective  of  the
    respondent.

23.  I am unable to accept that the judge, having set out chapter and  verse
    in paragraph 13 of his decision, misdirected himself in failing to give
    consideration to what is set out in  the  sections  to  which  he  made
    reference.  It is unarguable that he failed to give regard to the issue
    of maintenance of effective immigration control for the reasons I  have
    already given.  Had the judge found that the appellant was  financially
    independent, then it is clear in the light  of  Rhuppiah  that  he  had
    misdirected himself.  However, he made no such finding.  He  also  made
    no express reference to the  appellant  being  able  to  speak  English
    which, like financial independence, was described by Lord Justice Sales
    as a neutral factor.  The judge may have had in mind the  cost  burdens
    facing local social services and the NHS in paragraph 42 but I  see  no
    evidence of any misdirection in the  judge's  approach  and  I  am  not
    satisfied  that  he  neglected  to  take  into  account  the  statutory
    provisions to which he made reference.  He  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the situation was a unique one as he did in paragraph  43  and  to
    allow the appeal for the reasons he gave.

24.  Despite having carefully considered the submissions of Mr  Whitwell,  I
    am not satisfied that the determination was materially  flawed  in  law
    and accordingly I direct that  it  shall  stand.   The  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed.

25.  The First-tier Tribunal judge made no anonymity  direction  and  I  was
    not invited to make one.  No anonymity order is made.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
