
[pic]
IAC-FH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                PRONOY barua
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is  1
    January 1985. He appealed against the respondent's  decision  dated  31
    January 2014 to refuse to vary his leave to remain to that of a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  He appeals to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke who dismissed  his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 24 September 2014.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 6 February 2010  with  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student that was valid until  30  November  2011.
    On 29 December 2011 he was granted an extension of leave to remain as a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  until  29  December  2013.   On  28
    December 2013 he applied to vary his leave to remain to that of a  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  He proposed to enter into an entrepreneurial
    team with Mr MD Emran Hossain in order to run an  IT  services  company
    called BE Tech Solutions Ltd.

3.   The respondent refused the application in a notice  of  decision  dated
    31 January 2014.  The Secretary of State noted that the  appellant  had
    failed to provide a number of documents that were required in paragraph
    41-SD of Appendix A of the immigration rules, which included  a  recent
    bank or building society statement.  He also failed to provide relevant
    documentation relating to third party funding.  He  failed  to  provide
    contracts as evidence of trading. He  had  also  failed  to  provide  a
    Current Appointments Report as evidence to show that he was a  director
    of the company.

4.   The Secretary of State also pointed out that other pieces  of  evidence
    did not contain the correct information.  This included the letter from
    the Halifax dated 27 December 2013, which did not show the  appellant's
    account number as required and also included a letter relating to Mr Md
    Emran Husain, also dated 27 December 2013, which the Secretary of State
    rejected because it did not state that the appellant had access to  the
    funds held in the account as required in the rules.

5.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the ground that the judge erred in failing to give consideration  to
    the evidential flexibility policy outlined in paragraph  245AA  of  the
    immigration rules.  The grounds also argued that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate consideration to Article  8  because  the  appellant  had
    established a private life and a business in the UK.

6.    On  9  March  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan   granted
    permission to appeal because it was at least arguable  that  the  judge
    had failed to give consideration to paragraph 245AA although the  judge
    said: "It is far from clear that the appellant's  failings  would  have
    been saved by paragraph 245AA".  In response the  respondent  submitted
    that the number of failures in the evidence means that  the  provisions
    of paragraph 245AA would not avail the appellant in any event and  that
    there is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

7.   The matter comes before the Tribunal today to decide whether  there  is
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

8.   The appellant did not attend the hearing and  was  unrepresented.   The
    Tribunal was in receipt of a letter from the appellant  dated  12  June
    2015 in which he said that he was unable  to  attend  the  hearing  and
    asked for it to be decided on the papers already before  the  Tribunal.
    In light of this correspondence I was satisfied that I could proceed to
    decide the appeal in the absence of the appellant.



Decision and reasons

9.   After having  considered  the  documentary  evidence,  the  grounds  of
    appeal and oral submissions I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal
    decision does not disclose any material errors of law.  The  fact  that
    the judge did not deal explicitly with paragraph 245AA is a matter that
    could amount to an error of law but I find that it is  not  a  material
    error for the following reasons.

10.  Paragraph 245AA states the following:

         "(a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part  6A  state
             that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted after the application where they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with subparagraph (b).

         (b)  If the applicant has submitted:

             (i)  A sequence of documents and some of the documents in  the
                  sequence have been  omitted  (for  example,  if  one  bank
                  statement from a series is missing);

             (ii) A document in the wrong format; or

             (iii)    A document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                  document;

             the  UK  Border  Agency  may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  documents.
             The requested documents must be  received  by  the  UK  Border
             Agency at the  address  specified  in  the  request  within  7
             working days of the date of the request.

         (c)  The UK Border  Agency  will  not  request  documents  where  a
             specified document has not  been  submitted  (for  example  an
             English language certificate is  missing),  or  where  the  UK
             Border Agency does not anticipate that addressing the omission
             or error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a  grant
             because the application will be refused for other reasons.

         (d)  If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i)  in the wrong format; or

             (ii) that is a copy and not an original document;

         the application may  be  granted  exceptionally,  provided  the  UK
         Border Agency is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
         and the applicant meets all the other requirements. The  UK  Border
         Agency  reserves  the  right  to  request  the  specified  original
         documents in the correct format in all cases where (b) applies, and
         to refuse applications if these documents are not provided  as  set
         out in (b)."

11.  Although the judge did not specifically refer  to  paragraph  245AA  it
    was quite clear that she took into account the fact that the  appellant
    had failed to provide  a  number  of  the  documents  required  in  the
    immigration rules.  At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  it
    was accepted that the appellant failed to provide some of the documents
    but it was said that this was an oversight and that some of  the  other
    documents were merely in the wrong format.  The judge  was  correct  to
    say that she could only consider documents that were submitted with the
    application and was unable to consider the further  evidence  that  was
    produced at the hearing by virtue of section 85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended at the relevant date).

12.  The appellant's grounds of appeal seek to argue  that  his  failure  to
    provide the contract was merely part of a series of  documents  because
    he had supplied two invoices relating to trading of the  company.   The
    grounds  also  sought  to  argue  that  the  omission  of  the  Current
    Appointment Report was irrelevant because it was a minor document.

13.  It is true to say that the First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  consider
    the appellant's arguments in relation to paragraph 245AA.  However,  it
    is quite clear to me that  the  provisions  of  245AA  would  not  have
    assisted the appellant in any  material  way  even  if  the  judge  had
    considered those provisions.  Paragraph 245AA(c) states  quite  clearly
    that the UK Border Agency will  not request further documents where  it
    is not anticipated that the omission or error would  lead  to  a  grant
    because the application would be refused for other reasons.

14.  In this case, although there were some documents that were arguably  in
    the wrong format, for example, the letters from the Halifax, there were
    other documents that were clearly missing, which included a recent bank
    statement,  contracts  as  evidence  of   trading   and   the   Current
    Appointments Report to show that the appellant was a  director  of  the
    company.  In such circumstances paragraph 245AA  would  simply  not  be
    engaged because the appellant failed to  provide  so  many  fundamental
    pieces of evidence that were required that it would not lead to a grant
    of leave to remain. There was no onus on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    contact the appellant when he had simply failed to  produce  sufficient
    evidence to support the application.

15.  It is the case that applicants  may  occasionally  make  errors  in  an
    application for leave to remain now that a large  number  of  documents
    are often required for such applications. However, the onus is still on
    the  applicant  to  ensure  that  they  have  carefully   checked   the
    requirements of the immigration rules and have provided  the  specified
    evidence. Paragraph 245AA is designed to assist an applicant to rectify
    very minor errors in the evidence but is  not  designed  to  assist  an
    applicant who falls far  short  of  providing  the  specified  evidence
    required to support the application as in this case.

16.   For  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  although  the  judge  did  not
    specifically refer to paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules this did
    not amount to a material error of law because it would  not  have  made
    any difference to the outcome of the appeal. Paragraph 245AA would  not
    have assisted the appellant in any event.

17.  I find that the grounds  relating  to  Article  8  are  unarguable  and
    disclose no error of law.  The appellant made nothing more than a  bare
    assertion relating to his private  life  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's
    witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal did  not  contain  any
    detail about the ties that he might have established in the UK. He  has
    only been resident for a period of five years and nominal evidence  was
    produced relating to the running  of  the  business  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant has produced wholly insufficient evidence to  show  that  the
    consequences of removal would be of sufficient gravity  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8. For these reasons I find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision relating to Article 8 do not  disclose  any  material
    errors of law.

18.  For the reasons given above I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and the
    decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
    law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]    Date 01 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                PRONOY BARUA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION TO SET ASIDE

        Rule 43 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

1.   It appears from consideration of the file following an application  for
    permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  that,  owing  to  an
    administrative error, an uncorrected and unsigned draft of the decision
    was issued in error. The draft had not been approved by the  judge  and
    the purported decision was sent out as a result of a procedural error.

2.   The Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the interests of  justice  that
    the purported decision is set aside pursuant to rule  43(2)(d)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  The  final,  correct
    version of the decision is to be promulgated at the same time  as  this
    order.

3.   The effect of this decision is that by operation  of  section  13(8)(e)
    of The Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement act 2007 the earlier  decision
    is an excluded decision for the purposes of section 13 of the  Act  and
    there is no right of appeal to the Court of Appeal against  a  decision
    which has now been set aside. Therefore  the  pending  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal has no effect.

4.   The final and correct version of the decision now  promulgated  is  not
    an excluded decision and there is a right of appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal  against  that  decision  provided  that  an   application   for
    permission is made in time. Time will run from the date of promulgation
    of the new decision.


Signed   [pic]    Date 01 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

