
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09667/2014
                                                               IA/09665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On April 24, 2015                             |On May 1, 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR ADEDEJI OLUNAGBADE OSINLOYE
                         MRS OLUFUNMILAYO OLUWADARE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Oke (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in
         the  interests  of  convenience  and  consistency,  replicate   the
         nomenclature of the decision at first instance.




      2. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are  husband  and  wife.
         The first named appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
         student on October 3, 2010 with  leave  valid  until  February  29,
         2012. He lawfully extended his stay as a Tier  1  Post  Study  Work
         Migrant until February 2, 2014..  The  second  appellant  had  been
         given leave to enter as a dependant of the First-named appellant on
         March 17, 2012 valid until February 2, 2014. It was a condition  of
         their respective leave that they were prohibited from employment as
         a doctor or dentist in training. On January 14, 2014 they submitted
         applications for leave to remain.

      3. The respondent refused their applications on February 3,  2014  and
         took decisions to  remove  them  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
         Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 1986.

      4. The appellants appealed those decisions on February 13, 2014  under
         section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
         They argued they met the Immigration Rules or alternatively removal
         would breach the right to family and private life under  article  8
         ECHR.

      5. Their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Tootell
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October 16, 2014, and in
         a decision promulgated on November  25,  2014  he  dismissed  their
         appeals under the Immigration Rules but allowed their appeals under
         article 8 ECHR on a limited basis..

      6. The respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  December  1,  2014
         submitting the FtTJ had erred by misdirecting himself in law and/or
         the FtTJ  failed  to  have  regard  to  all  of  the  matters  when
         considering  proportionality.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Brunnen found there was an error in law. He found no merit  in  the
         argument based on Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  but  found  it
         arguable there was no basis to find the circumstances unduly  harsh
         was arguable.

      7. The matter came before me on the above date and  the  parties  were
         represented as set out above.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

      8. Mr Parkinson invited me to revisit the grounds of appeal relying on
         the recent decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
         387.  I explained to him that I would consider his request as  part
         of his overall submissions.

    SUBMISSIONS

      9. Mr Parkinson invited me to reinstate the  first  ground  of  appeal
         namely that as there was nothing exceptional about the  appellant's
         claim the FtTJ should not have considered the appeal under  article
         8 ECHR. He referred me to paragraph [44] of the recent decision  of
         SS (Congo) which made clear that a case should only  be  considered
         under article 8 where there is a reasonably arguable case that  had
         not been sufficiently dealt with  under  the  Rules.  Mr  Parkinson
         argued that that there was no reasonably arguable case and the FtTJ
         had erred by considering the case outside  of  the  Rules.  In  the
         alternative he argued that the FtTJ  had  failed  to  consider  the
         obvious alternative  namely  that  the  second  appellant  and  her
         husband could have returned to Nigeria and she  could  simply  have
         forwarded her passport to the General  Medical  Council.  The  FtTJ
         only considered the appeal on the basis she had to  be  present  in
         the United Kingdom and there  was  nothing  before  the  FtTJ  that
         suggested this was a requirement. By failing to do  this  the  FtTJ
         failed to give reasons for why removal  would  be  disproportionate
         and failed to give weight to the issue of  Immigration  control  or
         section 117B of the 2002 Act.

     10. Mr Oke argued that paragraph [44] of the decision in SS (Congo) did
         not alter the approach a Tribunal should take.  He  submitted  that
         the case merely emphasised what weight should be  attached  to  the
         argument argument and he submitted  the  FtTJ  had  considered  the
         appropriate weight and was satisfied  that  there  were  sufficient
         factors enabling him to deal with the case outside of the Rules. He
         further submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had  regard  to  the  fact  the
         defendant had been misled by the respondent and he referred  me  to
         paragraphs [19] to [20]  of  the  first-named  appellant's  witness
         statement and the immigration stamp exhibited  at  page  C  of  the
         respondent's  bundle.The  FtTJ  accepted  that   the   second-named
         appellant only had to produce her passport to qualify as a  doctor.
         It was not practical  to  send  a  passport  by  post  and  Mr  Oke
         submitted it was illegal to send the  passport  from  Nigeria.  The
         FtTJ recognised that the appellant wanted to conclude  the  process
         and then leave the United Kingdom. There were no Section 117B  that
         affected the decision and the FtTJ was entitled to find  article  8
         was engaged and to allow the appeal on the basis  he  did.  If  the
         appellants were removed then following the decision of UE (Nigeria)
         EWCA Civ 975 there would be a loss to the  public  benefit  if  the
         appellants were ordered to leave.

     11. Mr Parkinson  responded  to  these  arguments  and  maintained  the
         respondent had not misled the appellants and the FtTJ had not  made
         such a finding. The FtTJ had commented at paragraph [34]  that  the
         situation was confusing but he had not  found  the  respondent  had
         misled the appellants. There was nothing before either the FtTJ  or
         this Tribunal that supported Mr Oke's  submission  that  posting  a
         passport was illegal. There was no evidence to support the argument
         that an appointment was necessary despite the FtTJ  making  such  a
         finding. The appellants had limited  leave  to  remain  and  it  is
         arguable their status was precarious  and  this  was  a  factor  to
         consider under Section 117B.  The  FtTJ  should  have  refused  the
         appeal under article 8 ECHR because there were no compelling factor
         that made removal unduly harsh.

     12. Having heard the parties' representations I considered  the  papers
         before me and then gave an oral decision on the question of whether
         there had been an error in law.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

     13. I have before me an application that the  FtTJ  erred  in  allowing
         this appeal under article 8 ECHR. Linked to this application is  an
         argument that the FtTJ was  wrong  in  principle  to  consider  the
         appeal under article 8 at all and reliance is placed on the  recent
         decision of SS (Congo).  I  have  considered  the  evidence  placed
         before the FtTJ and his reasons for considering  the  appeal  under
         article 8. It is clear he placed weight on the fact there was  some
         confusion over a stamp in the first-named appellant's passport  and
         the fact the second-named appellant was merely seeking an extension
         to complete the paperwork for her GMC acceptance and she was unable
         to do this without her passport. Based on his approach to the facts
         I accept the FtTJ could consider the claim under article 8 but  for
         the reasons I shall hereinafter give I am also  satisfied  that  he
         erred in finding removal was unduly harsh.

     14. The FtTJ had two bundles of documents before him from the  parties.
         There is no dispute the first-named appellant had a  stamp  in  his
         passport allowing him Tier 1 HS Post  Study  Leave  to  remain.  If
         there was confusion it was open to the appellants  to  clarify  the
         position but I am satisfied too much weight was  attached  to  this
         issue because ultimately the appellants accepted they did not  meet
         the Immigration Rules and consequently any  confusion  should  have
         been inconsequential.

     15. I have reviewed the emails contained at pages [16] to [17]  of  the
         appellant's bundle particularly in light  of  Mr  Oke's  submission
         that the second-named appellant had to attend personally  with  her
         passport and it would be illegal to send a  passport  by  post.  Mr
         Parkinson does not accept it is illegal to send a passport by  post
         and submitted to me that there was  no  requirement  to  personally
         attend at the GMC.

     16. I have to agree on both counts with Mr  Parkinson  because  on  the
         evidence placed before the FtTJ there was  nothing  that  supported
         either argument. The  second-named  appellant  was  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a  dependant  and  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  her
         carrying out  activities  as  long  as  they  did  not  breach  her
         conditions of leave. The document at page [16] of  the  appellant's
         bundle is dated March 20, 2014 and indicated that the appellant had
         met  the  required  standard  and  she  was  able  to   apply   for
         registration to practise. The pass would be valid for three  years.
         The document at page [17] of the appellant's bundle is dated  April
         30, 2014 and stated that  the  GMC  were  unable  to  complete  the
         identity check "without seeing your passport or a valid UK  driving
         licence. We cannot accept a photocopy of your passport or any other
         document. If you do not have either of these we will need to  close
         your application and issue you with a full refund. You will need to
         re-apply once you have your passport back from the home office"

     17. The FtTJ interpreted this second email as meaning the  second-named
         appellant had to personally present the documents but  that  is  an
         erroneous view of the second email. All the appellant had to do was
         provide her passport. There was no requirement,  according  to  the
         evidence before him, of a personal attendance.

     18. By overlooking this issue the FtTJ failed to have regard to all  of
         the relevant facts and in this appeal I find this  was  a  material
         error. The second appellant's case was that she  merely  wanted  to
         complete the registration process before leaving  the  country  and
         applying for entry clearance. The FtTJ found that completion of the
         registration process would enable her to  make  the  correct  entry
         clearance application.

     19. The failure to consider  the  obvious  alternative  is  a  material
         error, as it must impact the proportionality considerations.

     20. I therefore set aside  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under
         article 8 ECHR.

    FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS OF CLAIM

     21. Mr Oke indicated he had further documents that he wished to  adduce
         in support of his submission that the appellants needed  to  attend
         personally. Although no application had been lodged  in  accordance
         with the Rules I agreed to the admission of physical  documents.  I
         was not prepared to consider documents on a  mobile  phone.  I  was
         handed two further emails and in reconsidering this matter  I  have
         referred to them. I have also taken into  account  the  submissions
         made both to the FtTJ and me.

     22. The first document submitted was an email  dated  January  7,  2014
         from the GMC registration department. This email  is  connected  to
         the email dated March 20,  2014  as  it  advised  the  second-named
         appellant of where and when she had to take her exam and  what  she
         needed to bring with her. The later email (page [16] of the bundle)
         confirmed she had attended her test date on March 6, 2014 and  that
         she had passed and referred to how she could register  her  result.
         There is nothing in either of these emails that requires the second-
         named appellant to remain in the United Kingdom.

     23. The second document was not shown to the  FtTJ.  It  confirmed  her
         application for registration had been closed because she had failed
         to provide her identity document namely her passport. The FtTJ  was
         not told of this and  whilst  this  document  was  put  forward  to
         support a claim that she needed to remain in the United  Kingdom  I
         am satisfied it did not actually serve that purpose. The email made
         it clear  she  could  apply  at  anytime  and  again  there  is  no
         requirement of personal attendance. The earlier email (page [17] of
         the bundle) made that clear and there is nothing  in  either  email
         that suggests otherwise.

     24. I am satisfied that the second-named appellant does not need to  be
         in the United Kingdom to complete her registration and  to  suggest
         otherwise would be misleading.

     25. The appellants do not meet the  Immigration  Rules  although  I  am
         struggling to find a Rule that  would  enable  them  to  remain  to
         complete a registration. For that reason I am  satisfied  that  the
         applications can be considered outside of the Immigration Rules.

     26. The first-named appellant came as a Tier 4 student  and  his  leave
         was lawfully extended as a Tier 1 post study  migrant.  He  had  no
         expectation of being allowed to remain here permanently. The second-
         named appellant did not come to  the  United  Kingdom  in  her  own
         right. She came as the first-named appellant's  spouse  and  whilst
         here she has put her time to good use.

     27. The only family life  they  have  is  with  each  other  and  I  am
         satisfied in those circumstances removal  would  not  breach  their
         right to family life  and  consequently  article  8  would  not  be
         engaged.

     28. Little is known of the first-named  appellant's  private  life  and
         little evidence has been submitted in respect of  the  second-named
         appellant's private life save the evidence about her  qualification
         with the GMC. She has no lawful entitlement to remain here although
         it would be open to her to make an entry clearance application once
         she secured her registration.

     29. The appellants' appeals are based on the  second-named  appellant's
         desire to complete her registration because then she would be in  a
         position to seek a position as a doctor. The  second  question  set
         out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  00027  is  where  there
         would be an interference with her right to  private  life,  if  she
         were removed. I have already concluded that she does not need to be
         in this country to complete her registration and it therefore  must
         follow that removal would not interfere with her private life.  She
         can still complete the  registration  requirements  and  it  cannot
         therefore be argued that article 8 would be engaged.  Her  and  her
         husband's article 8 claims fall at this hurdle.

     30. Even if I had been persuaded that  their  private  lives  would  be
         interfered with the decisions are in accordance with the Rules  and
         for  the  purpose  of  immigration  control.  On   the   issue   of
         proportionality I would have had regard to the fact they  had  been
         here lawfully, spoke English and had not  been  reliant  on  public
         funds.

     31. It is also arguable that their immigration  status  was  precarious
         because they did not satisfy any Immigration Rule  and  no  attempt
         had been made to convince me that they met paragraph 276ADE HC 395.



     32. In considering whether it was proportionate to remove them  I  have
         had regard to all of  the  matters  contained  herein  and  in  the
         bundles provided. In the event I had reached lord  Bingham's  final
         question I would have concluded that removal was proportionate.

     33. The appellants' appeals outside of the  Rules  both  fail  for  the
         reason set out above.

    DECISION

     34. There was a material error. I have set aside  the  decision  and  I
         have remade the decisions.

     35. I dismiss the appellants' appeals under the Immigration  Rules  and
         article 8 ECHR.

     36. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction  and
         pursuant to Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated: May 1, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: May 1, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
