
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24th July 2015                    |On 11th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Amanpreet Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page promulgated  on  2nd  June  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Columbus House, Newport, on 16th May 2014  (on  the  papers).   In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of  Mr  Amanpreet  Singh,
    the  Appellant,  who  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  India,  who  was  born  on  8th
    September 1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  to
    refuse his application for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of
    a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom,  namely,  of  Mrs
    Simone Selena Jordan, following his application of 23rd January  2013,
    and the Respondent's refusal decision dated 29th January 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is based upon his marriage with Mrs Simone Selena
    Jordan.  He was invited for interview with his wife  on  25th  November
    2013.   He  confirmed  he  would  attend.   There  was,   however,   no
    attendance, but the Appellant sent a note dated 17th December  2013  to
    the Respondent stating that his general practitioner  had  referred  to
    his "severe backache".  Another interview was then set up, whereby both
    the Appellant and his wife were re-invited to attend  on  24th  January
    2014.  Again, the Appellant did not attend, but after the interview, on
    27th January 2014, his representative contacted the Respondent  to  say
    that his wife and he had been unable to attend as their car had  broken
    down on the way to the interview.  At the hearing itself, the Appellant
    asked for a "paper hearing" on 16th May 2014.  Naturally,  he  did  not
    attend that interview because of such a request.  At the hearing before
    me today on 24th  July  2015,  the  Appellant  is  once  again  not  in
    attendance.  Neither is any explanation given for this  non-attendance.
    Nor, is any legal representative present on his behalf.  There  can  be
    no more serious and urgent a matter for a person without  legal  status
    in the UK than to attend his appeal hearing in order to regularise  his
    or  her  stay.   To  fail  to  do  so,  and  particularly  without   an
    explanation, speaks for itself.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge referred to the matters above.  The judge also stated,  "that
    ... he wanted the appeal to be decided on the papers without a hearing.
     I find this surprising as the hearing would have been  an  opportunity
    for the Appellant and his wife to attend to give evidence  about  their
    relationship ..." (paragraph 4).  The judge then made two observations.
     First, that the failure to attend the first interview was "unsupported
    by any medical evidence to be expected if the Appellant  was  suffering
    from incapacity" (paragraph 9).  In particular, simple reference  to  a
    back complaint was insufficient because what was required was, "medical
    evidence to record that the Appellant had a back complaint  to  prevent
    attendance, explaining what exactly was wrong with his back" (paragraph
    10).  This was missing.  The judge concluded that, "the description  of
    backache does not assist much.  People with  back  problems  cope  with
    daily living" (paragraph 10).  With respect to the  car  having  broken
    down, for which an explanation was given  some  seven  days  after  the
    interview date on the second occasion on 24th January 2014,  the  judge
    observed that, "there is just a bare assertion that the car broke  down
    when they were on their way to interview" (paragraph 11).   Given  that
    the evidential burden rested upon the Appellant and his wife to provide
    proper evidence, the  judge  concluded  that,  "I  can  only  draw  the
    conclusion that the Appellant and his wife did not want to attend these
    two interviews for whatever reason, and these two unimpressive  excuses
    have been put forward"  (paragraph  12).   That  being  so,  the  judge
    applied paragraph 322(10) of HC 395  and  upheld  the  refusal  by  the
    Respondent authority.

 5. With respect to Article 8, the judge had regard to the case of  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 640.  The judge concluded that, neither the  Appellant  nor
    his wife availed themselves of the "opportunity to demonstrate  to  the
    Respondent that they met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    I can find no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Immigration Rules"  to  necessitate  regard  being  given  to
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence, so that the  appeal  was  refused
    (see paragraph 14).

Grounds of Application

 6.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    considering the papers submitted with the appeal.

 7. On 18th August 2014, permission to appeal was granted  specifically  on
    the basis that it was arguable that the judge  should  have  considered
    the papers submitted with the appeal since there is  no  indication  in
    the determination that the judge recognised that refusal under  322(10)
    was discretionary.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 24th July 2015, the Appellant  was  not  in
    attendance and no submissions were made before  me  by  anyone  on  his
    behalf.  The Respondent was represented by Mr D Mills,  a  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, and he submitted that  the  failure  of  the
    Appellant and his wife to repeatedly not attend and give an account  of
    their relationship spoke for itself.  He submitted that the judge below
    had himself observed (at paragraph 4) that it was rather surprising for
    the Appellant not to have asked for an oral hearing before the Tribunal
    given that this was  an  opportunity  for  both  he  and  his  wife  to
    demonstrate the genuineness and validity  of  their  marriage.   Today,
    however, they had failed to attend yet again.  This time there  was  no
    explanation whatsoever at all.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  In the determination, the judge refers to the fact that "the
    Grounds of  Appeal  have  been  served  with  a  voluminous  bundle  of
    documents" (see paragraph 6).  He refers to the witness statement dated
    3rd April 2014 provided for the Appellant and his wife.  It is not  the
    case that "the voluminous evidence" has been neglected  by  the  judge.
    Quite the contrary is the case.  What the judge states is that,

         "The fact that there is no proper evidence to explain why there was
         no attendance on these two occasions - yet voluminous  evidence  to
         show that the Appellant and his partner have  been  living  at  the
         same address - I am unable to  make  any  finding  under  paragraph
         322(10) in favour of the Appellant.  The burden of  proof  is  upon
         the Respondent ... but there  is  an  evidential  burden  upon  the
         Appellant ..." (paragraph 12).

10. That finding was entirely open to the judge.  Indeed, the fact that the
    Appellant and his wife have yet again failed to attend and  to  provide
    an explanation is indicative of the "unimpressive  excuses"  that  have
    been put forward, as the judge below explained (see paragraph 12).

11. It is not enough to provide  documentary  evidence  about  the  parties
    living at the same address.  They have to show that they are engaged in
    a genuine and subsisting marriage which comes up to proper proof.  This
    is  done  through  a  process  of  making  themselves   available   for
    questioning.

12. The fact that they have both  refused  to  entertain  that  possibility
    indicates that the judge's  decision  below  was  entirely  proper  and
    within his power to make.

Decision

13. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

14. No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    3rd August 2015

