
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09498/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 2 November 2015                     |                On 12 November 2015  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                          RAMESHKUMAR SHANMUGARAJAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appealed against the refusal  of
    the Respondent to grant his application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    as the extended family member of an EEA national under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

2.   The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Devittie  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 9 February 2015. The Appellant was represented by Counsel; the
    Respondent was not represented.  The Appellant  and  the  sponsor  gave
    evidence.   In a decision of 26 February 2015, promulgated on that day,
    the judge dismissed the appeal under the Regulations and on  Article  8
    human rights grounds.

3.   The Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  was  initially
    refused by Judge Chambers on 29 April 2015.  On second  application  it
    was granted on 10 July 2015 by Judge Mandalia in the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka,  appealed  against  the
             Respondent's decision of 3 June 2015 to refuse the Appellant's
             application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  an  extended
             family member of an EEA national.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             (FTTJ) Devittie dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in  a
             decision promulgated  on  26  February  2015.   Permission  to
             appeal can only be granted if there  is  a  properly  arguable
             point capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


         2.   Although it seems that much of what is said in the grounds  is
             merely disagreement with the  findings  of  the  FTTJ,  it  is
             arguable, and I put  it  no   higher  than  that,  that   FTTJ
             Devittie failed to take into  account  relevant  evidence  and
             made adverse findings against the  Appellant,  in  respect  of
             matters that did not  appear  to  be  in  issue,  and  without
             providing the Appellant a proper opportunity to respond.


         3.   Since permission to appeal is granted on ground 1, it seems to
             me that the matters  set  out  in  ground  2  should  also  be
             considered by the Upper Tribunal."

4.   The Respondent  submitted  on  12  August  2015  a  Rule  24  response,
    essentially submitting that Judge Devittie gave clear reasons  for  his
    decision, taking into account relevant matters.

5.   On the date  of  the  error  of  law  hearing,  2  November  2015,  the
    Appellant's solicitors, S Satha & Co, wrote to the Tribunal  requesting
    determination  of  the  appeal  on  the  papers.   The  Appellant   was
    accordingly not represented at the hearing, save  that  at  the  outset
    Counsel came into the room to check that  the  solicitors'  letter  had
    been received and then left.  Mr Tufan made submissions, which  I  have
    taken into account, together with the permission  application  and  the
    Rule 24 response.  I reserved my decision.


Determination

6.   The judge found that the Appellant had  not  established  that  he  was
    living in the sponsor's household.  At paragraphs 13 and 14 he gave his
    reasons.  These are full and cogent, and do  not  disclose  any  patent
    error in the chain  of  reasoning.   Much  of  the  lengthy  permission
    application  essentially  represents  disagreement  with  the  judicial
    findings.   The judge appears to have considered all  of  the  relevant
    evidence, and it was not procedurally unfair, as asserted in  paragraph
    6 of the skeleton argument and paragraph 5 of  the  renewed  permission
    application, not to afford the Appellant +t relate to a Sponsor who was
    at the material time an EEA  national:  Moneke  (EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC)  at  head  note  (ii).   The  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor, recorded at paragraph 8  of  the  decision,  is  that  at  the
    material time the Sponsor was a citizen of Sri Lanka.

8.   The decision does not reflect an error of law, and is upheld.

Decision

9.   The original decision does not contain an error of law and is upheld.

Signed                                                                Dated:
    11 November 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis



