
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09082/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th May 2014                                |On 12th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                             Nancy Mwenya Chashi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by Coventry Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lloyd promulgated on 9th January 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zambia born 27th July  1987.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 8th February 2007 with valid leave  as  a
    student.  Leave was subsequently extended until 8th October 2012.

 3. On 27th September 2012 the  Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student.   That  application  was  refused  on  19th
    December 2012 with reference to paragraph 245ZX(d) of  the  Immigration
    Rules, as the Appellant did not satisfy the maintenance requirements.

 4. The Appellant's subsequent appeal was  heard  on  26th  June  2013  and
    dismissed with reference to paragraph 245ZX,  but  the  judge  at  that
    hearing allowed  the  appeal  with  reference  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, and made no  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's family and private life.

 5. Permission to appeal against that decision was  given,  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal subsequently set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    and remitted the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  further
    decision to be made.  The Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been wrong to allow the appeal with reference  to  section
    47, as the removal decision was withdrawn by the Presenting Officer  at
    the hearing, and the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the Appellant's human rights.  The appeal was remitted  to  be
    re-made only in relation to Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 6. The appeal was then heard by Judge Lloyd on 6th January 2014, and after
    hearing evidence from the Appellant, her husband  and  the  Appellant's
    father, Judge Lloyd dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the grounds are summarised in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Colyer dated 3rd April 2014, who  granted  permission  to
    appeal on limited grounds.  I set out below paragraphs 5 and 6 of Judge
    Colyer's grant of permission;

         "5.  The grounds and reasons for permission to appeal  assert  that
             the judge erred in failing to consider material  matters  such
             as the 'Chikwamba principles' or to consider the rights of the
             Appellant's husband.  However, it is apparent that  the  judge
             has considered the Appellant's family life  and  that  of  her
             husband.   These  grounds  amount  to  nothing  more  than   a
             disagreement with the findings of the  judge,  findings  which
             were properly open to the judge on the evidence before him.

         6.   The grounds and reasons for permission to appeal contend  that
             the judge  has  made  a  material  misdirection  of  law.   In
             particular that at paragraph 40  the  judge  states  that  the
             interference is lawful 'as she has no leave to remain'.  It is
             argued that the judge had erred in failing  to  consider  that
             the appeal related to an in time variation application and the
             Appellant had statutory extended leave.  I note that the judge
             repeats this purported error at paragraph 48 'the Appellant is
             a mature adult who no longer has leave'.  It is arguable  that
             the  judge  may  have  made  an  error  with  regard  to   the
             Appellant's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  this
             purported mistake may have materially influenced the decision.
              The grounds  disclose  an  arguable  error  of  law  on  this
             aspect."

 8. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Vokes accepted that  permission  to  appeal
    had been granted on limited grounds, and he therefore addressed me only
    in relation to the finding of the judge that the Appellant had no leave
    to remain.  I was asked to conclude that  this  was  a  material  error
    because the judge presumed that the Appellant was an  overstayer  which
    was not the case.  The Appellant had applied for leave to remain  prior
    to the expiry of her  existing  leave,  and  therefore  her  leave  was
    extended by section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 while her appeal was
    being determined.

10. Mr Vokes submitted  that  there  was  a  real  difference  between  the
    position of an overstayer, and the position of a person who had  leave,
    and this would make a difference when a judge was  considering  Article
    8.

11. The judge had referred in paragraph 40  of  the  determination  to  the
    Appellant not having leave, and had made further reference to  this  in
    paragraph 48.  I was asked to accept that this was an error, and it was
    material, because this had influenced the judge when carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise required when considering proportionality.   It  was
    possible that the outcome would have been different if  the  judge  had
    taken into account that the Appellant had leave.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr Smart contended that the judge was aware of the  full  circumstances
    of the Appellant's case and the history of it.   In  paragraph  46  the
    judge had referred to the Appellant having completed the course,  which
    was the reason why she had applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 Student.

13. Mr Smart submitted that in paragraph 40 the judge was in fact recording
    that the Appellant no longer had leave as a  student  because  she  had
    completed the course.

14. In any event the judge had properly considered all the appropriate case
    law in paragraphs 31 - 34 of the determination, and properly considered
    whether there were any good reasons to  find  compelling  circumstances
    outside the rules which would make  removal  unjustifiably  harsh,  and
    this was demonstrated in paragraph 49 of the determination.

15. Mr Smart's position was that if there was an error of law, then it  was
    not material to the outcome.



The Appellant's Response

16. Mr Vokes contended that Mr Smart was  inviting  me  to  read  into  the
    determination words that were not there.  Mr Vokes' position  was  that
    the judge had clearly recorded that  the  Appellant  had  no  leave  to
    remain, and that was wrong.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. The criticisms of Judge Lloyd relate to paragraphs 40  and  48  of  the
    determination which I set out below for ease of reference;

         "40. I find she has  established  private/family  life  with  which
             removal would interfere albeit lawfully as she has no leave to
             remain and necessarily in the interests of the maintenance  of
             immigration control.

         48.  I take into account all the evidence including  the  years  in
             the UK where she studied and has community and family ties but
             I note also that the Appellant is a mature adult who no longer
             has leave, whose husband's limited leave expires in just  over
             a year and who also has  family  links  to  Zambia  where  she
             married in August 2012."

19. The judge erred in recording that the Appellant  did  not  have  leave.
    The Appellant no longer had leave as a student, as her leave expired on
    8th October 2012, but  the  Appellant  submitted  her  application  for
    further leave to remain on 26th September 2012, before  the  expiry  of
    her leave.  The correct position is as submitted by Mr Vokes, that  the
    Appellant therefore had leave extended by section 3C of the Immigration
    Act 1971, while her appeal was being considered.

20. I do not find that the judge erred materially.  In my view, it is clear
    from reading the determination that the judge was  well  aware  of  the
    correct position.

21. In paragraph 26 the judge recorded submissions made on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant in which her representative referred to factors  that  should
    be taken into account in the Appellant's favour, and made reference  to
    there being no illegality or criminality.  In paragraph  28  the  judge
    recorded that she found no material discrepancy in the facts which  she
    accepted save 2 points.  Those 2 points did not relate to the Appellant
    being an overstayer or being in the United Kingdom without leave.  This
    therefore is an indication that the judge accepted that  the  Appellant
    had not remained in the United Kingdom illegally.

22. The judge in paragraph 30 referred to the Appellant's application form,
    and it is apparent that she had considered that  form  carefully.   The
    application form at page 11, which  is  page  A7  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle, indicated that the Appellant had valid leave until 8th  October
    2012.  I am satisfied that the judge was aware of that.

23. The judge had clearly considered the  Respondent's  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 19th December 2012, in which the Respondent  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant on 8th December 2009 was granted further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a student until 8th October  2012,  and  on  26th
    September 2012 the Appellant had made an application for further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  was  therefore  clear  from  the
    Respondent's decision  that  the  Appellant  was  not  regarded  as  an
    overstayer, and had made her application for leave to remain  prior  to
    the expiry of her existing leave.

24. I take Mr Vokes' point that this was not what  the  judge  recorded  in
    paragraph 40 but I am  satisfied  that  although  the  judge  erred  in
    phraseology, she was aware of the true position, in that the Appellant,
    although she no longer had leave to remain  as  a  student,  had  leave
    extended by section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

25. In my view the judge in paragraph 40 was considering the third question
    in the five stage approach advocated in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  when
    considering whether interference with family and/or private life was in
    accordance with the law.  The Respondent's decision was  in  accordance
    with the law because the  Appellant,  and  this  was  accepted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf, could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.   Although
    this was not correctly recorded by the judge, I do  not  conclude  that
    the judge regarded the Appellant as an overstayer.

26. The judge went on to consider the fourth and fifth stages of the Razgar
    guidance and considered whether  the  proposed  interference  with  the
    Appellant's private and family life was necessary for the  reasons  set
    out in Article 8(2) of the 1950 Convention, and  went  on  to  consider
    proportionality in paragraphs 41 - 49.  In my view  the  judge  carried
    out a comprehensive proportionality assessment.  In  paragraph  48  she
    made the same mistake as in paragraph 40 by referring to the  Appellant
    no longer having leave, but on reading the determination as a whole,  I
    am satisfied that the judge was referring to the  Appellant  no  longer
    having leave as a student, and the judge noted in  paragraph  46,  that
    the Appellant had completed her masters degree which was the reason why
    she had applied for further leave as a student.

27. The judge considered the appropriate case law,  and  did  not  omit  to
    consider any material factors, and did not take into account immaterial
    factors.   I  am  satisfied  that   the   judge   in   conducting   the
    proportionality  assessment  was  aware  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    overstayed in the United  Kingdom  illegally,  and  did  not  make  any
    adverse inference against the Appellant on this issue.

28. The determination is comprehensive and adequately reasoned and contains
    no material error of law.

Decision

The making the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that it must be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             9th June 2014

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             9th June 2014


