
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09911/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2015                           |On 24 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                        MS NATTALIA BENITES DE MORAES
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chakmakjian


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Ms De Moraes
    as "the appellant".

 2. No anonymity order has been made in these proceedings and there  is  no
    reason why such an order should now be made.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil who was born on 24 June 1995.  Her
    mother is a Brazilian  citizen  present  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    limited leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen.   The
    appellant was granted entry clearance to join her mother in the  United
    Kingdom on 10 August 2012.  She made an application for leave to remain
    on 7 January 2014 without the benefit of  legal  assistance  which  was
    refused on 4 February 2014 because the  respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that "discretion should be exercised outside  the  Immigration  Rules".
    The appellant appealed that decision and following a hearing at  Hatton
    Cross  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Napthine,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 October 2014 allowed the appellant's  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that the refusal was wrong  in  law  and  the  appellant
    awaits a lawful decision.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal  and  on  11  December  2014
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever granted such permission  in  the
    following terms:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Napthine) who, in a
             determination  promulgated  on  23  Oct  2014  -  allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal to remain outside the rules.

          2.  The grounds assert that the judge allowed  the  appeal  within
             the Immigration Rules without specifying  which  rule  applied
             and on an application made outside of the rules.

          3.  The Appellants mother had limited leave to remain in  the  UK.
             The Appellant had entered the UK in 2012 as a dependant child.
              However prior to the Appellants application she had become an
             adult.

          4.  The grounds of appeal do not reflect  the  judges  conclusion.
             He did not allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules rather
             he allowed the appeal to the extent of finding the  Respondent
             had not yet made a lawful decision.  It is arguable  that  the
             Respondent had made a lawful decision  and  it  was  incumbent
             upon the judge to have dealt with  the  matter  on  appeal  in
             light of the  evidence  available  to  him  either  within  or
             outside of the rules.

          5.  There was an arguable error of law in this case."

 5. Today Ms Kenny relied on the respondent's grounds seeking permission to
    appeal contending that the judge had made a  material  misdirection  of
    law in finding that the appeal should have been allowed with  reference
    to the Immigration Rules as the decision was  not  in  accordance  with
    them noting, as she did that  the  respondent's  refusal  was  in  fact
    outside of the Immigration Rules as the appellant was over the  age  of
    18 at the time of application.  Mr Chakmakjian  made  two  key  points.
    Firstly, that the grounds were not arguable as the respondent  has  not
    asserted within them that the decision is in accordance  with  the  law
    (as opposed to the Immigration Rules).  He  relied  on  the  fourth  of
    Judge Lever's reasons for granting permission with particular reference
    to the fact that the grounds of  appeal  do  not  reflect  the  judge's
    conclusions.  Secondly, he contended that the  respondent  has  clearly
    failed to consider the application in light of  the  very  purpose  for
    which it was made.  In short that there had been no balancing  exercise
    and consideration of Article 8.  He relied on the authority  of  R  (on
    the application of Aliyu and another) [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).

 6. Whilst Ms Kenny argued that I should set the judge's decision aside and
    make a fresh one dismissing the appeal Mr Chakmakjian argued that if  I
    was not with the first of his  submissions  the  second  one  was  that
    effectively there could be  no  replacement  for  a  properly  effected
    balancing exercise within Article 8 and the only  result  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was the one she in fact came to.

 7. I find, and if I need to I extend the reasons  granting  permission  to
    appeal to cover  the  respondent's  grounds,  that  there  is  here  no
    material error of law.  I accept the submission  that  there  was  very
    little open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to do beyond allowing  the
    appeal in the way  that  she  did.   The  respondent's  refusal  letter
    contains no Article 8  balancing  exercise  and  simply  re-states  the
    Secretary of State's policy to  consider  granting  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules where particularly compelling  circumstances  exists.
    Further, that such grounds are rare and are  given  only  on  genuinely
    compassionate grounds.  Having considered  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular appellant there are no exceptional circumstances.

 8. It was incumbent  upon  the  respondent  to  carry  out  an  Article  8
    balancing exercise.  She plainly has not done so.   The  appellant  was
    entitled to consideration of her individual circumstances  outside  the
    Immigration Rules pursuant to Article 8.

 9. Accordingly I find that the judge has not materially erred as  asserted
    by the respondent.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 23 February 2015.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

