
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09406/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th November 2016                         |On 25th November 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Bhachu of Counsel, instructed by Bassi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female Indian  citizen  born  24th  April  1978  who
    arrived in the UK as a visitor  on  6th  August  2014.   She  had  been
    granted a visit visa valid between 16th July  2014  and  16th  January
    2015.

 2. The Appellant met and married a British citizen, MS, to  whom  I  shall
    refer as the Sponsor.

 3. The Sponsor was divorced, and had two children, a daughter who is now 8
    years of age and lived with his former wife, and a son, K, born in July
    2004, who lived with the Sponsor.

 4. The Appellant and Sponsor married on  2nd  October  2014,  and  on  7th
    January 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK  based
    upon her marriage to a British citizen.

 5. The application was refused on  26th  February  2015.   The  Respondent
    contended that  the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  She was in the UK as a visitor.  Because  she  failed  to
    satisfy the eligibility requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  she
    could not benefit from the criteria set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM.

 6. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was entitled to remain
    in the UK  by  relying  on  her  private  life  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1).  The Respondent considered Article 8 of  the  1950  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950   Convention)   outside   the
    Immigration Rules and decided that there  were  no  circumstances  that
    would warrant a grant of leave to remain outside the rules.

 7. The appeal was heard by Judge Broe of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)
    on 27th July 2015.  The FtT found that the  issue  to  be  decided  was
    whether the Respondent should have  exercised  discretion  outside  the
    rules and  whether  Article  8  rights  were  engaged  by  the  refusal
    decision.  The FtT found that the Appellant accepted that she could not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The FtT noted that the consequence of  the  Respondent's  decision  was
    that the Appellant must leave the UK.  The FtT found that  family  life
    had been established and  the  Respondent's  decision  amounted  to  an
    interference with the right to enjoy that family life.  The  FtT  found
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the Sponsor's  son  to  leave
    the UK and found that the Appellant and Sponsor's son "may have  formed
    an attachment" in the ten months that they had known each other.

 9. The FtT was satisfied that  the  marriage  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor is genuine and subsisting but found  that  there  would  be  no
    breach of Article 8 if the Appellant had to return to India and make an
    application for entry clearance.  The FtT  found  that  any  separation
    would be for a relatively short period.

10. The appeal was therefore dismissed.

11. The Appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

12. At the hearing before me on 6th September 2016 I heard submissions from
    both parties regarding error of law.  On behalf of  the  Respondent  it
    was accepted that the FtT had erred in law in  not  making  a  specific
    finding as to whether there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor's  son,  which  was
    relevant to  consideration  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  It was however  argued
    that this error may not be material, because the FtT finding  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor's son "may have  formed  an  attachment"  implied
    that there was in fact no parental relationship.

13. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of  law
    and setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         18.  The error of law is the failure to adequately consider section
             117B(6) of the 2002 Act which is set out below;

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         19.  The FtT found that family life existed and that it  would  not
             be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.  There  has  been
             no challenge to those findings which are preserved.

         20.  The error was that although there was a reference  to  section
             117B(6) there was a failure to analyse and make findings as to
             whether the Appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with the Sponsor's son,  who  is  accepted  as  a
             qualifying child being a British citizen under the age of  18.



         21.  It is correct that in paragraph 17  the  FtT  found  that  the
             Appellant and Sponsor's son had an attachment, but  I  do  not
             accept Mr Duffy's submission that this implies that  there  is
             no genuine and subsisting parental relationship.   It  is  not
             clear.  This is material, because  if  section  117B(6)(a)  is
             satisfied, then the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
             Appellant's removal, the FtT  having  already  found  that  it
             would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.

         22.  The error, in my view, is also material to  the  consideration
             of the best interests of the child.

         23.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  FtT  which  then
             needed to be remade.  Mrs Bhachu applied for an adjournment on
             the basis that further evidence needed  to  be  given  by  the
             Appellant and Sponsor on the issue of  parental  relationship.
             It was  not  possible  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  as  no
             interpreter was available.

         24.  I therefore decided that it was fair and in the  interests  of
             justice to adjourn for a  further  hearing  so  that  evidence
             could be  given.   The  application  made  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant dated 22nd August 2016  to  admit  further  evidence
             pursuant to rule  15(2A)  of  the  2008  Procedure  Rules  was
             granted without objection from Mr Duffy.

         25.  As previously mentioned, findings  made  by  the  FtT  that  a
             genuine family life exists, and it would not be reasonable for
             the Sponsor's son to leave the UK are preserved.  The issue to
             be decided at the next hearing is whether the Appellant has  a
             genuine  and  subsisting  parental   relationship   with   the
             Sponsor's son.

Remaking the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 17th November 2016

Preliminary Issues

14. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  I had received
    the Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-E, the Appellant's  bundle  with
    sections A-I, the Appellant's further evidence indexed 1-16, a skeleton
    argument dated 8th November 2016, and a letter dated 19th October  2016
    from the deputy head teacher of K's school  admitted  as  new  evidence
    pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules, without  objection
    from Mr Richards.

15. Both representatives indicated that their understanding of the  hearing
    was that the only issue to be considered related to whether or not  the
    Appellant had a parental relationship with K, and to consider K's  best
    interests.

Oral Evidence

16. Both the Appellant and Sponsor gave oral evidence with  the  assistance
    of  an  interpreter  in  Punjabi.    There   was   no   difficulty   in
    communication.  Both adopted the contents of their  witness  statements
    dated 20th July 2015 and 20th August 2016 as their evidence.  There was
    no cross-examination.

17. It is not necessary to set out the evidence here.  If relevant  I  will
    refer to the evidence when I make my findings and conclusions later  in
    this decision.

The Respondent's Oral Submissions

18. Mr Richards acknowledged that there were no credibility issues.  It was
    also acknowledged that K is a qualifying child being a British  citizen
    under 18 years of age.  The FtT had found, without challenge,  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect K to leave the UK.  Mr Richards noted
    that K still had very limited contact with his biological  mother,  but
    in the circumstances stated that he would  not  seek  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant did not have a parental  relationship  with
    K.

The Appellant's Submissions

19. I indicated that I did not need to hear lengthy  submissions  from  Mrs
    Bhachu in the light of submissions made by  Mr  Richards.   Mrs  Bhachu
    relied upon her skeleton argument, and submitted  that  although  there
    was very limited contact between K and his biological mother, this  did
    not preclude the Appellant from having  a  parental  relationship  with
    him, and the evidence that had  been  submitted,  proved  that  such  a
    relationship existed.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. The preserved findings of the FtT are that  Article  8  is  engaged  as
    family life exists, the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage, and K is a British citizen under 18 years of  age.



22. In considering Article 8 I follow the five stage approach advocated  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Article 8 is engaged on  the  basis  of  family
    life, the Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law  in  that
    the Immigration Rules that relate to a grant of leave to remain  cannot
    be satisfied, and it  is  necessary  and  in  the  public  interest  to
    maintain effective immigration control.

23. In accordance with Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39,  I  must  consider  the
    family life of all members of the family, not only the Appellant.

24. The issue to  be  decided  is  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  is
    proportionate and in considering proportionality I must have regard  to
    the considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  I do  have
    regard to those  considerations,  accepting  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest, and that it is
    in the public interest that a person seeking leave to remain can  speak
    English (and there is no evidence that the Appellant can do so), and is
    financially independent.  As to financial independence  I  accept  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor are financially independent, but this  is  no
    more than a neutral factor.  I also accept that little weight should be
    given to a private life established by a person when that person is  in
    the UK with a precarious immigration status.  The Appellant has  had  a
    precarious immigration status, but this appeal is not  based  upon  her
    private life.  It is not the case that the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully when she married the Sponsor.

25. Sub-section (6) of section 117B confirms that the public interest  does
    not require a person's removal where there is a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

26. It is already established that K is a  qualifying  child  as  he  is  a
    British citizen under 18 years  of  age,  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

27. The issue therefore is whether the Appellant has proved that she has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with K.

28. I accept the evidence of the Sponsor and Appellant as credible.  It was
    not challenged by way of cross-examination.  I accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence that following his divorce, he wanted to remarry, and  one  of
    his main concerns was that his son should have a mother.

29. The Appellant and Sponsor married on  2nd  October  2014,  having  been
    introduced in August 2014.  The Sponsor is a British citizen.

30. Both the Appellant and Sponsor speak of the Appellant as  acting  as  a
    mother to K, and make reference to the fact  that  K  very  soon  after
    meeting the Appellant started calling her "mom".

31. Guidance on the principles involved in considering whether there  is  a
    parental relationship is contained in R v the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department IJR [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC).  It was decided  that  it
    is not necessary for an individual to have parental  responsibility  in
    law for there to exist a parental relationship.  Whether a  person  who
    is not a biological parent is in a parental relationship with  a  child
    for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act  depends  on  the
    individual circumstances and whether the  role  that  individual  plays
    establishes that he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.

32. I have taken particular note of the guidance contained in paragraphs 42
    and 45 of RK.  I have considered  what  role  the  Appellant  plays  in
    caring  for  and  making  decisions  in  relation  to  K,  which  is  a
    significant factor.  I have considered whether K has  established  that
    she has taken on the role that a parent usually plays in the life of  a
    child.  I have taken into  account  what  role  K's  biological  mother
    plays.

33. K has lived with the Sponsor since the divorce.  A Family  Court  order
    was made on 25th March 2014 confirming that K should  reside  with  the
    Sponsor, and K should  have  contact  with  his  biological  mother  on
    alternative Saturdays at 12 noon for an hour.  I accept  the  Sponsor's
    evidence that contact is continuing, and takes place  at  a  McDonald's
    restaurant.

34. I also accept the Sponsor's  evidence  that  K  displays  no  affection
    towards his biological mother and has indicated that he does  not  wish
    to speak to her.  This is confirmed  by  a  letter  from  K,  which  is
    undated, but which is contained at  page  9  of  the  further  evidence
    bundle submitted on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   In  that  letter,  K
    explains that he regards the Appellant as his mother and describes  her
    preparing his food, washing and ironing his clothes, helping  him  with
    homework and, together with the Sponsor, taking him to a doctor when he
    is unwell.  K indicates that when he wishes to go on a school  trip  he
    asks both the Sponsor and Appellant.

35. K also explains in his letter that he does see  his  biological  mother
    once every two weeks at McDonald's, but only enjoys having contact with
    his sister, and does not speak to his biological mother, feeling  angry
    towards her because of the way he believes she treated the Sponsor  and
    himself.

36. I conclude that K's biological  mother  plays  no  meaningful  role  in
    looking after him.  I have also placed some weight  upon  the  letters
    contained in section I of the Appellant's bundle which are from  family
    and friends of the Sponsor,  commenting  upon  the  close  relationship
    between the Appellant and K.

37. I also note and place weight upon the fact that K's GP has stated in  a
    letter dated 16th August 2016 that  the  Appellant  is  listed  as  an
    emergency contact for him, and accompanies  him  to  appointments,  and
    there is a letter written on behalf of K's football  club,  that  makes
    reference to the support provided by the Appellant in  taking  him  to,
    and collecting him from football.  I have also taken into  account  the
    letter from K's school, which confirms  that  both  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor are listed as emergency contacts.

38. Having considered the evidence in the round,  and  taken  into  account
    that the Respondent did not seek to challenge that evidence, I conclude
    that it has been established that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with K.  Therefore the requirements of
    section 117B(6) are satisfied, and the public interest does not require
    the Appellant's removal from the UK.

39. When considering proportionality it is also necessary to  consider  the
    best interests  of  a  child  as  a  primary,  but  not  the  paramount
    consideration.  In this case the Family Court decided that it would  be
    appropriate for K to live with his father on  a  full-time  basis,  and
    only to have very limited contact with his biological mother.   I  find
    that the Family Court decision is  of  very  considerable  significance
    when considering the best interests of K.

40. It is clearly K's wish to remain  living  with  both  the  Sponsor  and
    Appellant, and at 12 years of age he  is  old  enough  to  express  his
    wishes.

41. It seems to me, clearly  evident,  from  the  evidence  that  has  been
    submitted, that the best interests of K would be to remain living  with
    both the Appellant and Sponsor, and to have limited  contact  with  his
    biological mother.

42. I am conscious of the guidance given by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, that compelling circumstances need  to  be
    identified to support a claim for a grant of leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration  Rules.   In  my  view,  taking  account  of  the  best
    interests of K, and the fact that the requirements of  section  117B(6)
    are  satisfied,  and  the  fact  that  the   family   are   financially
    independent, amount to compelling circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds in relation to  Article  8  of
the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity direction pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because this  appeal  involved  considering  the
interests of a  minor.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21st November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 This appeal has been allowed because of evidence presented to the  Tribunal
that was not presented to the initial decision maker.   Therefore  there  is
no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21st November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

