

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09506/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2015                                 |On 7 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NANCY FAY COY
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs J Moore of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties as described above, but  the  rest  of  this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the USA.  She applied  for  a  derivative
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 as the primary carer of a UK citizen.

 3. The respondent refused that application  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    letter dated 28 January 2014.  The letter says that  if  the  appellant
    wishes to remain in the UK on the basis of family and private life, she
    should make the relevant application.   It also advises her that if she
    fails to depart voluntarily her departure might  be  enforced,  but  in
    that event she would firstly be contacted and  would  have  a  separate
    opportunity to make representations against removal.

 4. The appellant's appeal against that decision  came  before  Judge  D  C
    Clapham SSC in the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2014.  The appellant
    did not insist on her case under the Regulations but pressed  it  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  In his  determination,  promulgated  on  7  May
    2014, the judge allowed the appeal under Article 8 on the basis that an
    application  made  from  the  USA  was  bound  to  succeed  under   the
    Immigration Rules, and there was no reason for requiring the  appellant
    to submit to the formality of applying from abroad (paragraphs  21  and
    22).

 5. The SSHD's grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  argue  firstly
    (paragraphs 2-4) that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  its
    approach to the Article 8 assessment by not having regard to the Rules,
    by failing to identify compelling circumstances not recognised  by  the
    Rules, and by failing to identify exceptional circumstances leading  to
    an unjustifiably harsh outcome.  Secondly, the grounds argue (paragraph
    5) that it would be proportionate to require the appellant to return to
    the USA to seek entry clearance.

 6. Mrs O'Brien sought firstly to raise  an  issue  of  jurisdiction.   She
    acknowledged that such is not raised in the  SSHD's  grounds,  but  she
    submitted that a fundamental error of jurisdiction was always liable to
    be corrected.  The point to be made was that the case did  not  involve
    any substantive interference with Article 8 rights.

 7. I indicated that  in  my  view  that  the  point  was  not  properly  a
    jurisdictional one.  It could be argued that the  SSHD's  decision  did
    not involve any substantive interference with  Article  8  rights,  but
    without doubt procedurally an Article 8 ground of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal was available.

 8. Mrs O'Brien maintained that nevertheless the  point  could  be  derived
    from the grounds of appeal (which she did  not  seek  to  amend).   The
    SSHD's decision did not foreshadow removal, so the  judge  should  have
    approached the  case  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  substantive
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights by requiring her  to
    make a properly vouched application in accordance with the  Rules.   If
    the judge had taken the correct  legal  approach,  he  could  not  have
    reached the result he did.  He had also fallen into  the  misconception
    that this is "a Chikwamba case" whereas it was open to  the  appellant,
    given her immigration status, to apply under the Rules without  leaving
    the country.  Her case would then have fallen for  consideration  under
    paragraph EX.1 and was likely (although not guaranteed) to succeed,  on
    the basis of the facts found by  the  judge.   The  whole  approach  to
    Article 8 had been erroneous and the determination should be reversed.

 9. Mrs Moore's principal point in reply was that the argument now made for
    the respondent was entirely novel, and not foreshadowed in the grounds.
     Her clients (the appellant and the sponsor) were a  vulnerable  couple
    who had been advised up to this date on the basis of the SSHD's grounds
    of appeal.  A drastic shift of position should not be permitted at this
    very late stage.

10. I indicated that the grounds of appeal disclosed no legal error in  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination, and that the SSHD's  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal would be dismissed.

11. The first point in the grounds (paragraphs 2-4) fails to recognise  the
    basis of the determination, namely that the judge thought the terms  of
    the Rules would be met on an application from abroad.  The second point
    in the grounds (paragraph 5) says that it is always  proportionate  for
    applications to be made from abroad where the  Rules  so  require,  but
    that is contrary to  the  principle  in  Chikwamba.   The  grounds  are
    misconceived.

12.  There  is  at  least  a  respectable  argument   to   be   made   that
    notwithstanding JM (Liberia) and Ahmed, to which the appellant referred
    the First-tier Tribunal,  no  substantive  Article  8  issue  generally
    arises from a decision such as the one leading  to  these  proceedings.
    That was argued in the First-tier Tribunal by the Presenting Officer  -
    see paragraph 17.  However, the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    do not adopt that line of argument.  Also, the grounds accept  that  on
    its facts this case did raise a Chikwamba issue.  On the basis  of  the
    grounds there would be no reason to find that the judge did  not  apply
    the Chikwamba principle correctly.

13. While the Presenting Officer did her best with the grounds she  had  to
    argue, it is too late now to raise a  quite  different  attack  on  the
    determination.  It may be possible to raise issues going  fundamentally
    to jurisdiction even at a late stage, but the point sought to be argued
    is not of that nature.  It goes to the substance of the decision not to
    jurisdiction.  It is also too late to raise the point that this was not
    a case in which the Rules specify an out of country application.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            6 May 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




