
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA099222015
                                                                 IA099282015
                                                                 IA099332015
                                                                 IA099472015
                                                                 IA099582015
                                                                 IA099532015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2016                              |On 26th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    MAOA
                                    RMKM
                                    MMAOA
                                    AMAOA
                                     SMA
                                     RMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Marshal of NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson (9th March 2016)
     Mr M Diwnycz (18th May 2016]

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dearden
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th July 2015.

Background

 2. The appellants are all citizens of Libya.  The first  two  are  husband
    and wife and the remaining four their minor children.

 3. The principal appellant arrived in the UK on 15th September 2007,  with
    leave to enter as a student, subsequently extended  until  1st  January
    2015.  His spouse came here on 22nd November 2007, the  three  children
    having arrived on 25th October 2007 and the youngest having  been  born
    here in 2012.

 4. They applied to the Secretary of State for further leave to  remain  on
    22nd December 2014 but were refused on 23rd February 2015.  The  matter
    came before Judge Dearden on 8th July 2015.

 5. Before the judge it was conceded that only one of the appellants  could
    potentially meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   SMA,  who
    is presently 16 years of age, having come here when she  was  8,  could
    qualify, it was said, under paragraph 276ADE1(iv) i.e. she is under the
    age of 18 years and has lived continually in the  UK  for  at  least  8
    years and it would not reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

 6. The judge concluded that SMA could continue  her  education  in  Libya,
    that her best interests are met by remaining with  her  mother,  father
    and siblings and whilst she would be disappointed to leave her  friends
    behind, it would not be unreasonable to expect her to go with the  rest
    of the family.

 7.  The  appellant's  representative  had  produced  a  large  amount   of
    documentary material relating to the present situation in  Libya.   The
    judge noted that they had not claimed asylum here and that the  present
    country guidance of AT and Others (Article 15(c) risk categories) Libya
    [2014] UKUT 00418 did not conclude that there were substantial  grounds
    for believing that an individual would solely by  being  present  there
    face a real risk that threats his or her life or person.

 8. He then wrote as follows:

         "Mr Vaughan places greater emphasis on the documentation from  page
         13 onwards of his bundle,  the  majority  of  which  postdates  the
         country guidance case.  It is clear that there is violence in Libya
         and that some educational institutions  have  been  taken  over  by
         various militias.  However the current  country  guidance  case  is
         that Libya is not in a state of general  insecurity  sufficient  to
         warrant protection and of course all  these  appellants  have  very
         substantial support available in Libya from their extended  family.
         The documentation produced by Mr Vaughan is very interesting but in
         my conclusion insufficient to warrant my departing from the country
         guidance case of AT."

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to adequately consider the situation in Libya, in particular
    whether it was reasonable to expect SMA to return there.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in law by failing properly  to
         consider the background material together with the relevant CG case
         of AT concerning the  situation  in  Libya  in  (a)  assessing  the
         children's best interests; (b) whether it would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the fifth appellant  to  return  to  Libya  under  paragraph
         276ADE1(iv); and(c) in carrying out the balancing exercise required
         by proportionality.  The judge's conclusion that there is no  basis
         to depart from AT fails to engage  with  the  material  and  it  is
         arguably inadequately reasoned."

11. Although  the  Secretary  of  State  initially  sought  to  defend  the
    determination by way  of  a  reply  filed  on  22nd  December  2015  Mr
    Parkinson accepted that the reference in  the  determination  to  "very
    interesting" was not an adequate consideration of the  material  before
    him

12. The decision of Judge Dearden is set aside in that he materially  erred
    in law in failing to adequately  consider  material  relevant  to   his
    decision.

Resumed Hearing

Submissions

13. Mr Diwnycz relied  on  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  readily
    accepted that the situation in Libya had changed since it was  written.
    He confirmed that it was not the intention of the Secretary of State to
    split the family and said that there was ample evidence before me  upon
    which to make the correct decision.

14. Mr Marshall confirmed that the family comes from a town called Gharyan,
    some 80 Km south of Tripoli. Between Tripoli and their home  town  lies
    an area which is particularly dangerous.  Reference  to  the  two  main
    towns nearby, namely Zantan and Worshefana was  made  in  the  material
    supplied by the investigation by the Office of the UN  High  Commission
    for Human Rights on Libya dated 23rd February  2016.  The  context  for
    that report was the decline in the political and security situation  in
    Libya with a number of groups emerging pledging allegiance  to  IS.  In
    the appellant's home area the militia known as Libya  Dawn  had  gained
    control causing a severe humanitarian crisis with over  120,000  people
    displaced from the  Worshefana  area  alone.   There  were  reports  of
    significant civilian casualties in that area from Amnesty International
    as a consequence of the shelling of residential areas by Libya Dawn.

15. UNHCR reported that the ongoing armed conflict has had a  major  impact
    on children's enjoyment of their rights in Libya including their rights
    to life to an adequate standard  of  living  and  to  health  care  and
    education which has been severely compromised by the  conflict.   There
    were reports of particular risks to girls who  had  been  attacked  and
    harassed by armed groups on their way to school in Tripoli.

16. Mr Marshall relied on the case of PD and Others  (Article  8  conjoined
    family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT  00108 which held that:

         "In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple
         family members decision makers should first apply  the  Immigration
         Rules to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,  then
         consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  This exercise will typically
         entail the consideration and determination of all  claims  jointly,
         so as to ensure that all  material  facts  and  considerations  are
         taken into account in each case."

Findings and Conclusions

17. SMA is qualifying child, in that she is under the age  of  18  and  has
    spent over 7 years in the UK, indeed the majority  of  her  life  here.
    The issue here is the reasonableness of her return to Libya.

18. None of the material relied upon by Mr Marshall was challenged  in  any
    way by the  respondent, either as to the conclusions reached or  as  to
    the source, in  this  case  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High
    Commissioner for Human Rights.  Neither was it argued that the  present
    situation in Libya was irrelevant to the  issue  of  reasonableness  of
    return.  Indeed it is hard  to  see,  in  the  context  of  a  holistic
    analysis, why the situation of  the  country  to  which  SMA  would  be
    returned is not a highly relevant factor.

19. The consideration of her best interests requires a broad assessment  of
    multiple aspects of her life.  She has been here since the  age  of  8,
    and has spent her formative years in the UK with her family.  She is at
    a  critical  stage  of  her  education,  having   finished   her   GCSE
    examinations and now studying at Bradford College.   As  in  PD,  whose
    appeal was allowed,

         "critical  milestones  in  both  her   personal   and   educational
         development have been passed and are now looming."

20. She would be returning to what is  essentially  a  failed  state  where
    rival militias fight one another for  dominance  and  where  IS  has  a
    significant presence, particularly in fact in the north west  of  Libya
    where the family comes  from.  The  towns  nearby  have  been  severely
    affected by the fighting and very large numbers  of  people  have  been
    displaced. It cannot possibly be in  SMA's  best  interests  to  return
    there.

21. Neither is it reasonable. There is clear evidence  that  her  education
    would be at the least disrupted and at worst impossible to continue.

22. It is not argued that the appellants, save  for  SMA,  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and in order to succeed they have
    to rely on Article 8 outside the Rules and the test to  be  applied  is
    that of exceptional or compelling circumstances.

23. The provision in paragraph 276 ADE1(iv) is mirrored  in  the  statutory
    framework to the Rules, namely Section 117B of the 2002 Act. It states,
    inter alia, that, by 117B(vi)

      i) "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where -

     ii) (a)  That person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

    iii) (b)  It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

24. Paragraph 43 of PD and Others reads as follows:

         "Finally, given that the parents' appeals can only succeed  outwith
         the Rules, we remind ourselves that the test to be applied is  that
         of exceptional or compelling circumstances: see MF (Nigeria) v SSHD
         [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 @ 42. In our application of this test we refer
         to, but do not repeat, our various analyses and findings above. The
         first of the two final considerations which we have  identified  is
         the unequivocal  statement  in  Section  117B(6)  that  the  public
         interest does not require the removal of these parents  given  that
         they have a substantial and genuine parental relationship with  the
         third appellant and our finding that it would not be reasonable  to
         expect him to leave the UK.  The second is that, given our findings
         above, the effect of dismissing the two parents' appeals  would  be
         to stultify our decision that the  third  appellant  qualifies  for
         leave to remain in the UK  under  the  Rules.  Insofar  as  Section
         117B(6) requires a balancing exercise to be performed, we highlight
         our previous assessments and findings  and,  balancing  everything,
         our  overall  conclusion  is   that   the   test   of   exceptional
         circumstances is satisfied.  Thus the first and second  appellants'
         appeals succeed outwith the Rules."

25. There is nothing in this case which can properly be distinguished  from
    that in PD. If their daughter satisfies the requirements of  the  Rules
    there are compelling reasons why  the  parents,  and  the  other  minor
    children, should be granted leave outside them.

Decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision  is  set  aside.  It  is
    remade as follows.  The appeal of SMA is allowed within the Immigration
    Rules.  The remaining appellants succeed outwith the Rules on Article 8
    grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                              Date 25 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
