
[pic]
IAC-PE-sw-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09517/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd October 2014                         |On 10th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                              MR NAZMI BRAHIMAJ
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adams of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 14th March 1980 is a  citizen  of  Albania.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Adams of Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Home Office  Presenting
    Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for a residence card as a person  in
    a durable relationship with a qualified EEA national.  That application
    was refused by the Respondent on 4th February 2014.  The Appellant had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holmes on 9th May 2014.  The  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal had been granted and the matter came before me  in
    the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether an error of law  had  been
    made in the case or not.  I heard that matter  at  Manchester  on  15th
    August 2014  and  for  reasons  provided  in  a  written  determination
    concluded a material error of law had been made by the judge, set aside
    the decision and issued directions for the remaking of  that  decision.
    The matter comes back before me in accordance with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. As the Appellant was present I firstly explained to him the  nature  of
    the proceedings and the way they would be conducted.

 5. I next checked the documents available to me in this case.

 6. The Respondent's documents consist of:

      i) Immigration history.

     ii) Those documents listed at folios A to C on the index sheet.

    iii) Refusal letter.

     iv) Notice and Grounds of Appeal.

 7. The Appellant's documents consist of:

      v) Those documents listed at folios 1A to 97 on the index sheet to the
         bundle.

     vi) Original marriage certificate.

 8. As a preliminary issue it was noted that the  parties  had  married  on
    1st July 2014 as evidenced by the marriage  certificate.   Application
    was made to amend the Grounds of Appeal so  that  this  case  could  be
    considered under Regulation 12 of the 2006  Regulations  the  Appellant
    being a family member of the EEA national.  There was no opposition  to
    that amendment.

The Proceedings - Evidence

 9. The Sponsor in this case, Miss Pirktina, provided her name and  address
    and confirmed her witness statement in the Appellant's bundle as  being
    true and correct.  She confirmed that she had  been  working  for  some
    time firstly at Pretzza plc from March to August  2013,  thereafter  at
    Kakoo Fashions for two months and most recently at Pizza Express  based
    in London.  She said that she expected a transfer to a Pizza Express in
    the Manchester area in the very near future.   She  was  working  full-
    time.

10. In cross-examination she confirmed her employment history and confirmed
    she was not claiming any benefits.  She paid rent for the accommodation
    from her wages.  She said other than wages she received tips but had no
    other source of income.  She outlined two  visits  that  she  had  made
    outside of the UK for a week or ten days in the last  two  years.   She
    said she had a current Latvian passport.

11. At the conclusion I said that I would allow the appeal  but  provide  a
    decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

12. In this case the burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard
    of proof for both immigration and human rights issues is a  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Appellant is within the country and I am  therefore
    entitled to look at circumstances  existing  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

13. The history of this  case  demonstrates  that  the  parties  have  been
    together for a little time.   At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in May 2014 he accepted that they had been together in a
    relationship for a period of  time  that  may  have  been  as  much  as
    fourteen months.  They continue living together  in  that  relationship
    and given the passage of time they have now been together for a  period
    of  about  twenty  months  or  so.   Further  as  acknowledged  by  the
    Presenting Officer circumstances have changed somewhat  from  the  last
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in that  the  parties  have  now
    married and accordingly the Appellant's case can  be  considered  under
    the terms of Regulation 12 of the 2006  Regulations  separate  from  or
    additional  to  a  consideration  under  Regulation   8(5)   of   those
    Regulations.

14. I am satisfied, and indeed there was no suggestion  that  the  marriage
    was simply a somewhat cynical ploy on the part of the Appellant and the
    Sponsor but rather something that reflected their relationship which as
    indicated above has been in existence now for some period of time.

15. The Presenting Officer wished to confirm that  the  Sponsor  was  still
    exercising treaty rights in the UK although that was not a matter  that
    had been raised or placed  in  dispute  on  any  prior  occasion.   The
    evidence  as  presented  by  the  Sponsor  confirmed   that   she   had
    consistently been in employment in the UK since  arrival  and  although
    she was no longer in the same  employment  as  at  the  first  hearing,
    nevertheless I was  satisfied  from  the  evidence  provided  that  she
    continues to be employed at present with Pizza Express and  accordingly
    is still exercising treaty rights.



16. In all the circumstances therefore I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    meets the requirements of being a family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    within the terms of the 2006 Regulations.

Decision

17. I allow this appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

18. Anonymity not retained.

Fee Decision

19. A fee has been paid in this case but given my decision there should  be
    a refund.






Signed                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever            10th November 2014

