
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09952/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th August 2016                            |On 26th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MR ADNAN AFZAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Malhotra of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 31st October  1983.   He
    successfully appealed against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  3rd
    March 2015.  By that decision  the  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant
    leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  cancelled  his  United  Kingdom
    residence permit as a spouse.  The Respondent was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had either employed false representations or  material  facts
    were not disclosed for the  purposes  of  obtaining  the  UK  residence
    permit. In the alternative a change of circumstances since the issue of
    the permit had removed the basis of the Appellant's claim to enter  the
    United Kingdom.  The Respondent appeals  with  permission  against  the
    First-tier decision. Although this is an appeal by the Home Office  for
    the sake of convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they
    were known at first instance.  tHIS  the  first  instance  decision  to
    make a full fee award.   o intccordingly I dismiss the rthe ut stop  at
    the point of critici

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in June 2011  on  a  two  year
    student visa and met his wife, Mrs Kira Afzal around  about  May  2012.
    They began a relationship in January 2013 and  married  on  12th  April
    2013.  The Appellant enjoyed leave to remain in  the  UK  as  a  spouse
    valid from 3rd June 2013 to 3rd December 2015.  On 11th  May  2013  the
    Appellant lodged a successful application with the Respondent for leave
    to remain as the spouse of a British citizen.  In order to obtain  this
    leave the Appellant submitted proof of his English language proficiency
    in the form of a TOEIC English language test certificate which  he  had
    obtained from a test he had sat on 20th February 2013 at the South Quay
    College with the test providers Educational Testing Services (ETS).

3.   On 3rd March 2015 the Appellant was  encountered  entering  the  United
    Kingdom from a trip he had made to Pakistan.   He  was  interviewed  by
    Immigration Officers who refused him leave to enter the United  Kingdom
    on the basis that the TOEIC English language  certificate  was  invalid
    because it had been obtained by the Appellant using a proxy test taker.
     The Appellant denied this and said that he had successfully varied his
    leave from that of a student to a spouse and he  applied  for  and  had
    taken the TOEIC test on 8th February and 20th February  2013  at  South
    Quay College.  He had passed the test and used the  certificate  gained
    thereby legitimately in order to apply for leave to remain as a spouse.
     The Respondent should not have cancelled his residence permit.

The Proceedings at First Instance

4.   The Appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Blake sitting at Taylor House on  19th  October  2015.   After  hearing
    evidence from both the Appellant and his wife  the  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal finding that the Appellant had undertaken the  English  language
    test himself.  At paragraph 119 the Judge stated "my reasons for coming
    to this conclusion were based on my  assessment  of  [the  Appellant's]
    demeanour and use of language before me.  I further  entirely  accepted
    the evidence from his wife Mrs Afzal.  I  found  her  to  be  a  wholly
    credible witness".

5.   Later on in  the  determination  the  Judge  noted  that  the  evidence
    produced to establish the Appellant's alleged  deception  consisted  of
    generic evidence in the form of statements from Miss  Rebecca  Collings
    and  Mr  Peter  Millington.   No  voice  recognition  expert  had  been
    personally identified as having analysed the test  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's  case.   Against  the  Respondent's  evidence   the   Judge
    considered the evidence produced by the Appellant that he had taken his
    previous qualifications in Pakistan in the English language and that he
    had succeeded and progressed at his college in the UK using the English
    language.  On a balance of probabilities the Judge found the  Appellant
    had undertaken the test himself and no  deception  had  been  employed.
    The Immigration Officer's decisions to curtail  the  Appellant's  leave
    and deny him entry clearance were not in  accordance  with  Immigration
    Rules or law. He also allowed the appeal under Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

6.   The Respondent appealed against the decision arguing that the  Tribunal
    had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant had undertaken the test himself.   The  Respondent's  grounds
    referred to the evidence of Mr Millington and Miss Collings and  stated
    that there was also an ETS lookup tool document which proved  that  the
    Appellant's test had been categorised by ETS as invalid.  The  Tribunal
    had failed to properly take this evidence into account.  Under  Article
    8 the  Tribunal  found  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's wife to go to Pakistan as she cared for an  invalid  father
    and was employed in the United Kingdom.   None  of  the  reasons  given
    constituted exceptional circumstances which would lead to unjustifiably
    harsh circumstances.  Furthermore in considering Article 8 the Tribunal
    had failed to consider the relevant factors set out at Section 117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

7.   Initially permission to appeal was refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nicholson on 25th  May  2016.   He  wrote  that  although  the
    Tribunal had considered generic evidence in the  case  of  Gazi  [2015]
    UKUT 00327 and that that could suffice to show  deception,  nonetheless
    the generic evidence was not infallible and  all  cases  involving  ETS
    certificates would be fact-sensitive.  If the Judge had simply rejected
    generic evidence in ETS cases that would arguably be an error  of  law.
    Where however as in this case the Judge made a  rounded  assessment  of
    all of the evidence as required by Gazi and concluded that overall  the
    evidence was insufficient to show that  deception  had  been  practised
    then there was no arguable error of law.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    take the Appellant's ability to speak English as a factor.   Permission
    was refused and the Respondent renewed  their  application  in  similar
    grounds to the Upper Tribunal.

8.   The renewed application came before an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on  4th
    July 2016 who granted permission limited to  Article  8  grounds  only.
    Dealing with the  first  point  regarding  the  English  language  test
    certificate the  Judge  at  first  instance  had  made  clear  that  he
    understood the nature of the methodology employed by  ETS.   The  Judge
    had a clearly  reasoned  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  taken  the
    disputed test personally and not used a proxy test taker.  Although the
    Respondent complained that the Judge had erred in failing to  recognise
    that a person who had sufficient language skills might still for  other
    reasons use a proxy test taker, weight was a matter for  the  Judge  to
    determine.  The findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  disclosed  no
    arguable legal  error and were simply unassailable.

9.   Permission to appeal was given on Article 8  grounds  as  the  approach
    adopted by the Judge was "problematic to say  the  least".   The  Upper
    Tribunal continued:

         "The Appellant's leave was precarious when he was married  and  the
         Judge  had  no  apparent  regard  to  material  matters   such   as
         considerations of Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   There  was  no
         evidence that  the  Appellant  was  financially  independent.   The
         findings that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  family  life  to
         continue in Pakistan because  the  Appellant's  wife  would  be  in
         danger there so that there were insurmountable obstacles preventing
         that are arguably unsustainable.  For these reasons  permission  is
         granted limited to the Respondent's challenge to  the  allowing  of
         the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Whether the Respondent chooses to
         pursue the appeal before the Upper Tribunal may  well  depend  upon
         the view she takes as to how to respond to  the  rejection  of  her
         challenge to the findings  of  the  Judge  that  no  deception  was
         employed so that the Appellant's leave as  the  spouse  should  not
         have been disturbed."

10.  The Appellant responded to the grant of  permission  arguing  that  the
    Judge had given very detailed  reasons  why  this  appeal  should  have
    succeeded outside the Rules under Article 8.  The Appellant had  worked
    at Domino's Pizza in the past and was thus not a burden  on  taxpayers.
    He had the right to work at the time  of  the  appeal  and  there  were
    payslips and relevant employment documents to  demonstrate  this.   The
    Judge's determination was sound.

The Hearing Before Me

11.  Following the  grant  of  permission  the  matter  came  before  me  to
    determine  whether  there  was  an  error  of  law   in   the   Judge's
    determination such that it fell to be set aside and the matter reheard.



12.  At the outset the Presenting Officer conceded that his instructions  in
    relation to the case had not included sight of  a  copy  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge's decision to grant  permission  to  appeal  limited  to
    Article 8 only.  There was no  longer  a  ground  of  appeal  that  the
    decision of the Respondent was not in accordance with the  law  but  if
    the Respondent could not make out her case under the Immigration  Rules
    that would play a part in the proportionality exercise under Article  8
    as indicated by  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who  granted  permission.
    Looking at the question of the public interest the decision to  curtail
    the Appellant's leave was  unlawful  as  the  Appellant  had  not  used
    deception to pass his English language test.   In  those  circumstances
    the Respondent indicated that there was no other argument that could be
    made in the case.

13.  For the Appellant Counsel indicated she had nothing to add to what  had
    been said by the Presenting Officer.  The Respondent's candid admission
    in this case indicated that dismissal of the appeal was  the  best  way
    forward.  I indicated  to  the  parties  at  the  conclusion  of  these
    submissions that I would dismiss the Respondent's appeal and I give  my
    reasons for that now.

Findings

14.  The core issue  in  this  case  was  whether  the  Appellant  had  used
    deception to obtain his English language test certificate.  Due to  the
    fact that the certificate was issued by ETS the Respondent's suspicions
    were aroused and it was assumed by the Respondent  that  the  Appellant
    had used deception.  The Respondent produced evidence in support of her
    case.  It is fair to say that there has been  some  debate  as  to  the
    adequacy or otherwise of that evidence although the matter appears  now
    to have been settled following the very recent Court of Appeal decision
    in Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  In that case the Court of Appeal ruled
    that the evidence of Mr Millington and Miss Collings sufficed to shift
    the evidential burden on to an Appellant that is the person whose leave
    had been curtailed.  The Court of Appeal did not address  the  question
    of what evidence would be sufficient to enable a Tribunal  to  conclude
    that there had been no deception as that was likely to be an  intensely
    fact-specific matter.  Shehzad was concerned with the initial stage and
    the evidential burden at that initial stage.

15.  Thus as Judge Nicholson pointed out in refusing  permission  had  Judge
    Blake simply found that the evidence of Miss Collings and Mr Millington
    was insufficient of itself to show deception that would  have  been  an
    arguable error of law.  This was particularly so  as  the  Respondent's
    case was that the evidence included the ETS lookup  tool  which  showed
    the tests were invalid which the Judge appeared not to  have  made  any
    reference to.   However  the  Judge  did  not  stop  at  the  point  of
    criticising the generic evidence of the Respondent but  did  go  on  to
    consider whether the Appellant could genuinely establish he  must  have
    taken the test himself.  The Judge found that that  was  the  case  and
    permission was refused  both  by  Judge  Nicholson  and  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to appeal that finding.

16.  The importance of this background is how it then affected the issue  of
    Article 8.  As the Judge was correct in finding that there had been  no
    deception by the Appellant, the Respondent was not entitled to  curtail
    his leave.  In effect the case stopped there  since  if  the  Appellant
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules there was no need  to  go  on  to
    consider Article 8. The Appellant's leave remained intact. Another more
    complex way of looking at the matter is to consider the Article 8 claim
    under the  Razgar  step-by-step  approach.  The  Respondent's  decision
    interfered with the Appellant's private and family life  but  if  there
    was no basis for the decision (as Judge Blake found) that  interference
    would not be for a lawful purpose.  When  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission under Article 8  it  was  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge's
    analysis of Article 8 was inadequate.  However, (and  assuming  it  was
    necessary to consider Article 8 at all given  the  Appellant's  success
    under the Rules) if the interference with the Appellant's  private  and
    family life was not in accordance with a legitimate aim then  the  case
    would not reach the proportionality stage.  I find that  to  be  so  in
    this instance and accordingly I dismiss the Respondent's appeal against
    the Judge's decision to allow the case under Article 8.   Although  the
    Judge allowed the appeal under Article  8  giving  arguably  inadequate
    reasons for that decision (as the Upper Tribunal found), that was not a
    material error of law since the case  did  not  in  fact  either  reach
    Article 8 at all or alternatively the  proportionality  stage  for  the
    reasons I have given. It is not necessary for me to analyse the Judge's
    decision under Article 8. The Respondent quite properly  conceded  this
    appeal  at  the  hearing  before  me  and  accordingly  I  dismiss  the
    Respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I uphold the decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's
appeal.

Respondent's onward appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction as there is no public  policy  reason  for  so
doing.

Signed this 25th day of August 2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the Respondent's appeal against the Judge's decision  at  first  instance
has been dismissed there can be no  interference  with  the  first  instance
decision to make a full fee award.


Signed this 25th day of August 2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




