
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
                                            IA/10220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|    Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons        |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|    On 8 October 2015                      |     On 8 December 2015        |
|                                        |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S H STOREY

                                  Between:


                          Jinali Bhadreshkumar Shah
                        (AnonYmity DIRECTIO not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Counsel Mr Z Malik, on the instructions of Vision
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms. S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

 1. The appellant seeks to challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (FtT), promulgated on 9 March 2015, dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 12 February 2014,  refusing
    to vary her leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  directing  her
    removal under s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The grounds, upon which the appellant challenges the FtT  decision,  are
    attached to her application for permission  to  appeal  dated  16  March
    2015. They are drafted by Vision Solicitors. It is not necessary for  me
    to rehearse these here, as they are known to the  parties.  One  ground,
    however, is  central  to  whether  this  application  can  succeed.  The
    appellant submits that the FtT erred  in  law  in  following  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517  (EK)  because  EK  was  decided  per
    incuriam, the suggestion being that the Court's attention was not  drawn
    to the fact that the SSHD was fully aware of why the appellant's CAS had
    been withdrawn.

 3. On 6 May 2015, FtT Judge White  granted  Permission  to  Appeal  on  the
    grounds that the FtT Judge arguably made an  error  of  law  in  finding
    that:

          a) the appellant had not made  false  representations  dishonestly
             during her interview;
          b) the CAS had been withdrawn on 8 January  2014  given  that  the
             college continued to communicate with her subsequently;
          c) the CAS could be validly withdrawn after the appellant had made
             her application; and
          d) that the CAS was withdrawn by reason of the non-payment of fees
             when the CAS records show that fees were paid in full.


Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

 4. At the hearing, Mr. Malik argued that the FtT  decision  was  erroneous,
    firstly because the Judge wrongly found as fact that the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn on 8 January 2014 and therefore the decision of the  SSHD  was
    in accordance with the law; and secondly, because the  decision  of  the
    SSHD was procedurally unfair. In relation to the first ground, Mr. Malik
    submitted that this was not a finding open to the  FtT  Judge  to  make.
    This is, he says, because there was no evidence  before  the  FtT  Judge
    that the CAS was in fact withdrawn  other  than  the  statement  in  the
    document headed "CAS Details". Directing us to the Home Office  Guidance
    for Tier 4 Sponsors (version 10/13), Mr Malik submitted that a  CAS  can
    only be cancelled by  the  Home  Office,  where  there  is  evidence  of
    misrepresentation or fraud (paragraph 481.a), or withdrawn where it  has
    not been used to support an application for a visa or  an  extension  of
    stay (paragraph 482).

 5. On the issue of procedural fairness, Mr. Malik  drew  our  attention  to
    paragraphs 27 and 39 in EK and the reference therein to Naved (Student -
    fairness - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC) and R v. SSHD,  ex  p.
    Doody [1994] 1 AC 531. He submitted the principles  of  fairness  demand
    that a person should be informed of any factors that weigh against  them
    and  that  they   should   be   afforded   the   opportunity   to   make
    representations. This was not done in the instant case.

 6. On behalf of the  Respondent,  Ms.  Sreeraman  submitted  that  the  FtT
    decision did not contain any material error of law and that the SSHD was
    not in breach of her public duty responsibilities. The decision  was  on
    all fours with EK.


Was there an error of law?

 7. The Judge found as fact that there  was  no  evidence  of  deception  or
    misrepresentation.  He further found that there was no valid  CAS  on  8
    January 2014, and that this was probably because fees had not been paid,
    causing the CAS to be withdrawn. Irrespective of whether the finding  in
    relation to the payment of fees was correct, Mr. Malik does not  dispute
    that on the date the SSHD checked the system, there was no valid CAS  in
    place. In the absence of any evidence to show that on  that  date  there
    was a valid CAS in place, the  Appellant  could  not  meet  a  mandatory
    requirement of the Rules.

 8. On the issue of fairness, the FtT Judge quoted at length from the  Court
    of Appeal judgment in EK. That judgment is binding on the FtT in as much
    as it is binding upon us. As Sales LJ stated [at paragraph 26]:
         "  26.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepts,  correctly,  that   the
         Immigration Rules do not exclude the general public law duty to act
         fairly which rests upon the Secretary of State  in  exercising  her
         functions: see, e.g., Alam  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2012] EWCA Civ 960, [44]. The question,  therefore,  is
         whether that duty imposed an obligation on the Secretary of  State,
         when  she  saw  that  the  CAS  letter  on  which  the  Appellant's
         application for leave to remain was based had  been  withdrawn,  to
         adjourn any decision on  the  application  to  give  the  Appellant
         notice of the problem and an opportunity to rectify it. In my view,
         it did not."  (Emphasis added).

 9. Accordingly, the FtT Judge was bound  to  find,  as  he  did,  that  the
    approach of the SSHD does not involve any unfairness to an Appellant.

10. We have heard nothing to persuade us that the contention made by  Vision
    Solicitors (but not relied upon by Mr. Malik) that EK  was  decided  per
    incuriam. Accordingly, in the absence  of  the  same,  we  reject  their
    submission.


Decision

11. For the above reasons, we concur with Ms. Sreeraman's  submissions  that
    read in its entirety, the FtT Judge's determination  does  not  disclose
    any material error. The Appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.


|Signed:                              |                                     |
|[pic]                                |                                     |
|Sehba H Storey                       |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |                                     |


