
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA103122015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th June 2016                          |On 15th June 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Mrs Joana Noelle Estelle Momasso
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Opoku-Boateng (instructed by JF Law Solicitors)


                             NOTICE OF DECISION


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Oliver,
    promulgated on 28th October 2015 following a hearing on 25th  September
    2015 at Hatton Cross.

 2. The Appellant in this case is a young lady from the  Cameroon  born  on
    2nd January 1990.  She had arrived in the UK on 31st August 2012  as  a
    Tier 4 Student.  That leave was extended until 28th February  2015  but
    in between times on 22nd June 2014 she applied  for  a  residence  card
    under the EEA Regulations as the family member,  namely  spouse,  of  a
    Dutch national, Mr Samuel Amponsah.  She had married  him  on  7th  May
    2014 and he was described in the marriage certificate as a sport centre
    manager.  That application was refused on 18th August 2014 on the basis
    that the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the husband  was  in
    truth a qualified  person.   That  was  not  appealed  but  a  separate
    application was made in October 2014, this time on the basis  that  her
    husband was a student.

 3. By the time the matter came before the Judge he was no longer a student
    but working.  The judge in the Decision noted at paragraph 12 that  the
    husband had submitted a  witness  statement  but  did  not  attend  the
    hearing.  In fact, in that he was wrong.  The husband  did  attend  the
    hearing but did not give evidence.

 4. The judge went on to find the Appellant's husband  to  be  a  qualified
    person although nowhere in the Decision does he refer to  any  evidence
    to support that.  The Decision is thus flawed by a  material  error  of
    law which is fundamental to  the  Decision  because  if  he  is  not  a
    qualified person then the Appellant is not  eligible  for  a  residence
    card.

 5. On that basis I set aside the Decision.  With  the  agreement  of  both
    parties it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    and I direct the Appellant to file and serve all  the  evidence  to  be
    relied upon including a  schedule  which  gives  a  chronology  of  the
    husband's qualified status with supporting evidence.   The  appropriate
    hearing centre is Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing by a different Judge.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 13th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
