
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10771/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2016                     |On 15th August 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs Hilda Yemwenre Amadasun
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R P Benton of Counsel, Duncan Lewis Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    that is Mrs Amadasun as the appellant and the Secretary  of  State  for
    the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 7th May 1955 and on 19th
    August 2014 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of Article  8.
    She had entered the UK on 15th November 2011 as the  dependant  of  her
    son who sadly passed away in August  2014.   Prior  to  that  date  the
    appellant had applied and been denied naturalisation.   The  respondent
    considered and refused the appellant's application under Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules and paragraph 276ADE.

 3. It was not deemed  that  the  appellant  could  comply  with  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) because she had spent the majority of her  life  in  Nigeria
    and it was not accepted that she had lost her ties to Nigeria or  found
    that there were exceptional circumstances to warrant  the  exercise  of
    discretion outside the Rules.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Samini allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) and on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State challenged  that  decision  asserting  that  the
    judge had clearly applied  the  wrong  test  because  she  stated  that
    various  factors  "constitute  significance  (sic)  obstacles  to   her
    returnability to live in safety and security in Nigeria  in  accordance
    with the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(vi)".   The  judge  clearly,
    according to the Secretary of State, applied the wrong test.

 6. In the alternative the judge went  on  to  consider  the  matter  under
    Article 8 but gave no weight to the factors set out in Section 117B  of
    the 2004 Act, specifically sub-Sections (1), (3) and  (5).   The  judge
    failed to carry out the appropriate balancing act having regard to  the
    public interest as statutorily defined.

 7.  At the hearing before me Mr Clark,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, submitted that the Tribunal could not be sure that the judge had
    applied the correct test but he conceded  that  the  second  ground  of
    challenge was dependent on the first.  Owing to the terminology of  the
    judge he advanced that it was  not  clear  that  she  had  applied  the
    correct legal test under paragraph 276ADE(vi).

 8. It was acknowledged with regards to the second ground  that  the  judge
    had set out Section 117B in full but had not appeared to apply it.

 9. Mr Benton resisted the challenge by the Secretary of  State  submitting
    that the judge knew what the test was  and  that  the  judge  had  made
    reference to significance in relation to individual facts did not  mean
    that taken cumulatively, that she had applied the wrong test.   It  was
    unfair to fixate on the absence of the word "very".  It was  a  careful
    and detailed decision making coherent and clear findings.  He  did  not
    accept that Section 117B had not been applied correctly.  The judge had
    made a series of findings including the financial circumstances of  the
    appellant, that she had been here since 2003 and  was  sadly  bereaved.
    The judge he submitted addressed the public policy considerations.

10. He contended that this was effectively a disagreement with  the  weight
    the judge had attached to the findings and he cited the judgment of the
    Court of Appeal  in  Reid  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 138 which stated at [41], [42] and [42]

         "41. I turn now to the  second  ground  of  appeal.   This  is,  in
             essence, a criticism  of  the  balancing  exercise  which  the
             Immigration Judge carried out.  What Mr Ahmed argues, both in
             his   skeleton   argument   and   orally,    is    that    the
             Immigration Judge attached too much weight to the seriousness
             of the offence, for which the appellant was sentenced to  two-
             and-a-half years' imprisonment, or  rather  the  offences  for
             which the appellant was  sentenced  to  two-and-a-half  years'
             imprisonment, and the Immigration Judge attached  too  little
             weight to the other positive  factors  which  weighed  in  the
             appellant's favour.  These are factors such as the duration of
             time that the appellant has spent in this  country;  the  fact
             that he had a wife  and  children  here,  with  one  of  which
             children the appellant was living.  Mr Ahmed submits that the
             Immigration Judge took  insufficient  account  of  the  wider
             family members of the appellant who are living in this country
             and so forth.

         42.  First of all, it must be said that all of the factors of  this
             nature,  the  positive  factors  which  Mr Ahmed  says  were
             insufficiently taken into account, were all mentioned  in  the
             reasoned decision of the Immigration Judge.  This is  not  an
             argument that matters were ignored; it  is  an  argument  that
             insufficient weight was given to some  matters  and  excessive
             weight was given to other matters.

         43.  There are  two  problems  with  this  submission.   The  first
             problem is that matters of weight are for the  first  instance
             court or tribunal.  This court will not intervene  unless  the
             first instance court or tribunal  has  attached  a  degree  of
             weight to factors which it could  not  reasonably  attach,  or
             alternatively the tribunal has attached so  little  weight  to
             particular factors that it could not properly take that  view.
              I simply  do  not  think  that  this  case  falls  into  that
             category; the degree of weight  which  the  Immigration Judge
             attached to both positive  and  negative  factors  reflects  a
             perfectly possible and reasonable approach to the material  in
             this case."

11. Mr Clark submitted that if the matter was to be reheard the approach to
    the daughters of the appellant should be looked at differently.

12. In conclusion it is clear that the challenge by the Secretary of  State
    is in the application of the legal test by the  judge  in  relation  to
    Paragraph 276ADE and the weight given by the judge to the  factors  set
    out in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (not 2004 as referred to in the grounds).

13. On a careful reading of the decision of Judge Samini I note that  there
    was no challenge to the factual findings  made  by  the  judge  in  the
    grounds for permission to appeal.  I am not persuaded in any  way  that
    the judge has applied the incorrect test.  She has clearly set out  the
    test at paragraph 4 and again at paragraph 5 of her decision.  Not only
    did Judge Samini set out the correct test but at paragraph  5  explains
    why she found the test applied in the reasons for the refusal letter of
    the Secretary of State to be incorrect, addressed this matter in  court
    with the representatives and clearly set out the correct version in her
    decision.

14. It is to my mind, on reading the decision as a whole, not a  legitimate
    challenge to find that the judge did not have in mind the correct legal
    test.  I can appreciate that  at  paragraph  8  the  judge  states  "in
    relation to the consideration  of  the  relevant  test;  namely  as  to
    whether there are significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration
    to life in Nigeria" that the judge has  referred  only  to  significant
    obstacles, with inserting the adverb 'very', but the judge has  already
    directed herself appropriately and correctly in the previous paragraphs
    and I conclude that this is merely a slip of typing.

15. As stated above there was no challenge to the facts and the judge found
    that the "appellant has effectively lost family, and social  ties  with
    Nigeria and that the above factors constitute significant obstacles  to
    her returnability  to  live  in  safety  and  security  in  Nigeria  in
    accordance with the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(6)".

16. The judge set out in paragraph 8 the various factors that the appellant
    had experienced such as the loss of ties with  her  family  friends  in
    Nigeria, the death of her son who was suffering from  ill-health,  that
    the appellant's husband had remarried, that  she  had  severed  contact
    with her two daughters, her health of severe depression and HIV and the
    fact that she had a considerable support network in the United  Kingdom
    and the societal stigma associated with HIV on return to Nigeria.   The
    judge at paragraph 9 went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  ties  in
    Nigeria. The judge also considered her financial circumstances  finding
    that her friends had supported her but also noting at [15] that she and
    her son had relied on the NHS services.  The judge overall  found  that
    she was a 'single woman with no  home  or  family  to  return  to'  and
    someone 'in challenging circumstances'.  The judge took account of  the
    public interest [14].  She noted at [15] that she could speak  English.
    The  decision  read  as  a  whole  demonstrates  that  the  judge   has
    considered the relevant facts under Section 117B.

17. Overall I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  had  directed  herself
    incorrectly under the Immigration Rules and as such  the  criticism  in
    relation to her application of Section 117B does not apply.

18. The grounds of challenge are effectively a disagreement with the weight
    that the judge has attached to the particular facts  as  found  and  as
    such it is a matter open to the judge as to  how  she  evaluated  those
    facts in accordance with Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR  1360.   It
    is clear that the judge considered all the relevant evidence as she  is
    obliged to do and came to a decision on each of  the  factors  and  the
    factors in the round.  The judge when attaching weigh  to  the  various
    factors cited caselaw including Forman SS 117A Consideration [2015] 412
    (IAC) and appropriately directed  herself in law.

19. The judge was aware of the immigration history of the  appellant  which
    was recited  from  the  Secretary  of  State  documentation  [1].   The
    appellant entered the UK  lawfully with her son who died  in  2014  and
    the appellant subsequently developed  depression  [7].   The  judge  at
    paragraph  [16]  of  her  decision  referred  to  the   public   policy
    considerations and the interests of immigration control  but  concluded
    that in the circumstances they  were  outweighed  by  the  factors  and
    circumstances.

20. The facts in this particular case are indeed highly fact-sensitive  and
    although  the  judge's  findings  may  have  been  generous  they  were
    nonetheless open to her and the challenge is merely a disagreement with
    her findings.  I am not persuaded that she erred in her application  of
    Paragraph  276ADE  and  as  such  the  second  challenge  falls   away.
    Nonetheless I have also given my reasons for rejecting this challenge.



Notice of Decision

21. The decision of Judge Samini shows no material error of law  and  shall
    stand.



Signed                                  Date 12th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
