
IAC-FH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/10965/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2014 & 22nd January 2015     |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   R K K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Aloud, Counsel instructed by Crater Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hague made
    following a hearing at Stoke on 29th May 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jordan born on 5th March 1989.   He  last
    entered the UK on 25th January 2012, as a visitor, although he has made
    twelve visits here in the preceding ten years.

 3. On 10th April 2012 he applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent relative of a person present and settled in the UK.   He  was
    refused on 9th January 2014, on the basis that  he  did  not  meet  the
    relationship requirements set out in Rule 317.  The Respondent did  not
    consider that the Appellant  had  raised  anything  of  a  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate nature which would justify his remaining in
    the UK on an exceptional basis.  Consideration was given to  the  Rules
    brought in on 9th July 2012 in relation to private life and, since  the
    Appellant did not qualify under the Rules, leave was refused.

 4. The Appellant appealed on the grounds that the Secretary of  State  had
    unlawfully applied the new Rules to an  application  made  before  they
    came into effect and had not properly considered the appeal on  Article
    8 principles.

 5. The crux of the Appellant's case is that he is required  to  help  with
    his aunt in the care of her terminally ill eldest son who is profoundly
    disabled and suffers from Duchenne muscular dystrophy.   He  is  almost
    entirely paralysed.

 6. In a very brief determination the Judge  said  that  the  argument  was
    academic because the circumstances were not governed by the  Rules  but
    in any event said that he had not been provided with a full account  of
    the family's situation and the resources open to them. He did not  find
    that the Appellant's presence was reasonably necessary for the  purpose
    claimed.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    did not engage with the decision in Edgehill & Another  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 and erred by not conducting a full and  proper  Article  8
    assessment.  He failed to properly consider the  evidence  before  him.
    There was a considerable amount of documentary evidence in the form  of
    statements from family members and medical evidence from the physicians
    caring for the Appellant's cousin which had not been  considered.   The
    judge had not made any credibility findings, merely  stating  that  the
    Appellant's  evidence  was  unsatisfactory  without   saying   why   he
    considered it to be so.  He appeared to believe that he was being given
    a partial picture of the family's circumstances but gave no reasons and
    neither he nor the Respondent put any such concerns to the Appellant at
    the hearing.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 30th October 2014.

 9. On 7th November 2014 the Respondent served a  reply  stating  that  the
    grounds amounted to a disagreement with the decision.

The Hearing

10. Mr Diwnycz relied on the Rule 24 response and said that  he  would  not
    argue that the reasoning in this case was adequate.



Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

11. There was a considerable body of evidence before the  judge  which  did
    not find its way into the determination.

12. His consideration of the Edgehill point is very  brief,  but  it  seems
    that he comes to the conclusion that the matter  should  be  considered
    under the ECHR and said that he was satisfied  that  the  special  care
    needs of a severely disabled youth were capable of  giving  rise  to  a
    protected relationship under Article 8.  He  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on the grounds that he had not been provided  with  a  full  and
    frank account of the family's situation. He appeared  to  believe  that
    the Appellant's uncle was in a position to give the personal care which
    his son needs. He said that the Appellant's answers were  uninformative
    but did not explain why he considered them to be so.

13. The determination is not an adequate consideration of the issues before
    the judge. Following Edgehill, he ought  to  have  concluded  that  the
    Respondent was wrong not to have applied the  transitional  provisions,
    and to have materially relied on the new Rules in an  application  made
    before they came into effect.

14. Second, the judge gave no reasons why he considered the evidence to  be
    unsatisfactory in relation to the uncle. There  is  no  record  in  the
    determination of  the  evidence  which  was  given,  and  therefore  no
    analysis which could properly lead  to  the  conclusions  reached.  The
    decision is set aside.

15. It was hoped that it would  be  possible  to  continue  to  remake  the
    decision without the need for an adjournment and I began to  hear  oral
    evidence from the Sponsor.  However it quickly became apparent that she
    had significant evidence on a critical issue, namely evidence from  the
    police in relation to two recent incidents  of  domestic  violence  and
    evidence of an Islamic divorce in 2006 which were not before the  First
    tier Tribunal.

The resumed hearing.

16. The Appellant provided a further bundle  of  documents  and  gave  oral
    evidence as did his aunt, the Sponsor.

17. None of the evidence was contested by Mr Diwnycz who said that  he  was
    not challenging any of it and was not raising any credibility issues at
    all.

18. The facts of this case are as follows.  The Appellant was born  on  5th
    March 1989.  His mother is one of three siblings, one of  whom  is  the
    Sponsor, and the other is the parent of M who has  a  terminal  illness
    and now almost entirely paralysed.

19. M was born on 2nd September 1995 had been ill since  he  was  born.  He
    first came to the United Kingdom in June 2002, as  did  the  Appellant.
    In the same year the Sponsor, who is a nurse, adopted him as her child.



20. The Appellant's evidence is that his house in Jordan was  next  to  M's
    house and as he was the biggest he used to take care of him the most.

21. Between 2002 and 2012 the Appellant made eleven visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom, coming here almost every year, and when he returned to  Jordan
    M often went with him.  When he went  to  Jordan  he  stayed  with  his
    biological parents, which was  next  door  to  the  Appellant  and  the
    Appellant saw him daily. He  was  responsible  for  his  personal  care
    there.  The Appellant estimates that between 2002 and 2012,  which  was
    his last visit to the United Kingdom, he spent about 60%  of  the  time
    with M.

22. The Appellant said that three or four months  after  his  last  arrival
    here M started to deteriorate and his needs increased.   The  Appellant
    has to carry him from his bed to his wheelchair to the commode.  He  is
    unable to do anything for himself and the Appellant washes and  dresses
    him, feeds him and helps him to move his hands.   Presently  he  cannot
    even use his fingers.

23. The Appellant said that he is able to communicate with M  well  because
    he knows from his eyes what he wants.  M is very  frightened  of  being
    touched by strangers and always wants to be with him.  In  August  2012
    the Appellant underwent specialist training in health and  social  care
    so that he would be better able to assist him.

24. The Appellant accepts that social services would be able to offer  some
    help.  M would be entitled to four half hour visits a day but, he said,
    that would be insufficient because he needs turning every two hours.

25. The Appellant himself trained as a ground crew engineer with  Jordanian
    Airways and in order to work as a flight engineer he would be  required
    to do a one year course although there is nothing to prevent him  doing
    that training.

26. The Appellant was asked about his uncle, his aunt's husband and whether
    he would be in a position to help with M.  He said that  his  aunt  and
    uncle lived separately but his uncle  came  once  a  week  to  see  his
    daughters. There was an incident in 2014 when the  police  were  called
    and the uncle was asked to leave the house.   There was  not  a  strong
    bond between either his aunt or uncle or between his uncle and M.   His
    uncle did not provide any financial support to the children and he  did
    not know exactly where he lived.

27. The Sponsor confirmed the Appellant's evidence in every  respect.   She
    said that her marriage had never been happy and  in  2006  she  entered
    into an Islamic divorce with him.  The couple lived together after that
    for a period but for the last three years have been separated  and  she
    regards that as permanent.

Findings and Conclusions

28. The Appellant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent relative was refused by the Respondent  under  paragraph  317
    and it  is  not  disputed  that  he  does  not  meet  the  relationship
    requirements set out in that paragraph.  There is no challenge  to  the
    Respondent's decision under the Immigration Rules.

29. Appendix FM provides  for  persons  in  subsisting  relationships  with
    British citizens or as parents of British citizen children.  Neither is
    applicable in the Appellant's case.

30. Whilst the changes in the Immigration Rules brought in,  in  July  2012
    unify consideration under the Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR, and  are
    a complete code, they cannot foresee every  possible  circumstance  and
    indeed make no provision for the  very  unusual  set  of  circumstances
    which apply in this  particular  case.   Accordingly  the  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  the
    Appellant's leave breaches rights to respect  for  private  and  family
    life under Article 8.

31. Under Section 117A of the 2014  Immigration  Act,  in  considering  the
    public  interest  question,  the  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in Section 117B.

32. Of particular relevance here  is  Section  117B(v)  which  states  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

33. In this case the Appellant's immigration status was precarious in  that
    he had come to the United Kingdom as a  visitor  with  the  expectation
    that he would return to Jordan within six months.   Accordingly  he  is
    not able to succeed on private life grounds.

34. Whilst the existence of family life without more is  accepted  only  in
    the case of relationships between  husband  and  wife  and  parent  and
    dependent infant children, in more remote relationships, the  existence
    of family life  depends  upon  special  dependency  requirements.   The
    existence of family life is a  question  of  fact  in  each  case.   In
    general terms, in order to establish family, it is  necessary  to  show
    that there is real, committed and effective support between the  family
    members and normal emotional ties are not enough.

35. So far as siblings are concerned it  would  be  very  unusual  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 to extend the notion  of  family  life  to  adult
    siblings (Bakir [2002] UKIAT 01176) because  the  relationship  between
    siblings is not one which could be expected to give rise to a permanent
    common household.  It is  possible  to  maintain  family  life  between
    siblings by regular communication and visits.  On the other hand, in  H
    (Somalia) [2004] UKIAT 00027  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  there  was
    family life between siblings where the Appellants had a quasi  parental
    relationship with a Somali refugee Sponsor.

36. In this case the Appellant is not M's brother but his cousin.   However
    it is clear from the evidence that these families have operated as one,
    both in Jordan and the UK.  It was decided at an  early  age  that  the
    Appellant was in the best position to look after M and he has  been  an
    integral part of his care for his entire life. M requires intimate care
    from a male relative which he feels that his aunt  could  not  properly
    supply.

37. The Appellant has demonstrated over the years that he has established a
    quasi sibling relationship with M because it  is  to  him  whom  M  has
    looked to for his care, both in the United Kingdom and in  Jordan.   As
    time has gone by, and as M's situation has deteriorated his needs  have
    increased.

38. The medical evidence is compelling.   Both  the  consultant  paediatric
    respiratory physician and the specialist neuromuscular care advisor  at
    the Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust confirm  the  seriousness
    of M's condition which is said to be  life  limiting.   He  requires  a
    ventilator to support his breathing overnight. The consultant says that
    any change in circumstances or situations is very distressing to M  and
    increases his anxiety.  He is very vulnerable as he has little physical
    ability to move.

39. It is absolutely clear that the relationship between the Appellant  and
    M is characterised by extreme dependency, and this  establishes  family
    life between them.

40. The Appellant's removal would  clearly  be  an  interference  with  the
    Appellant's right to a family life and Mohammed's right to family  life
    with him but would be lawful since he has no basis of stay  in  the  UK
    and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

41. So far as proportionality is concerned  I  am  required  to  take  into
    account the public interest considerations set out in  paragraph  117B.
    The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest, and that persons who seek to enter or remain here are able to
    speak English and are financially independent.

42. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor intending to leave within six
    months, but due to the deterioration in his cousin's condition made  an
    in time application for indefinite leave to remain  which  could  never
    have succeeded under the Immigration Rules.  Those Rules  set  out  the
    circumstances in which persons may make applications for  variation  of
    their leave and the fact that the  Appellant  is  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules is a strong argument in favour of his removal
    from the UK.

43. He does speak English, and gave his evidence in English, but this is of
    less relevance in this case since the basis  upon  which  he  seeks  to
    remain is sadly time limited; his cousin is unlikely to live  for  many
    more years.

44. So far as the economic interests of the United Kingdom are concerned he
    is supported by his aunt, but more relevantly,  he  is  performing  the
    role of carer to his cousin which would otherwise fall  to  the  public
    purse.  There would therefore be a disbenefit to the United Kingdom  if
    the Appellant were to be removed since the costs of caring for M in his
    absence are considerable.

45. M's interests must also be considered.  The  unchallenged  evidence  is
    that he is wholly dependent upon the Appellant for all of his  personal
    care and that the kind of care which  his  cousin  provides  cannot  be
    matched by professional help offered by social services either in terms
    of the amount of hours given or in the quality of the care.

46. This is not  a  case  in  which  the  Appellant  has  recently  assumed
    responsibility for his cousin.  It is clear that he has done  so  since
    he himself was a child and since  M  was  very  young.   It  is  not  a
    relationship which can simply be replaced by professional carers coming
    in for half hourly visits.  If M's  situation  was  less  extreme,  the
    situation would be entirely different.  However, in these circumstances
    I conclude that it would be disproportionate for the  Appellant  to  be
    removed.

Notice of Decision

47. The original judge erred in law.  This  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 22nd January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

