
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10493/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |On 29 November 2013          |
|Prepared 7 November 2013                      |                             |

                                   Before

                                  LORD BOYD
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                             basharat ul farooq
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor W M Rees, instructed by Messrs Haq
Hamilton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan appeals, with permission,  against
    a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McIntosh  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3 September 2013 dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave
    to remain under the long residence Rules.

2.   The appellant's application was made on 3 July 2012 before  the  coming
    into force of the new Rules and was  therefore  dealt  with  under  the
    provisions  of  paragraphs  276B(i)(a)  and  (i)(b)  of  HC  395.   The
    appellant did not contend that he had lived for ten  years  legally  in
    Britain but rather that  he  had  lived  here  without  permission  for
    fourteen years.

3.   The judge, having  noted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  stated  in
    paragraph 24 of the determination that she had considered the rights of
    the appellant to remain under paragraph 276B(i)(a) and  found  that  he
    had not done so.  It was of course never claimed by the appellant  that
    he had done so.

4.   In the following paragraph the judge stated  that  she  considered  the
    rights of the appellant to remain in Britain pursuant to Article  8  of
    the ECHR and in that regard had considered  the  appellant's  right  to
    private life under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   She
    found that the appellant could not succeed under that Rule.

5.   With regard to the issue of the appellant's rights under Article 8  she
    stated that:-

         "26. With regard to the appellant's claim to an established private
             life; I find that if the appellant has been in  the  UK  since
             2000 and has worked intermittently during that period that  he
             has established a private life in the United Kingdom,  however
             I find that the decision to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
             remain  is  a  lawful  decision  which  interferes  with   the
             appellant's private life.  I also find that  the  interference
             is  reasonable  and  proportionate  and  that  there  are   no
             compelling grounds for the appellant to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom.  The appellant is a mature adult male who  spent  the
             majority of his  adult  life  in  Pakistan.   I  find  at  its
             highest, that the appellant's case is that he has been in  the
             UK since 2000 and  is  able  to  return  to  Pakistan  to  re-
             establish his life there."

6.   The grounds of appeal claim that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    rights of the appellant under paragraph 276B(i)(b) - the  paragraph  on
    which the appellant had based his claim.  It was  further  argued  that
    her analysis of the Article 8 rights of the appellant was  insufficient
    given the fact that there was evidence before her  that  the  appellant
    had lived  and  worked  in  Britain  for  many  years  and  there  were
    statements from a number of friends here.

7.   The grounds also allege that the judge  had  not  adjourned  the  claim
    when the  appellant's  representative  withdrew  from  acting  and  the
    appellant had asked for an adjournment.  Finally they commented on  the
    fact that the judge had placed weight on the fact  that  the  appellant
    had, at the beginning  of  the  hearing  stated  that  he  adopted  his
    statement then had later stated that  the  application  form  had  been
    submitted without being read over to him.  It was argued that the judge
    had been wrong to have relied on these  two  statements  and  concluded
    that the appellant's evidence was inconsistent.

8.   We have considerable sympathy with the judge as it was clear  that  the
    circumstances of the appellant's appeal  were  far  from  satisfactory.
    Nevertheless, we conclude that there were material errors of law in the
    determination in that the judge, although it is correct that  she  made
    certain findings throughout the  determination  which  related  to  the
    appellant's claim to have lived in Britain for fourteen years, did  not
    clearly focus  on  that  issue.   Furthermore,  we  consider  that  her
    approach to the issue of the appellant's rights under Article 8 was  in
    error given the totality of the appellant's evidence and the fact  that
    she did not weigh up that evidence and consider whether or not  removal
    of the appellant would be disproportionate.

9.   We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    It is our conclusion that it would be appropriate  for  the  appeal  to
    proceed to a hearing afresh in the First-tier as we are satisfied  that
    this is an appeal where the  requirements  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, paragraph 7.2(a) are met.

10.  We therefore allow the appeal before the Upper Tribunal to the  limited
    extent that it is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh.

Directions

1.   This appeal is to proceed to a hearing on all issues in the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House on 3 January 2014.

2.   An Urdu interpreter is required.

3.   The appellant's representatives will prepare and serve an  indexed  and
    paginated bundle of all documents on which they wish  to  rely  at  the
    hearing.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


