




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                       Appeal Number:
IA/10731/2015

                                       IA/10732/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |         Decision and Reasons           |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 26 June 2017                    |         On 05 July 2017                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                          Mrs Laxmi Ghimire Basnet
                               Mr Kush Basnet
                       (No Anonymity Directions Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Nepal, born on 29 March  1986  and  17
      June 1984 respectively. They are husband and wife. I  shall  refer  to
      the first appellant as the appellant. She came to the UK to  study  at
      the London School of Management and Science and her  husband  came  as
      her dependant.

   2. The appellant's leave to remain was extended until 31  December  2014.
      Her application made on 30 December 2014 to vary the leave  to  remain
      was refused by the respondent on 5 March 2015.

   3. In her decision promulgated on 23 May 2016, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      R L Head-Rapson, dismissed their appeals  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules and under  Paragraph  276ADE(1)  as  well  as  under
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

   4.  On  26  April  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that
      the Judge had given insufficient weight to the circumstances following
      the earthquake in Nepal. It had been contended that  there  were  very
      significant obstacles to integration into Nepal; that they had nowhere
      to live and would be destitute; that the Judge failed  to  mention  or
      consider whether the effects of the earthquake in Nepal were  such  as
      to amount to significant obstacles to their re-integration into Nepal.
      The Judge had made reference to the evidence but  did  not  list  "the
      objective evidence about the earthquake."

   5. Mr Singer relied on three grounds. First, he asserted that  the  Judge
      failed to have regard to  relevant  facts  in  her  assessment  as  to
      whether the parties met the  requirements  under  Rule  276ADE(1)(vi).
      Notwithstanding her rejection of the appellant's general  credibility,
      the underlying background facts  still  amount  to  "very  significant
      obstacles" to re-integration into Nepal.

   6. The appellants argued that as a result of the  widespread  devastation
      caused by the earthquake, they did not have anywhere to live and would
      be destitute. Hundreds of thousands of people were made  homeless  and
      entire villages were flattened.

   7. He submitted that the  consideration  under  paragraph  276ADE  was  a
      limited assessment by the Judge - namely at paragraphs  54-61  of  the
      determination. There was one single sentence at [58] where  the  Judge
      stated  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
      requirements under paragraph 276ADE as there would not be  significant
      obstacles to her integration in Nepal as she had lived there  most  of
      her life.

   8. There was evidence of devastation following  the  destruction  of  the
      family house. There was oral evidence that  the  home  was  destroyed.
      This was referred to by the Judge at [46] when  the  second  appellant
      stated that the house was no longer there and he would not be able  to
      find work in Nepal.

   9. Mr Singer referred to the decision in Treebhawon and others (NIAA 2002
      Part 5A - Compelling Circumstances Test) [2017] UKUT 00013. There  the
      Upper Tribunal held that:

     a)  where the case of a foreign national who is not an  offender  does
        not satisfy the requirements of the Article 8 ECHR  regime  of  the
        Immigration Rules the test to be  applied  is  that  of  compelling
        circumstances. The Parliamentary intention underlying  Part  5A  of
        the 2002 Act is to give proper effect to Article 8 ECHR.

     b) Thus a private life developed  or  established  during  periods  of
        unlawful or precarious residence might conceivably  qualify  to  be
        accorded more than little weight and under s.117B(4) and (5) are to
        be construed and applied accordingly.

     c) Mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere  hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and
        mere inconvenience, even when multiplied, are unlikely  to  satisfy
        the test of "very significant hurdles" at paragraph 276ADE  of  the
        Immigration Rules.

  10. The Judge failed to have regard to the various factors set out in  the
      policy guidance.  The failure to consider the impact of the earthquake
      and other material  factors  on  the  parties'  re-integration  was  a
      material error of law: R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

  11. Mr Singer submitted in Ground  2  that  the  Judge  failed  to  assess
      whether on his  own  merits,  the  second  appellant  could  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules. He submitted it is evident  from  paragraph
      [61] that the second appellant's appeal was dismissed because his wife
      lost: the Judge stated that the second appellant's appeal  falls  with
      the first appellant's and therefore he did not meet  the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules.

  12. The Judge was however under a duty to  consider  whether  on  his  own
      merits the second appellant could meet the requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. There were  no  factual  findings  on  his
      ability to re-integrate and whether he  would  face  very  significant
      obstacles to re-integration.

  13. The Judge in effect did not undertake  a  broad  evaluative  judgement
      with regard to the adverse circumstances that would be  faced  by  the
      appellants on return.

  14. He also submitted (Ground 3) that as a result of the asserted  errors,
      the Judge's assessment under Article 8 outside the Rules could not  be
      safe.

  15. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kandola noted the assertion  that  the
      Judge's reasoning with regard  to  paragraph  276ADE  as  set  out  at
      paragraph [58] might have been "too simplistic".  However,  the  Judge
      considered the evidence and made proper findings for  her  conclusion.
      She  did  undertake  a  broad  evaluative  assessent.  He   submitted,
      following Treebhawon that mere hardship, hurdles  and  difficulty  and
      upheaval, even when multiplied, do not satisfy  the  very  significant
      hurdles test.

  16. The Judge found that the appellants' evidence was simply not credible.
      In particular, the  first  appellant's  evidence  about  which  family
      members  lived  with  their  son  in  Nepal  contradicted  the  second
      appellant's. She stated that her brother in law resided in the  family
      household whereas the second appellant did not  mention  his  brother.
      The contention therefore that the appellants would not be able to have
      support from his brother was not credible.

  17. The consequent finding at [58] was accordingly justified.

  18. In reply, Mr Singer submitted that the Judge did not go so far  as  to
      reject all the evidence. In any event, the Judge  would  have  had  to
      find that they had not proved that the house was destroyed. There  had
      accordingly been an error of law.

      Assessment

  19. The First-tier Judge has set out  the  relevant  requirements  of  law
      extensively. She took into account the documentary evidence which  had
      been referred to her. She took into account the oral evidence given by
      the  appellants.  She  assessed  the  evidence   of   each   appellant
      separately.

  20. She had regard to the appellant's contention that she had instructed a
      fraudulent agent to assist her in applying for a visa [34-36].

  21. She also had regard to the availability of family in Nepal. She  found
      that both had  close  family  members  there.  Both  had  parents  and
      siblings, together with their five year old son who resides with their
      paternal relatives at the second appellant's family home [43].

  22. The first appellant stated that her son was born  in  London  and  was
      then taken to Nepal in 2011 when he was ten months old. At  that  time
      her husband was ill and she could not look after her  son  [45].   Her
      parents in law and brother in law live with  her  son.  The  appellant
      stated that she had not returned to Nepal as she does not have  enough
      money and needs to take care of her husband [45].

  23. The appellant also contended that she  could  not  return  because  of
      ongoing problems since the earthquake in Nepal. She communicates  with
      her son via Skype regularly [45].

  24. The Judge had regard to the second  appellant's  assertion  that  they
      could not return to Nepal due to the earthquake as they had nowhere to
      live as the house was destroyed [46]. The second  appellant  contended
      that they could not return to live with their son and his family  "due
      to a lot of domestic problems". When asked who  lived  in  his  family
      household, the second appellant did  not  mention  his  brother.  When
      questioned about this, given the  first  appellant's  claim  that  his
      brother resided there, the second appellant stated  that  his  brother
      lives separately, close to the city. He stated that their house is  no
      longer there and he will not be able to find work in Nepal.  That  was
      the nature of the problems [46].

  25. She accordingly found that there  were  many  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence of both appellants.  The  first  appellant's  evidence  about
      which family members lived  together  with  their  son  in  Nepal  was
      contradicted by her husband's.

  26. The Judge did not dispute that the second appellant  received  medical
      treatment for burns  which  required  input  and  appointments  up  to
      December 2012. However, they had given no up to date medical  reports.
      She did not accept that the second appellant  continued  to  regularly
      see his specialist. [48]

  27. There had been no separate contention that the  medical  circumstances
      relating to the second appellant constituted a basis  for  granting  a
      period of leave to remain.   In  any  event  the  treatment  could  be
      continued in Nepal. His current medication was  paracetamol  which  is
      widely available [49].

  28. Her finding  that  the  appellants'  evidence  lacked  credibility  is
      sustainable.

  29. The Judge has properly taken into account their claims, including that
      regarding the lack of accommodation following the earthquake in Nepal.
      She did not find the appellants credible in respect of  their  account
      of why they could not return to Nepal and in particular,  with  regard
      to accommodation.

  30. Although she made no express findings of fact as to where  they  could
      reside on return, the Judge did have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
      appellants' family were residing there and they could be  accommodated
      there. Accordingly the finding that they had failed to establish  that
      they would face significant obstacles to their integration into  Nepal
      must be read in the light of the earlier findings that the Judge  made
      including the adverse credibility findings.

  31. Both have close  family  members  in  Nepal.  Both  have  parents  and
      siblings, including their five year old son who lives with the  second
      appellant's parents at the family home. The first appellant had stated
      that she had not returned to Nepal as she did not  have  enough  money
      and needed to take care of  her  husband  [45].  There  was  never  an
      assertion that she would have nowhere to stay.

  32. The second appellant was directly asked if they could  not  return  to
      live with their son and his family and he stated that they  could  not
      do so on account of his alleged domestic problems.

  33. The second appellant also contended that his brother lived  separately
      whereas his wife claimed that he resided with his family at the  home.
      When asked about the nature of "these problems"  he  stated  that  the
      house was no longer there and he would not be able  to  find  work  in
      Nepal.

  34. The Judge also considered the claim  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention. She had regard to s.117A and B of the 2002 Act. She
      followed the "five stage process" in Razgar, at [69]. She did not find
      that there were any unique or  exceptional  circumstances  applicable.
      Their return would be proportionate in the circumstances [69].

  35. Although the Judge might have been more expansive with regard  to  the
      reasons for the findings she  made,  she  has  taken  account  of  the
      contentions and evidence regarding the availability  of  accommodation
      following the earthquake.   She  has  given  proper  reasons  for  her
      finding that there would  not  be  very  significant  difficulties  in
      returning  to  live  in  Nepal.   She  also  found  that  it   was   a
      proportionate interference  to  expect  them  to  return  to  Nepal  -
      [69(iii)].


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a point of  law.  The  decision  shall
      accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 4 July 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









