
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10550/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Determination Promulgated   |
|On 5 January 2015                             |On 21 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     SR
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Burney Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  19
    September  1987,  against  a  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision  made  on  10
    February 2014 refusing her application for a derivative residence  card
    as the primary carer of her British child born on 17 July 2011. In  the
    light of the fact that it is clear from the papers before me that there
    have been proceedings before the Family  Court  about  the  appellant's
    daughter. I make an order  under  rule  14(1)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Procedure Rules) 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    information relating to the proceedings or any matter  leading  members
    of the public to identify the appellant's child. Failure to comply with
    this order may lead to contempt proceedings.

Background

 2. In brief outline the background to this appeal is  that  the  appellant
    entered the UK with leave as a student on 12 December 2009 and this was
    extended on two occasions to 11  April  2014.  On  17  April  2013  she
    applied for a derivative right of residence as the primary carer of her
    child who she claimed was a British national  on  the  basis  that  his
    father had indefinite leave to remain in the UK  at  the  time  of  her
    birth.

 3. The appellant claimed that she was the sole carer of her  daughter  who
    was fully dependent on her. But her application was refused because she
    had submitted no evidence as to why the child's father  was  not  in  a
    position to care for her if the appellant was required to leave the UK.
    Further enquiries by the respondent revealed that  the  child's  father
    had applied for naturalisation on 22 October 2013 and his ceremony  was
    approved on 11 December 2013. The address he had  given  was  the  same
    address as given for the appellant on her application for the residence
    card. It was the respondent's view that this suggested that the child's
    father currently lived with the family and that there was  insufficient
    evidence why he could not continue to do so and care for the  child  if
    the appellant was required to leave the UK. The full  reasons  for  the
    respondent's decision are set out  in  the  decision  letter  dated  10
    February 2014.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision and at the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal she gave evidence that  the  relationship  with
    her child's father had broken down and that  he  had  divorced  her  in
    February 2012. She had formed a relationship with  the  landlord  where
    she was living, they subsequently married and she was pregnant with his
    child. She also gave evidence about her former  husband  continuing  to
    use the external mail box at her home.

 5. At the hearing the presenting officer confirmed  that  the  appellant's
    current husband had a human rights appeal outstanding and noted that he
    had submitted an  affidavit  which  corroborated  key  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case [9].

 6. The judge summarised his findings as follows:

         "11. While I accept that the appellant is the primary carer of  the
         British child and that the post box at her home is accessible  from
         outside the building it was made clear  in  the  refusal  that  the
         decision to refuse her derivative residence card  did  not  require
         her  or  the  child  to  leave  the  United   Kingdom.   In   these
         circumstances the appeal must fail. Further for the same reason her
         Article 8 rights are not engaged at this stage.


         12. Her claim should be considered at the same time as her  current
         husband's. At that hearing she may have to explain why her  husband
         would go to the trouble of checking her mailbox for his mail rather
         than giving out his own  arguably  much  more  convenient  address.
         Without such an explanation I find reason to  doubt  evidence  that
         her ex-husband plays no role in the child's upbringing. I  am  also
         surprised that she did  not  bring  the  children  to  the  hearing
         alternatively made no  attempt  to  provide  alternative  childcare
         arrangements so that her current husband could attend the hearing."




The Grounds and Submission

 7. In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred in law in that  having
    found that the appellant was the primary carer of a  British  child  he
    should then have  concluded  that  she  was  entitled  to  a  right  of
    residence in the light of the provisions of para 15A of the Immigration
    (European Area) Regulations 2006 as amended. It is then argued that the
    only findings the judge made with respect  to  the  child's  biological
    father related to the evidence about him checking the mailbox but there
    was no reference to the Family Court proceedings. Further, it is argued
    that simply because the decision to  refuse  the  application  did  not
    require the appellant or the child to leave the UK it  did  not  follow
    that she was not entitled to an order and the judge was  wrong  in  law
    not to deal with the appeal accordingly. The grounds also challenge the
    decision on Article 8 grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge had erred in  law  in  basing
    his  decision  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  derivative
    residence card on the fact that  she  and  the  child  were  not  being
    required to leave the UK.

 9. Ms Iqbal adopted the grounds maintaining the argument that having found
    that the appellant was the child's primary carer, the judge should have
    gone on to allow the appeal. However, she accepted in discussion during
    submissions that the judge had failed to deal adequately if at all with
    the issue of whether the child would be unable to reside in the  UK  or
    another EU State if the appellant was  required  to  leave.  Mr  Tarlow
    conceded that the judge had erred in law in the way he had  dealt  with
    the appeal in [11] on the basis that regardless of whether the decision
    required her to leave the UK, she was still entitled to a  decision  on
    her application under the regulations.

The Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  err  in  law  by  dismissing  the
    application under the  regulations  for  a  derivative  residence  card
    simply on the basis that the decision did not require the appellant  or
    her child to leave the UK. That might well be a proper reason  for  not
    considering the separate appeal  under  Article  8  but  it  is  not  a
    justification for failing to make a finding  on  whether  the  relevant
    requirements of  the  regulations  relating  to  derivative  rights  of
    residence were met.

11. The judge commented in his decision that the appellant's  claim  should
    be considered at the same time as her current husband's. On that basis,
    the proper course in these circumstances would have been for the appeal
    to be adjourned so that it  could  be  heard  with  an  appeal  by  her
    husband.

12.  For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept the submission that having
    found that the appellant was the child's primary carer it followed that
    the appellant could meet the requirements of the regulations. The  onus
    was on the appellant to show that her child would be unable  to  reside
    in the UK or another EEA State if she were required to leave: para  15A
    (4a)(c). It is clear  from  the  judge's  decision  that  he  had  very
    considerable concerns about the role the child's father played  in  her
    life and whether and to what extent he had contact. However, he made no
    findings on those matters and did not address the issue of  whether  he
    would be able to provide the relevant care were the appellant  to  have
    to leave the UK.

13. I am satisfied that these errors of law  are  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside. Both Ms Iqbal and Mr Tarlow agreed that the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-
    made afresh by a different judge. I  agree  that  this  is  the  proper
    course  and  the  appeal  will  be  remitted  accordingly  for  a  full
    rehearing.

Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside. The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-
    made afresh. An anonymity order is made  as  set  out  in  paragraph  1
    above.






Signed   Date 20 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


