

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number:
IA/10595/2015






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 July 2016                             |On 15 July 2016                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YASIR ARAFAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hancox instructed by Bukhari Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although this is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
      decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Archer)  allowing  Yasir
      Arafat's appeal, I will for  convenience  continue  to  refer  to  the
      parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.





Introduction

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 9  March  1989.
      He entered the United Kingdom on 11 February 2011 with entry clearance
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  His leave was valid until  30  October
      2013.  He applied for further leave to remain as a  student  but  that
      was refused on 18 June 2014 with no right of appeal.

   3. A subsequent application for leave based upon his private  and  family
      life was made on 29 August 2014 but was subsequently withdrawn.  On 10
      February 2015, the appellant made a further application as the  spouse
      of a British citizen.  On 24 December  2014,  he  had  married  Farhat
      Kousar, a British citizen.

   4. On 4 March 2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      application for further leave based on his  private  and  family  life
      under the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and also under Article
      8.  On 9 March 2015, the Secretary of State made a decision to  remove
      the  appellant  to  Pakistan  as  an  overstayer  under  s.10  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.



The First-Tribunal's Decision

   5. The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by Judge Archer on 15 September 2015.

   6. The focus of Judge Archer's decision was upon the "partner" rule in R-
      LTRP in Appendix FM.  The Secretary of  State  had  concluded  in  her
      decision letter that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  'suitability'
      requirements as he fell within S-LTR.2.2., namely that he  had,  in  a
      previous application,  submitted  a  false  document  namely  a  TOEIC
      English language certificate obtained from ETS having  used  a  proxy-
      taker for part of the test.

   7. In his determination,  Judge  Archer  found  (at  para  17)  that  the
      Secretary of State had failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  upon
      her to prove this deception in the absence of any  supporting  witness
      statement or printouts relating to the appellant.

   8. Judge Archer did not, however, go on to consider whether the appellant
      met the substantive requirements of R-LTRP as a  "partner".   Although
      it had been accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  appellant's
      marriage was a genuine and subsisting one, it was  not  accepted  that
      the appellant met the requirements of the Rules,  in  particular  EX.1
      because it had not been established that  there  were  "insurmountable
      obstacles" to the appellant and his wife continuing their family  life
      in Pakistan.  Instead, Judge Archer concluded that the decision of the
      Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law  and  that  the
      application for leave should be reconsidered by the Secretary of State
      in the light of all the evidence.  In addition, Judge Archer  made  no
      decision in respect of Article 8 outside the Rules.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   9. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
      First, the judge had erred in law in concluding that the Secretary  of
      State had failed to prove that the appellant  had  submitted  a  false
      document with his earlier application.  Secondly, the judge was  wrong
      in law  to  allow  the  appeal  without  considering  the  substantive
      requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and,  instead,  leaving  the
      Secretary of State to reconsider the application on the basis that her
      decision was not in accordance with the law.

  10. On 10 March 2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grant-Hutchison)
      granted the Secretary of State permission  to  appeal  on  ground  two
      only.  Permission was refused on ground one.

  11. At the hearing before me, Mr Richards, on behalf of the  Secretary  of
      State, did not seek to maintain the challenge to the judge's  decision
      in respect of the suitability requirement and  his  finding  that  the
      Secretary  of  State  had  not  established  that  the  appellant  had
      submitted a false document in support  of  his  previous  application.
      However, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had erred in law by,  in
      effect, remitting the application back to the Secretary of  State  for
      reconsideration.  Mr Richards submitted that  the  judge  should  have
      considered the evidence and determined the appeal on the basis of  the
      Immigration  Rules  and  whether  the  appellant  had  satisfied   the
      substantive requirements for leave as a "partner" under Appendix FM.

  12. Mr  Hancox,  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  it  was
      appropriate for Judge Archer to remit the case back to  the  Secretary
      of  State  to  determine  the  application   under   the   substantive
      requirements  of  the  relevant  rules  in  Appendix  FM.   Mr  Hancox
      submitted that this would be the proper way to consider, for  example,
      new circumstances that have arisen since the decision namely that  the
      appellant's wife is pregnant.



Discussion

  13. I accept Mr Richards' submissions.

  14. In my judgment, Judge Archer erred in law by allowing  the  appeal  on
      the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law and, in
      effect, remitting the application for reconsideration by the Secretary
      of State.  There may be some circumstances in  which  that  course  is
      justified but it was not in this appeal where the Secretary  of  State
      had given consideration in her  decision  letter  to  the  substantive
      requirements of the Rules.  She had concluded that the appellant could
      not meet all the requirements, including the substantive requirements,
      of the Rules.  Judge Archer's decision did not engage with, let  alone
      set  aside,  the  Secretary  of  State's  adverse  findings   on   the
      substantive requirements.  The proper course for Judge Archer  was  to
      consider whether  the  appellant  had  established  that  he  met  the
      requirements of the "partner" rules in  Appendix  FM  both  (as  Judge
      Archer in fact did) in respect of the suitability requirement and also
      (as Judge Archer did not) the substantive requirements of  the  rules.
      In other words determine the appeal on the ground in s.84(1)(a) of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002: whether "the decision is
      not in accordance with the immigration rules".

  15. I do not accept Mr Hancox submission that remittal to the Secretary of
      State to reconsider the application was the appropriate  mechanism  to
      enable the appellant to have any new circumstances considered.   Those
      new circumstances could, and should, have been considered by the First-
      tier Tribunal in determining whether the appellant met the substantive
      requirements of  the  "partner"  rule.   The  judge  was  required  to
      consider  any  matter  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision
      including any matter "arising after the date of decision" (see s.85(4)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

Decision and Disposal

  16. For the above reasons, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
      in allowing the appellant's  appeal  and,  in  effect,  remitting  the
      application for reconsideration to the Secretary of State.

  17. The proper disposal of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      required the First-tier Tribunal to consider, and make findings  upon,
      whether the appellant met the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
      (in particular the "partner" Rules) and whether the decision  breached
      Article 8.

  18. Consequently, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow
      the appellant's appeal and  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to decide whether the appellant meets the requirements of the
      relevant Immigration Rules.

  19. In doing so, Judge Archer's finding that the Secretary  of  State  has
      not  established  that  the  appellant  fell  within  the  suitability
      requirement in S-LTR.2.2. shall stand.

  20. In all the circumstances, the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be reheard on that basis  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
      Archer.






                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 15 July 2016
