
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10760/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2016                           |On 6th October 2016           |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                  MR O I A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bloomer (instructed by Sabz, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
      permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons promulgated by Judge
      Hodgkinson on 4th February 2016.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who had appealed a  decision  of
      the Secretary of State to refuse him leave to remain on the  basis  of
      his private and family life.

   3. The Appellant relied on his relationship with his two children.  He is
      no longer in a relationship with their  mother  but  has  regular  and
      frequent contact and a Family Court order to that effect.

   4. The Judge noted that  it  was  accepted  that  he  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   5. The Judge considered Article 8 outside the Rules and considered, as he
      was  obliged  to  do,  the  factors  identified  in  s.117B   of   the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   6. The Judge's findings, unchallenged by the  Secretary  of  State,  were
      that the Appellant was not liable to deportation, had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with his qualifying children  and  it
      would be unreasonable to expect those children to leave the UK.

   7. The Judge went on to nevertheless dismiss the appeal.

   8. The Judge erred in his application of s.117B(6).  MA (Pakistan) [2016]
      EWCA Civ 705 confirms that if an  applicant  satisfies  s.117B(6)  his
      appeal should succeed.

   9. At paragraphs 19 and 20 of MA Lord Justice Elias says:-

      "In my judgment,  therefore,  the  only  questions  which  courts  and
      tribunals need to ask when applying section 117B(6) are the following:


         (1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section 117B  is
         inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually be found in
         section 117C.


         (2) Does the applicant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with the child?


         (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?


         (4) Is it unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom?


      If the answer to the first question is no,  and  to  the  other  three
      questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article 8 is infringed".



  10. Accordingly that provides a  complete  answer  to  this  appeal.   The
      answers to the first question is no and to the other three yes and  so
      removing the Appellant would be a disproportionate breach  of  Article
      8.

  11. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law.  His decision is
      set aside, but his factual findings preserved.

  12. I redecide the appeal and allow it.

   Decision


   The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


   Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008


   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is
   granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  Failure to comply
   with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 5th October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin







