
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 October 2016                             |On 01 November 2016           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                Elizabeth [O]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Okunowo, of TolTops Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent to refuse the
    appellant's application for a derivative residence card under
    Regulations 15A and 18A of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the
    2006 Regulations").

 2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Nigeria born on 19 May 1982, made an
    application for a residence card on the basis that she is the primary
    carer of a British citizen child born on 18 February 2014 who would be
    unable to reside in the UK if she were required to leave.

 3. The reason given by the respondent for refusing the application was
    that the appellant's son obtained his British citizenship through his
    claimed father but it was questionable whether the claimed father was
    indeed his actual father.  It was noted that the appellant failed to
    provide DNA test results and had not explained the fact that she was
    not residing in the UK when her son was conceived.  She also failed to
    provide any evidence why the purported father was not able to care for
    the child and to demonstrate that she was the primary carer.

 4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako, whose decision
    was promulgated on 21 April 2016.

 5. The judge stated that the Secretary of State was entitled to entertain
    and act upon doubts about previous information provided in support of a
    nationality application.  Having heard the appellant give oral evidence
    the judge found her to be vague and unable to explain either why she
    came to the UK or the timing of key events in her narrative.  He found
    the appellant's description of her son's father obtaining a UK passport
    for her son without her knowledge improbable and concluded that the
    appellant was not the parent of a British child.

 6. The judge went on to find that even if the appellant's child was
    British, she had failed to establish she was his primary carer. At
    paragraph [25] the judge stated:

         "Even if the question of paternity, which is the principal ground
         of refusal, were to be put to one side, it would take more evidence
         than has been adduced in this case to reach the conclusion that the
         appellant is indeed the primary carer of her son.  This matter
         cannot simply be assumed and where there has been false or
         unreliable evidence adduced it is not possible to rely on the word
         of the appellant without more".

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge improperly focused on the
    child's nationality when the judge was not competent to make a decision
    in this regard. The child's citizenship has not been revoked and could
    not be disputed.  It was argued that the only issue should have been
    whether the appellant is the child's primary carer and on this issue
    the judge failed to consider key evidence, in particular a letter from
    the appellant's GP.  The grounds also argue that the appeal should have
    been considered under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Consideration

 8. Having heard submissions from Mr Okunowo and Ms Fijiwala, I find that
    the judge has made two errors which are both material to the outcome of
    this appeal.

 9. The first error was to question the citizenship of the appellant's
    child. Chapter 55 of The UK Visas and Immigration Nationality
    Instructions (headed "deprivation and nullity of British citizenship")
    explains the circumstances in which a person may be deprived of British
    citizenship.  At paragraph 55.7.5 the guidance states that in general
    the Secretary of State may not deprive of British citizenship a person
    who was a minor on the date he applied for citizenship unless it is in
    the public interest to do so.

10. The appellant's son was undoubtedly a minor when the application for
    citizenship was made.  No evidence has been put forward to suggest that
    it is in the public interest to deprive him of his citizenship and at
    the hearing before me Ms Fijiwala accepted that the nationality of the
    appellant's son was not at issue.  In these circumstances I am
    satisfied that the judge made a material error of law by finding that
    the appellant was not the mother of a British child.

11. The second error of law concerns the judge's assessment of whether the
    appellant was the primary carer of her son. The judge concluded she was
    not on the basis he did not find her to be a truthful witness. The
    judge was entitled (and had good reason) to find the appellant not
    credible, but that does not mean material documentary evidence could be
    ignored.

12. The evidence before the judge included a letter from the appellant's GP
    which stated that the appellant was the sole person who brought her son
    to the surgery and was the surgery's only point of contact for her son.
    This letter constitutes clear and unambiguous evidence supportive of
    the appellant's claim. Whilst arguably it may not of itself be
    sufficient to establish that she meets the requirements under 15A of
    the 2006 Regulations, it was an error of law for the judge to fail to
    address this evidence.

13. Having advised the parties that I found there to be a material error of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I invited them to make
    submissions in respect of the re-making of the appeal.

14. Mr Okunowo sought to introduce further evidence in support of the
    claim.  Despite failure to apply in a timely manner Ms Fijiwala raised
    no objection and therefore the evidence is admitted. One of the items
    adduced was a letter dated 3 October 2016 from the nursery manager at
    the nursery attended by the appellant's son.  The letter states that
    they have the appellant on their records as her son's mother and she is
    the person that drops and collects him from nursery.  Moreover they
    note that it is her address that is on their record as the appellant's
    son's home.

15. In re-making this decision the issue for me to determine is whether the
    appellant satisfies the requirements of Regulation 15A(4A) in the 2006
    Regulations whereby she must establish that:

      a) she is the primary carer of a British citizen;

      b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom; and

      c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or
         at another EEA state if she were required to leave.

16. In order to satisfy the definition of a primary carer (at Regulation
    15A(7)) the appellant must show she is the person who has primary
    responsibility for her son's care.

17. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the appellant's son is
    a British citizen.  This was not disputed before me. The only issues to
    be resolved, therefore, are whether the appellant is her son's primary
    carer and whether her son would be unable to reside in the UK (or
    elsewhere in the EEA) if she were required to leave the UK.

18. I accept the point made by Ms Fijiwala that judge Afako for good reason
    found the appellant to not be credible.  However the evidence before me
    in the form of a letter from the appellant's son's GP and from his
    school overwhelmingly supports the view that the appellant is her son's
    primary carer.  In oral evidence at the rehearing the appellant stated
    that she has no contact with her son's father and that there is no-one
    other than her responsible for her son's care.

19. Having considered the documentary evidence referred to above along with
    the appellant's oral evidence before me, I am satisfied that the burden
    of proof has been discharged to establish that, on the balance of
    probabilities, the appellant is her son's primary carer and that if she
    were to leave the UK her son would be unable to remain without her as
    there would be no one to care for him.

20. As the requirements under the 2006 Regulations are satisfied the appeal
    is allowed.


Decision


1. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
   and is set aside.


2. I remake the said decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 28 October 2016               |

