
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: iA/10826/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |On 3 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                                 MS OLAIDE RAMON ODUNTAN
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant

And

                   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                               Respondent

For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Mr Mtisi, Obeseki Solicitors, London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 11 September  1967.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  18  March  2013
    refusing her a residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Her appeal was heard by Designated Judge David  Taylor
    on 19 August 2013.  He dealt with it on the  papers.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 26 August 2013.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baker on 18 September 2013.
     The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on the basis  that  there
    was no evidence of whether the claimed proxy marriage between a  Polish
    citizen and a Nigerian citizen is valid in  Polish  law.   The  grounds
    state that this issue was raised by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    first  time  in  the  determination,  without  any  reference  to   the
    respondent or the appellant and so there was  a  procedural  error,  as
    both parties should have been  given  notice  of  this  point  so  that
    relevant  submissions  could  be  made.   They  go  on  to  state  that
    consideration should have been given as to whether  the  appeal  should
    have been determined at an oral hearing rather than on the documents.

The Hearing

 3. The appellant's representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  the
    grounds and his skeleton argument and the submissions made at the First-
    tier hearing by the appellant's previous representative.  He  submitted
    that the respondent in the refusal letter electively  quoted  from  the
    COI Report and the judge made the same error.

 4. I was referred to the skeleton argument at paragraph  11  which  quotes
    section 24.19, 24.20 and 24.21 of the COI Report.   The  representative
    submitted that these paragraphs set out  the  position  in  Nigeria  on
    proxy marriages and although proxy marriages are not  recognised  under
    Nigerian civil law, they are recognised under Nigerian  customary  law.
    The COI Report was before the judge.

 5. I was then referred to the case of CB (Brazil) [2008] UKAIT 00080.  The
    appellant's representative submitted  that  had  the  judge  considered
    this, the appeal  would  have  been  allowed.   Instead  he  considered
    whether  this  marriage  would  be  valid  under   Polish   law.    The
    representative submitted that based on this case,  as  the  law  stands
    today, the appellant's appeal should have been allowed  and  the  judge
    made a material error.  He also submitted that as proxy  marriages  are
    valid in Nigeria under customary law, had the judge read the  objective
    evidence, his decision would have been different.  I was asked  to  set
    aside the decision and allow the appeal.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that based on the  said  case  of  CB,
    what the judge has done in his determination is exactly what he  should
    not have done. Because of this  she  had  difficulties  supporting  the
    respondent's position.  She submitted that what the judge did was  look
    at domicile and the case of CB states that this is not what  should  be
    done.

 7. At paragraph 25 of CB it is stated  "The  validity  of  a  marriage  is
    governed in this jurisdiction by the lex loci celebrationis and not the
    domicile of  the  parties.   Accordingly  I  conclude  that  the  judge
    correctly decided that since the lex loci celebrationis in  this  case,
    Brazilian  law,  recognises  proxy  marriages,  the  marriage  of   the
    appellant and his wife is valid under English law and as a  consequence
    the relevant requirements of the EEA Regulations are met."

Determination

 8. I have carefully considered the evidence which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the judge's determination and reasons, based on  what
    was before him.  I have carefully considered the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument and the said case of CB  (Brazil).   On  this  basis,  as  the
    appellant's proxy marriage in Nigeria is valid under customary law,  it
    will be under English law.

 9. The way the judge dealt with the appeal was an error.  Although the law
    of the United Kingdom does not allow proxy marriages to  be  contracted
    here, the United Kingdom recognises proxy marriages if they  are  valid
    under the law of the country, in which they take place,  provided  they
    have been executed properly.

10. That is the case here.  As a consequence the relevant  requirements  of
    the EEA Regulations are met.

                                  DECISION

11. There is a material error of law in the judge's determination and I  am
    setting it aside.

12. The appellant's appeal for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as confirmation of  a  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom, is allowed.

13. Anonymity has not been directed.




Signed                                  Date



Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



