
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 June 2016                      |On 18 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR ERVIN SELITA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee of Counsel, instructed by Tuckers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal V Jones.  The appellant  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Ervin Selita, is  hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the
    applicant".

 2)  The  applicant  is  married   to   a   Slovakian   national,   Adriana
    Melichercikova.  The applicant and his wife entered the UK in May  2007
    and the applicant was granted a residence  card  in  December  of  that
    year.  The couple separated in 2011 but it not disputed that  they  are
    still married and the applicant is a "family member" of an EEA national
    in terms  of  reg.  7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 "(EEA) Regulations".

 3) The applicant made a further application for  a  residence  card  under
    regulation 17  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   This  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 5 February 2014.  The Secretary of State was  not
    satisfied that the applicant's spouse was exercising Treaty  rights  in
    the UK.

 4) The Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  that  the  applicant's
    wife, who did not give oral evidence, had previously worked for Minster
    Cleaning Services but had left  this  employment  on  31  January  2014
    because she was pregnant and had had time off  work  due  to  pregnancy
    related sickness.  The applicant's  wife's  employment  history  showed
    that she had worked as a beauty therapist from 2006 to 2009.  She  then
    received Job Seeker's Allowance for a period.   In  November  2010  she
    began working as a cleaner for Ultraclean Cleaning.  In  February  2011
    her employment was transferred to  Cleandustrial  Services,  where  she
    continued working until April 2011.  She worked  for  Minster  Cleaning
    Services from September 2012 and was working there when  the  applicant
    applied for his residence card in November 2013.   It  seems  she  left
    there at the end of January 2014, shortly before the Secretary of State
    made inquiries in February 2014 as to whether  she  was  still  working
    there.

 5) According to the applicant's wife her next employment was with  Morello
    Ristorante in South Woodford, London, commencing on 31  July  2015  and
    ending in September 2015.  She gave  up  this  employment  because  she
    learned, through checks made  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  her
    employer had not registered her with HMRC  for  PAYE  purposes.   On  1
    October 2015 she began working for Wada Express Ltd.

 6) Notwithstanding these employment difficulties the applicant produced  4
    payslips for his wife covering  her  work  at  the  Morello  Ristorante
    between July and September 2015, together with an original letter  from
    the employer confirming her employment.   In  relation  to  his  wife's
    current employment, the applicant produced a  copy  of  her  employment
    contract stating she is contracted to work for 20 hours a  week.   This
    was supported by a payslip showing 87 hours  worked  in  the  month  of
    October.  This payslip  was,  however,  challenged  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State before the First-tier Tribunal because it was  dated
    5 November 2015.  The judge accepted that it was common  for  employers
    to have fixed pay dates and to pay wages in arrears.

 7) The Secretary of State referred to an  apparent  discrepancy  over  the
    nature of the applicant's wife's employment.  In her witness  statement
    she said she worked as a waitress whereas her contract stated she was a
    production  assistant.   The  applicant  was  unable  to  explain  this
    discrepancy but he believed that his wife was working  as  a  waitress.
    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the applicant's
    wife was working in the UK and exercising Treaty rights  and  therefore
    the appeal was allowed.

 8) The application  for  permission  to  appeal  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State was based on two main grounds.  The first  of  these
    was an alleged failure to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings
    on material matters.  The second  was  making  perverse  or  irrational
    findings on matters that were material to the outcome.  In relation  to
    the first of these grounds it was submitted that the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons for accepting  the
    applicant's wife was a qualified person exercising Treaty rights at the
    date of the hearing.   Reference  was  made  to  the  payslip  dated  5
    November, which was supposedly  for  the  month  of  October,  and  the
    contract stating that the applicant's wife is  a  production  assistant
    whereas  she  is  working  as  a  waitress.   This  evidence  had  been
    challenged on the basis of the apparent contradiction over  the  nature
    of her employment and the anomaly over the date of  the  payslip.   The
    applicant's spouse did not attend the hearing and did not  provide  any
    oral evidence.  The judge found that there was no discrepancy over  the
    date on the payslip and found that despite the apparent discrepancy  in
    the job title, the judge was not persuaded that the employment was  not
    genuine.  The judge stated that job descriptions did not always  convey
    in plain English the exact nature of  the  duties  carried  out  but  a
    clause in the contract required the employer to carry out other  duties
    reasonably required.

 9) The Secretary of State further challenged the judge's  acceptance  that
    the applicant's wife had given up her  job  with  Minster  Cleaning  in
    January 2014 as she was pregnant and had time off work due to pregnancy
    related illness.  This finding was unrelated to the applicant's  wife's
    wage slips.

10) In relation to perversity or  irrationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  made  findings
    in relation to the applicant's wife's employment that were not based on
    the evidence submitted but the judge's own belief.  Given as an example
    of this was the payslip dated 5 November 2015 showing 87  hours  worked
    in the month of October.  The applicant's wife was contracted  to  work
    for 20 hours a week.  The judge had no basis other than assumption  for
    stating that the employer may have fixed pay dates  but  pay  wages  in
    arrears.  There was no evidence to support that there was a  fixed  pay
    date of 5 November.  A similar challenge was  brought  to  the  judge's
    findings in respect of the discrepancy in the evidence over whether the
    applicant's wife was working as a waitress when her contract  described
    her as a production assistant.  There was no evidence dealing with  the
    matter, as recognised by the judge at paragraph 19 of the decision, and
    the finding was based on a further assumption by the judge.   The  role
    of production assistant was entirely different from  that  of  waitress
    and without any evidence before the judge to explain the discrepancy it
    was  irrational  to  assume  that  this  discrepancy  was  resolved  by
    reference to a contractual clause that specified additional duties.

11) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had found that the applicant's wife was a qualified person on
    the basis of assumptions and not evidence.   It  was  further  arguable
    that the judge had  not  taken  into  account  or  properly  considered
    discrepancies in the evidence which had been left unresolved.

Submissions

12) At the start of the hearing before me I was directed by  Mr  Lee  to  a
    supplementary bundle filed on behalf of the applicant on  15  September
    2015, which contained up-to-date information regarding the  applicant's
    wife's employment.  It was this evidence that the Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had made findings in favour of the applicant.

13) For the Secretary of State Mr Bramble submitted that  the  first  issue
    was in relation  to  the  date  of  5  November  2015  on  the  payslip
    supposedly for October 2015.  At paragraph 26 of the decision the judge
    stated that there was  no  discrepancy  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraph 14, but paragraph 14 did not relate to this  issue.   It  was
    paragraph 18 which related to this.  This could be a typing  error  but
    Mr Bramble questioned whether the judge was entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that there was no discrepancy after the date was challenged.
     The judge treated the payslip as a backdated payment.  On  what  basis
    did the judge come to this conclusion?  This was an assumption.

14) Mr  Bramble  referred  to  the  applicant's  wife's  witness  statement
    explaining her change of employment.  For the new job the  salary  slip
    and the  contract  of  employment  were  provided.   According  to  the
    contract the applicant's wife was a production assistant but  according
    to her witness statement she was a waitress.

15) The judge's conclusion on this matter was perverse and  irrational  and
    based on an assumption.  At paragraph 26  the  judge  stated  that  job
    descriptions did not always convey in plain English the exact nature of
    the duties carried out and there was a clause in the contract requiring
    the applicant's wife to carry out other duties.

16) A question was asked about the business of Wada Express, who  were  the
    applicant's wife's employers.  It was explained that this  company  was
    proprietor of a restaurant.

Discussion

17) Having heard from Mr Bramble, I did not consider it necessary  to  hear
    from Mr Lee.  All that  was  necessary  in  this  appeal  was  for  the
    applicant to satisfy the judge that his  EEA  national  spouse  was  in
    employment in the UK at the date of the hearing.  The main evidence  in
    support of this claim was  the  applicant's  wife's  witness  statement
    dated 20 November 2015, the payslip dated  5  November  2015,  and  the
    contract of employment from Wada Express Ltd.

18) At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this  evidence  was
    challenged on the basis that the payslip  was  dated  5  November  2015
    although it purported to be for the month of October, and the  contract
    described the employee's  role  as  production  assistant  whereas  her
    evidence was that she was a waitress.

19) It was confirmed at the hearing before me that  the  business  of  Wada
    Express Ltd was the ownership and running of a restaurant.  It does not
    seem to me to be unreasonable to assume that a production assistant  in
    a restaurant is a term sufficiently broad to encompass the  work  of  a
    waitress.  The term "production assistant" may not  be  plain  English,
    but the judge was entitled to observe  that  job  descriptions  do  not
    always convey in plain English the exact natures of the duties  carried
    out.  The judge did not act unreasonably or perversely in finding  that
    the applicant's wife is employed as  a  waitress  and  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for this finding.

20) So far as the discrepancy over the date of the  payslip  is  concerned,
    the employment started on 1 October 2015  and  the  first  payslip  was
    dated 5 November 2015 for the month of October.   The  judge  commented
    that it was common for employers to pay wages in arrears.   I  consider
    that the judge was entitled  to  make  this  observation,  particularly
    where  the  employment  had  recently  commenced.   There  was  nothing
    perverse or irrational about  this  observation.   The  judge  was  not
    basing the decision  on  an  unjustifiable  assumption  but  giving  an
    adequate explanation and proper reasons for the finding made.

21) I am satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the  decision
    favourable to the applicant for the reasons  which  were  given,  which
    were adequate and sustainable.  I find no error of law in  the  judge's
    decision.

Conclusions

22) The making of the decision did not involve the making or an error on  a
    point of law.

23) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

24) No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have not
    been asked to make such an order and I see no reasons of substance  for
    doing so.


Signed      Date 17th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

