
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10769/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2015                         |On 5th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                BADRUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Fonoshe, Counsel, for Your Right, Solicitors,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  21st  February  1969.
    He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  18th  July
    2013, which decision was to remove an illegal entrant/person subject to
    administrative removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 - asylum/human rights claim refused.  His appeal was heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mitchell on 5th  November  2014.   The
    judge allowed the appeal to the limited extent that he  concluded  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law.  The judge found  that
    the application remains outstanding and the Respondent  should  make  a
    decision in accordance with the law.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers
    on 5th January 2015.  The grounds  submit  that  the  appeal  does  not
    succeed pursuant to the decision in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and in
    any event should have been determined rather than remitted.  Permission
    was granted, although the permission states that the outcome might  not
    necessarily be in the Respondent's favour.

 The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer handed me the case of Singh [2015] EWCA  Civ  74
    relating to the changes made to the Immigration Rules on 9th July  2012
    and whether in this case, the new Rules should be  considered,  as  the
    Appellant applied before 9th July 2012.  The case of Singh states  that
    the new Rules can be considered even if the application was made before
    9 July 2012, where an Article 8 case is being dealt with.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that  this  Appellant's  claim
    succeeds under the Rules, so this does not apply.   He  submitted  that
    the Appellant has been here for fourteen years, so his application must
    succeed under the Rules.

 6. The Presenting Officer put to her that as the Appellant arrived in  the
    United Kingdom in 2002, his fourteen years will not be up  until  2016,
    so how can the  fourteen  year  Rule  apply.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that there is a clear  material  error  in  Judge  Mitchell's
    decision as he should not  have  remitted  the  case,  he  should  have
    determined the case.  He referred to paragraph 56(2) of  Singh  stating
    that as from 6th September 2012 the Secretary of State was entitled  to
    take into account the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE -
    276DH in deciding private or family life applications even if they were
    made prior to 9th July 2012 and the result is that the law  as  it  was
    held to be, in Edgehill, only pertains to decisions taken  in  the  two
    month window between 9th July and 6th September 2012.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that as there has been no fair hearing in  this  case
    the appeal should be remitted back to the First-tier because there have
    been no substantive considerations.  He submitted that if the appeal is
    dealt with in the Upper Tribunal the  matter  will  go  on  to  further
    litigation. He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal should be allowed
    to make a reasoned decision in this appeal.

 7. The Appellant's representative submitted  that  the  IS151A  was  never
    served on the Appellant.  I  was  referred  to  the  skeleton  argument
    submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before   the   hearing.   The
    representative is mistaken in  this.  What  the  skeleton  argument  is
    stating is that the Appellant was served with an IS151A as a result  of
    verbal deception, not that he was only served verbally with the notice.
    The Appellant's representative submitted that at the First-tier hearing
    it was put to the Tribunal that the Appellant has resided in the United
    Kingdom since 2002 and so he had accumulated  long  residence  when  he
    made his application in 2011.  She submitted that the new Rules  should
    not be considered and  I  was  again  referred  to  the  said  case  of
    Edgehill.

 8. Because of the new case of  Singh  the  new  Rules  can  be  considered
    relating to human rights issues.

 9. There is a clear material error of law in  the  judge's  determination.
    The judge should have determined the appeal and not remitted it.

10. I am setting aside the First-tier determination.

11. I direct that there shall be a First-tier hearing  of  this  appeal  at
    Taylor House on 18th August 2015.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray









