
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10349/2015
      IA/10350/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 July 2016                           |On 23 September 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                           MS KATE ETIME IKEDIASHI
                        MR BENJAMIN OSAMUDIA EJENOBI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Jafar of Counsel, instructed by Jesuis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) The appellants are a mother and son.  They appeal against a  decision  by
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer dismissing  their  appeals  under
   the Immigration Rules and under the Human Rights Convention.

2)  The  appellants  are  nationals  of  Nigeria.   They  appealed   against
   decisions dated 2 March 2015 by the respondent to remove  the  appellants
   following refusal of a human rights claim.  The date of the  applications
   giving rise to the removal decisions - indeed even the existence of  such
   applications - is a matter of  some  contention.   This  is  because  the
   second appellant attained the age of 18 on 2 October 2014.  There  was  a
   question before the First-tier Tribunal as to  whether  the  applications
   leading to the decisions under appeal were  made  on  8  September  2014,
   while he was still under 18, or in January 2015, by  which  time  he  was
   over  18.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided  that  the
   applications were made in January 2015 and therefore the second appellant
   was 18 when the applications were made.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  believe  evidence  of  the
   first appellant, the mother, as to whether she had family in Nigeria  and
   whether she had owned property in Nigeria.   The  judge  noted  that  the
   appellants had been in the UK for over 10  years  but  their  status  was
   precarious.  Although they had built up some private or  family  life  in
   the UK, particularly in relation to education in respect  of  the  second
   appellant, there would be no breach of Article 8 were the  appellants  to
   return to Nigeria.  The applications would not  succeed  under  paragraph
   276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The  second  appellant,  the  son,  had
   lived not quite half his life in the UK, having entered on  30  September
   2007, according to the respondent.  His mother  had  entered  earlier  in
   November 2006.  For the appellants, Mr Jafar  maintained  that  both  had
   arrived in the UK in November 2006 but nothing turns  on  this  in  these
   proceedings.

4) Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal primarily  on  the
   basis that there  was  some  uncertainty  over  the  date  on  which  the
   applications giving rise to the decision under appeal were made.  If they
   were made on 8 September 2014 the first appellant would have been  17  at
   the time but if they were made in January 2015 he would have been 18.  In
   granting permission the Upper Tribunal Judge observed that the point  was
   not likely to meet with success for the appellants unless presented  with
   greater clarity.

5) The Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission to appeal  on  other  grounds
   also but commented these had limited prospect of success.  The  principal
   argument on which these other grounds were based was that the  judge  did
   not sufficiently distinguish between the two appellants, contrary to  the
   decision of the Upper Tribunal in PD and Others (Article  8  -  conjoined
   family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108.

Submissions

6) At the hearing before  me  Mr  Jafar  acknowledged  that  the  issue  was
   essentially a narrow one, namely whether the applications giving rise  to
   the refusal decisions under appeal were made on 8 September  2014  or  in
   January 2015.

7) Mr Jafar referred to the  immigration  history  of  the  appellants.   In
   August 2013 the first appellant applied for asylum with her  son  as  her
   dependant.  This application was refused on 4th August 2014.  The reasons
   for refusal were in the  appellant's  bundle.   The  son's  position  was
   considered but at that time the son had not spent 7 years in the  UK  and
   it had not been shown that there were any exceptional  circumstances  why
   he could not return with his mother to Nigeria.  According  to  Mr  Jafar
   the respondent was wrong in August 2014 to state that  the  son  had  not
   been in the UK for 7 years.  However the  decision  of  August  2014  was
   certified and could not be appealed from within the UK.

8) The appellants made a subsequent application for further leave to  remain
   received by the Secretary of State on 8 September 2014.  This was  before
   the second appellant became 18 on 2 October 2014.   On  7  November  2014
   these  applications  were  refused  without  a  right  of  appeal.    The
   appellants were invited to set out  additional  grounds  in  a  one  stop
   notice.  A response was submitted in December 2014 and  the  Home  Office
   asked for more information.  A further decision was made by the Secretary
   of State on 26 February 2015.  This was either a  response  to  the  "one
   stop" notice or reconsideration of the decision of 7 November 2014.

9) Mr Jafar submitted that only one application had been  made  by  each  of
   the appellants after the refusal of the first appellant's  asylum  claim.
   The statement of additional grounds made in response to  the  "one  stop"
   notice was not an application.  On the date of the application the second
   appellant was under 18.

10) For the respondent, Mr Avery questioned the legal basis for  Mr  Jafar's
   submission.  The applications for further leave to remain were refused in
   November 2014 with no right of appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  treated
   the further representations as applications.

11) Mr Jafar submitted that it  was  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  to
   reconsider old applications if a request was made.  Prior to 6 April 2015
   where a request for reconsideration of a human rights or protection claim
   was refused, there would have been no right of appeal.

12) Mr Avery submitted that even if the judge had made an  error  there  was
   still a test of reasonableness to be satisfied  under  paragraph  276ADE.
   Mr Jafar submitted that if the decision  were  to  be  re-made  then  the
   appellants would seek to lodge up-dated evidence, and  he  would  seek  a
   further hearing.   Having heard the parties' submissions  I  reserved  my
   decision on the question of whether the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   made an error of law.

Discussion

13) In his submission Mr Jafar correctly pointed out that  the  respondent's
   bundle did not contain all the relevant refusal decisions or  notices  of
   decision.  I understood him to refer me  to  the  appellant's  bundle  as
   completing the record of the appellants' immigration history.

14) With this in mind I was particularly concerned to  examine  the  refusal
   decision of 7 November 2014 in respect of the second appellant, Benjamin,
   both in relation to the lack of a right of appeal and in relation to  the
   "one stop" notice.  I understood from the index to the bundle  that  this
   decision of 7 November 2014 to be found at page  80  of  the  appellant's
   bundle.  When I examined the bundle, however, I found only the first page
   of this decision at page 80.  There are two  other  pages,  81-82,  which
   appear to be part of the same decision but on closer reading the text  on
   page 81 does not follow from the text on page 80.  It seems  that  I  was
   supplied with only the first page of the decision of 7 November  2014  in
   respect of Benjamin and I am therefore not able to see what was stated by
   way of a "one stop" notice, or "one stop" warning as Mr Jafar referred to
   it, in that decision.

15) It is unfortunate that I was not aware of this difficulty  at  the  date
   of the hearing.  I see, however, that this bundle was  prepared  for  the
   purpose of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal and I  assumed  that  it
   would contain all of the relevant material.  It does not do so.  As  will
   become apparent, however, the point was not material.

16) If it is assumed that the refusal notice of 10 November  2014  contained
   a "one stop" notice or warning, this would have been in the terms set out
   in section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, prior
   to its amendment by the Immigration Act 2014, which was not at that stage
   fully in force.  In its original version section 120 states:

        1) This section applies to a person if:


           a) he has made an application to enter or remain in  the  United
              Kingdom, or
           b) an immigration decision within the meaning of section 82  has
              been taken or may be taken in respect of him.


        2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may  by  notice
           in writing require the person to state -


           a) his reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom,
           b) any grounds on which he  should  be  permitted  to  enter  or
              remain in the United Kingdom, and
           c) any grounds on  which  he  should  not  be  removed  from  or
              required to leave the United Kingdom


        3) A statement under subsection (2)  need  not  repeat  reasons  or
           grounds set out in -


           a) the application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or
           b) an application to which the immigration decision mentioned in
              subsection (1)(b) relates.

17) The  additional  grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  in
   response to a one stop notice are said to be copied at pages  103-113  of
   the appellants' bundle.  The grounds contain references to case  law  and
   to policies of the Secretary of State  but  the  grounds  themselves  are
   essentially made on the basis of private or  family  life,  as  were  the
   original applications.  Be that as it may, removal decisions were  issued
   on 2 March 2015 by the Secretary of State in respect of both  the  mother
   and the son, each bearing a right of appeal, and each  accompanied  by  a
   letter dated 26 February 2015 giving  reasons  for  the  decision.   Each
   letter referred to the applications of 8 September 2014  as  having  been
   refused with no right of appeal on 7 November 2014.

18) Mr Jafar's contention was that the letters of 26 February 2015 were  not
   made in response to fresh applications but were reconsiderations  of  the
   applications of 8 September 2014.  This is certainly not apparent on  the
   face of the letters, which each refer to the applications of 8  September
   2014 as having been refused on 7 November 2014.  For Mr Jafar to  succeed
   in this argument he would have to satisfy me that any response to a  "one
   stop" notice or warning under section 120, assuming section  120  notices
   were issued, is to be treated as part of the original application.

19) Mr Avery questioned the legal basis for Mr Jafar's argument and,  indeed
   I was not referred to any legal authority at all by Mr Jafar  in  support
   of his proposition.  On  examining  the  Immigration  Rules  I  see  that
   various provisions are made in respect of applications from paragraph A34
   onwards.  Paragraph A34 refers to provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules
   where there are  specified  forms  and  procedures  for  applications  or
   claims.  At paragraph 6 the Immigration Rules refer to the interpretation
   of the term "date of application"  by  reference,  so  far  as  might  be
   relevant to this application, to paragraph 34G of  the  Rules.   This  is
   concerned with the date of  submission  or  receipt  of  an  application,
   however, and does not apply to  the  matters  at  issue  in  the  present
   appeals.

20) The provisions at paragraph A34 and subsequent paragraphs are,  however,
   subject to GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM, which states that, subject to  certain
   conditions, the requirement to make a valid application  will  not  apply
   when an Article 8 claim is raised.  There is a further provision  in  the
   Immigration Rules, at paragraph 400, which states  that  where  a  person
   claims their removal would be contrary to  Article  8  the  Secretary  of
   State has a discretion as to whether to require an application to be made
   under paragraph 276ADE or the relevant provisions of Appendix FM.   Where
   an application is not required, the claim will be considered against  the
   requirements of the Rules and if appropriate the removal decision will be
   cancelled.

21) It is clear from the refusal letters of 26 February 2015 themselves,  at
   paragraph 7 of each letter, that  the  Secretary  of  State  specifically
   considered the additional grounds under paragraph 400 of the  Immigration
   Rules.  No further application was required but it is also clear from the
   letters themselves that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider  the
   additional grounds to be part of the applications  made  on  8  September
   2014 which, according to the Secretary of State, had already been refused
   on 7 November 2014.

22) I have to record that Mr Jafar's submission did not take me  beyond  the
   grant of permission by the Upper  Tribunal  in  which  the  question  was
   identified of whether the date of the applications was 8  September  2014
   or 15 January 2015, and where it was observed that the  point  raised  by
   the appellants was not likely to meet with success unless presented  with
   much more clarity.   In  granting  permission  the  Judge  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal said there was just enough to allow a  further  debate.   Having
   heard the further debate I found myself no  further  forward.   Mr  Jafar
   simply failed to show any  basis  in  law  for  treating  the  additional
   grounds of January 2015 as part of the applications made on  8  September
   2014, rather than as further representations  leading  to  new  decisions
   under paragraph 400.  On the face of the  letters  of  26  February  2015
   themselves  it  is  stated  by  the   Secretary   of   State   that   the
   representations were  considered  under  paragraph  400  as  claims  that
   removal would be contrary to Article 8 and I accept  that  this  was  the
   proper position.

23) The conclusion I come to on this issue is that the Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal did not err in law by treating the  additional  grounds  of
   January 2015 as giving rise to a separate decision for each appellant not
   based upon the applications  of  September  2014.   By  2015  the  second
   appellant was over the age of 18 and therefore could no  longer  rely  on
   the considerations of the Immigration Rules for those under  the  age  of
   18.

24) At the hearing Mr Jafar did not address me on the remaining  portion  of
   the application for permission to appeal, namely whether the judge  erred
   in not differentiating sufficiently between the two appellants.   As  the
   grant of permission suggested, there would be  some  difficulty  for  the
   appellants in establishing an error in relation to this and, having  read
   the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I do not think  that
   the decision can be faulted on these grounds.  Although the  judge  deals
   briefly with paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 in respect of the appellants,
   as he treated the second appellant as being over the age  of  18  neither
   appellant would succeed under paragraph 276ADE.  As  Mr  Jafar  correctly
   recognised,  the  appellants'  case  depended  upon  showing   that   the
   representations made to the Secretary of State in January 2015  ought  to
   have been treated as part of the applications of 8  September  2014.   He
   has not succeeded in doing this and  accordingly  the  appeals  will  not
   succeed.

Conclusions

25) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

26) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  have
   not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason of substance for
   doing so.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


