
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/10038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 11 May 2015                                |On 4 June 2015                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JIT BAHADUR BK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal  against  a  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth in a determination  dated  30  September
    2014 and promulgated on 3 October 2014 following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 24 September 2014.  For ease of reference I  shall  throughout
    this determination refer to the Secretary of State who was the original
    respondent as "the Secretary of  State"  and  to  Mr  Bk  who  was  the
    original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 20 January 1979.  He
    had for a number of years apparently been a domestic worker employed by
    Mr Amit Sangar who is a British citizen and he  worked  for  Mr  Sangar
    both in this country and outside.  It appears that  he  had  previously
    entered the UK as a domestic worker in October 2011 and that his  leave
    on that occasion had been valid until October 2012.  However,  he  left
    the UK to travel to India with his employers during their  holiday  and
    before re-entering the UK which he did on 22 June 2013 he had first had
    to apply for entry clearance in order to do so.  He applied  under  the
    new Rules regarding the employ  of  domestic  workers  which  had  been
    brought in on 6 April 2012.   Before  the  expiry  of  that  leave  the
    claimant made an application for further leave to remain as a  domestic
    worker but this application was refused by the Secretary of State in  a
    letter dated 7 April 2014.  It is clear from the  refusal  letter  that
    the Secretary of State considered the application under the Rules which
    now applied and not under the Rules which had been  applicable  at  the
    time when the claimant had first entered the country in 2011.  However,
    as I have already noted, when the claimant had returned to this country
    in 2013 he had applied for entry clearance under the new Rules.  In the
    refusal letter it is stated as follows:

         "In view of the fact that you entered the UK on 22 June 2013  as  a
         domestic worker in a private household the Secretary  of  State  is
         not satisfied that you intend to leave the UK at  the  end  of  six
         months in the United Kingdom or at the same time as  the  employer,
         whichever is the earlier.  Furthermore, as you have already been in
         the United Kingdom for  a  period  in  excess  of  six  months  the
         Secretary of State is not satisfied that a grant of leave would not
         result in you  remaining  in  the  UK  beyond  the  maximum  period
         permitted  under  this  route.   Therefore  you  do  not  meet  the
         requirements under paragraph 159E.

         In view of the fact that you have applied for an extension of leave
         and as your application has not been withdrawn,  the  Secretary  of
         State is not satisfied that you intend to leave the United  Kingdom
         at the end of six months in the United Kingdom or at the same  time
         as the employer, whichever is the earliest.  You do not qualify for
         leave by virtue of paragraph 159D(vi) with reference to 159A(iv) of
         the Immigration Rules"

 3. The claimant appealed against this decision and the basis of his appeal
    was that he was entitled to have his application considered  under  the
    Rules as they had been when he had first been granted  entry  clearance
    in 2011.  That would seem to be a difficult argument to advance because
    there had been a break in his residence in this country and  indeed  in
    his entry clearance and when he returned in June 2013 he did so  having
    been granted entry clearance under the new Rules. A  positive  case  is
    not advanced on behalf of the claimant that under the new Rules  (which
    do not permit a grant of leave where this would result in an  applicant
    remaining in this country for more than six months), he would have been
    entitled to permission to remain under the Rules.

 4. There is some disagreement as to exactly what happened at  the  hearing
    before Judge Ruth.  It was originally argued in  the  grounds  that  on
    behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  a  "concession"  had  been  made
    effectively that the old Rules were applicable and that because of this
    the only issue which needed to be determined was  whether  or  not  the
    claimant had been in the continuous employ of  Mr  Sangar,  but  it  is
    apparent, having had regard to both the  witness  statement  which  has
    been prepared by Counsel who represented the claimant before the First-
    tier Tribunal and also the note of the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    at that hearing, that no formal "concession" appears to have been made.
     Indeed the claimant's Counsel has very appropriately accepted that  no
    such "concession"  was  overtly  made.   However,  it  is  argued  that
    effectively the point was conceded and certainly  today  before  me  Mr
    Sharma has  argued  that  the  difference  between  whether  or  not  a
    "concession" was formally made or whether the  issue  was  narrowed  is
    merely a question of semantics.  His argument essentially  is  that  at
    that hearing the Secretary of  State  through  her  Presenting  Officer
    effectively agreed that the only issue to be determined was whether  or
    not the claimant had been continuously employed by Mr Sangar  which  it
    is now accepted he was and that in light of that it is not now open  to
    the Secretary of State to resile from what was either  conceded  or  at
    the very least accepted at that hearing.

 5. I have been shown a  number  of  authorities,  some  more  recent  than
    others, relating to the effect of a concession by one of  the  parties,
    but in my judgment they are all beside the point because  it  is  clear
    both from the evidence presented by the respective representatives  and
    also from Judge Ruth's note  that  at  the  hearing  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative had relied upon the reasons given in the refusal
    letter.  Accordingly, the issue as to whether or not the claimant could
    succeed under the Rules was placed fully before the Tribunal and needed
    to be determined.  It may be that the case was not argued as  precisely
    as it might have been on behalf of the Secretary of State and the judge
    notes in his Record  of  Proceedings  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative had to be given a copy of the judge's papers because  he
    had not  been  properly  instructed  before  the  hearing,  but  it  is
    nonetheless clear that it remained the Secretary of State's  case  that
    under the Rules the claimant could not  succeed.   Mr  Sharma  has  not
    sought to persuade me during the hearing that in any event the claimant
    should have been entitled to succeed on the basis that  it  would  have
    been sufficient under the Rules if he could establish  simply  that  he
    had been continuously  employed  by  Mr  Sangar,  his  British  citizen
    employer, although he does not make any concession at this  stage  that
    he could not.  However, under the Rules as they now are, whatever might
    have been thought to be the main  issue  when  this  appeal  was  heard
    before Judge Ruth, the judge needed to consider whether, given that the
    claimant would if his appeal succeeded have been permitted to remain in
    the UK for over six months, this could possibly be permitted under  the
    Rules.  Having considered the Rules which are applicable now, it  would
    seem that the reasons given in the  refusal  letter  are  difficult  to
    challenge.   Notwithstanding this, the judge  proceeded  on  the  basis
    that the only issue really which he had to consider was whether or  not
    the claimant was still employed as a domestic worker as he claimed.  He
    says as follows at paragraph 10 of his determination:

         "10. For the respondent  [Secretary  of  State]  the  position  was
             clarified.  [The Presenting Officer] informed me that  as  far
             as he was concerned the issue in dispute was  whether  or  not
             the [claimant] was still employed as a domestic worker  as  he
             claimed."

 6. Then at paragraph 19 he says this:

         "19. At the beginning of the hearing the issues in dispute in  this
             appeal were clarified by the [Secretary of State] and this has
             rather altered the position.  The only disputed  point,  based
             on those  preliminary  submissions,  is  whether  or  not  the
             [claimant] continues  in  the  employment  of  his  sponsoring
             family.

         20.  Given my credibility findings, I have no doubt  that  he  does
             continue in the employment of the family, has been employed by
             them since 2007 and is likely to be employed by them  for  the
             next several years.

         21.  I therefore allow the appeal under the immigration rules.

         22.  No other matters were in dispute in this appeal."

 7. The judge then  gave  his  decision  allowing  the  appeal  "under  the
    Immigration Rules".

 8. In the course of these proceedings the judge was asked  to  supply  his
    Record of Proceedings and (as I have noted above) he has  recorded  the
    Presenting  Officer  as  relying  on  the  refusal  letter.   In  these
    circumstances the statement made by the judge that "the  only  disputed
    point ... is whether or not the appellant continues in  the  employment
    of his sponsoring family"  (see  paragraph  19  of  the  determination)
    without further explanation, misunderstands  the  basis  on  which  the
    application was refused, because it is quite  clear  from  the  refusal
    letter  that  the  application  was  refused  because  the   respondent
    considered that the claimant did not satisfy the requirements under the
    Rules as they are now.

 9. Mr Sharma has attempted to persuade this Tribunal that even if that  is
    right this error is not material because  the  judge  would  have  been
    entitled to allow the appeal outside the Immigration Rules on the basis
    that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Secretary  of  State  through   her
    representative was not seeking to rely  on  the  Rules  to  their  full
    extent.  I do not consider for present purposes that this is a  tenable
    proposition.  Without explaining how it was  that  notwithstanding  the
    Secretary of State's reliance on the refusal letter, the only issue was
    whether or not the claimant had been employed by the same  family  even
    though it would seem that if he were allowed to remain he would be here
    more than six months, at the very least the  decision  is  inadequately
    reasoned.   Accordingly  there  is  an  error   of   law   within   the
    determination such that the decision must be set aside and re-made.

10. Previously this appeal had been listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
    but because of lack of Tribunal time the hearing could not  proceed  on
    that occasion but Judge Gill gave directions that  this  hearing  would
    "be confined to whether the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should be set aside for legal error".  There will therefore have to  be
    a further hearing at which the claimant will be able  to  advance  such
    arguments as he is advised to do and these will include such Article  8
    argument as he is advised to advance, because as again  is  clear  from
    Judge Ruth's note, it had been submitted on  behalf  of  the  applicant
    that he should be allowed to remain under Article 8 even  if  he  could
    not succeed under the Rules and this submission was not dealt  with  in
    the determination.  Having had regard to paragraph 7  of  the  Practice
    Statements  of  the  President  I  consider  that  in  this  case   the
    appropriate course would be to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because the nature and extent of judicial  fact-finding  which
    is necessary in order for the appeal to be re-made is such that  having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate  to  do
    so.  Also that part of the claimant's case which was founded on Article
    8 was not considered by the First-tier Tribunal and that  must  now  be
    done.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and direct that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be determined by  any  judge  other
than Judge Ruth.



Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 20 May 2015

