

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10195/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              Miss SADAF AFZAL
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal McIntosh dismissing this appeal  against  refusal  of
   indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  14  years  continuous
   residence.

The hearing

2) The appellant was not represented before us.   An  interpreter  had  been
   requested for the hearing but was not present.  The appellant stated that
   she  was  willing  to  proceed  without  an  interpreter.   As   far   as
   representation was concerned, she explained that she was not able to  pay
   for representation but might be able to do so if she was given more  time
   to raise funds.  She explains that she had a friend who might be able  to
   help her.

3) For the respondent Mr Saunders sought to proceed.   It  was  questionable
   whether the appellant would be able to raise the required  funds  to  pay
   for representation.  The respondent would be arguing that  there  was  no
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4) In the circumstances  we  decided  to  proceed  with  the  hearing.   The
   prospect  of  the  appellant  raising  sufficient  funds   to   pay   for
   representation seemed remote, as she had not succeeded in doing so  prior
   to the hearing.

5) The application for  permission  to  appeal  had  been  prepared  on  the
   appellant's behalf by a solicitor.  As the appellant's case was  set  out
   in this application, we heard first from Mr Saunders  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent, after explaining to the appellant that  she  would  have  the
   opportunity to respond.

6) For the respondent, Mr Saunders submitted that there was no error of  law
   in the determination.  Although a different judge might have decided  the
   appeal differently, the judge was entitled to dismiss  the  appeal.   The
   appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules on the  basis  of
   chronology.  The appellant had not been  in  the  UK  for  the  14  years
   required in terms of paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules.   At  the
   time of the application the old  rules  applied  and  14  years  was  the
   requirement.  It was not necessary for the judge to  refer  to  paragraph
   276ADE, although she had done so.  The judge had considered Article 8  in
   the broader sense and looked at evidence of family or private  life.   In
   this regard there was a dearth of evidence and the appellant was not able
   to make out a case.  It was the appellant's claim that she had given  her
   documentary evidence to a previous representative but this  evidence  had
   not been served on the Tribunal.

7) The appellant confirmed that prior to the hearing before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal she had provided documentary evidence to her then solicitors, M-
   R Solicitors, including payslips and letters.   The  originals  had  been
   returned to her.  Her subsequent solicitors, Shahzads, had not asked  her
   for these documents.

8) The  appellant  had  not  attended  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. She had applied for an adjournment  on  medical  grounds.   She
   lodged a doctor's letter stating that she attended surgery with a pain in
   her foot with a mild degree of swelling.  The doctor  recorded  that  she
   was meant to attend the hearing the  following  day  but  was  not  in  a
   position to do so due to her discomfort and asked for the hearing  to  be
   rescheduled.  The First-tier Tribunal refused an adjournment and this was
   challenged in the application for permission to appeal.

9) The appellant confirmed that she had visited her doctor with  a  pain  in
   her foot and swelling.  The doctor had advised her to  take  painkillers.
   The appellant was asked how she would have travelled  from  her  home  to
   Taylor House, where the hearing took place.   She  said  she  would  have
   travelled by underground as her home was on the Central Line.

10) The appellant was asked about her family and friends  in  the  UK.   She
   said she had friends but they were not really close ones.  It was pointed
   out that in the original grounds of appeal the appellant was said to have
   a long term partner.  The appellant explained that this relationship  had
   broken down.  The appellant further said that she had spent half her life
   in the UK and wanted to remain here.

Discussion

11) The First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  was  born  on  13
   December 1982 and is a national of Pakistan.  She entered the  UK  on  15
   July 2000 and had remained here since then.  Her application for leave to
   remain was made on 5 July 2012 and refused on 13 March 2013.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal  noted  at  paragraph  1  of  the  determination  that  the
   application for leave to remain was made  on  the  grounds  of  14  years
   continuous residence.  Clearly  the  appellant  did  not  have  14  years
   residence either at the time of  the  application  or  the  date  of  the
   decision.

12) One of the grounds of the application for permission to appeal was  that
   the First-tier Tribunal had wrongly considered the appeal under  the  new
   Immigration Rules (ie post 8 July 2012) and had applied a rule  requiring
   20 years residence under paragraph 276ADE.   As  Mr  Saunders  submitted,
   however, the consideration by the Tribunal of the appeal under  paragraph
   276ADE was not relevant.  The Tribunal was clearly aware of the  14  year
   rule, as noted in the first paragraph of the determination, and found  as
   a fact at paragraph 11 of the determination that the length of  residence
   was 12 years - two years below the required length.  Accordingly  we  are
   satisfied that the Tribunal  did  not  make  any  error  of  law  in  its
   application of the 14 year rule under paragraph 276B.

13) The second issue before us was whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
   have proceeded in the absence of the  appellant,  having  regard  to  the
   medical evidence submitted by her.  In this regard  the  Tribunal  quoted
   the doctor's letter at the second paragraph  of  the  determination.   As
   already noted, the letter recorded  the  appellant's  attendance  at  the
   surgery with a pain in her foot.  The doctor stated  that  the  appellant
   was not in a position to attend due to her discomfort and asked  for  the
   hearing to be rescheduled.

14) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered the significance of  the
   doctor's letter at paragraph 7 of the  determination.   The  judge  noted
   that the letter did not describe the cause of the swelling or outline any
   treatment.  It appeared that the appellant was able to attend the surgery
   to obtain the letter.  In the circumstances the judge was  not  satisfied
   that the appellant  was  genuinely  unable  to  attend  the  hearing  and
   therefore decided to proceed.  We consider  that  having  regard  to  the
   medical evidence this was a decision the judge was entitled to make.

15) The third ground of the  application  was  the  absence  of  documentary
   evidence. The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  at  the  third
   paragraph of the determination that the appellant's  solicitors  at  that
   time, M-R Solicitors, wrote to the Tribunal the day before the hearing to
   state that they were  without  instructions  and  were  withdrawing  from
   acting.  The judge recorded that the hearing notice had been sent to  the
   appellant at her solicitor's address and that directions were issued  for
   witness statements and bundles to be submitted no later  than  five  days
   before the hearing.  The  judge  further  noted,  at  paragraph  11,  the
   absence of any supporting documents, although these were referred  to  by
   the Secretary of State in the refusal decision.  Before us the  appellant
   was unable to cast any light on why her  solicitors  had  withdrawn  from
   acting prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  According to
   the application for permission to appeal, prepared by a different firm of
   solicitors, the appellant had  given  her  documentary  evidence  to  her
   solicitors at that time.  It was submitted that it was the error  of  the
   previous solicitors not to submit documents as directed to do so.  It was
   further submitted that had the documents  been  submitted  the  appellant
   would have been in a better position to succeed with her appeal.

16) Whatever was in the appellant's documents, however, they would not  have
   provided her with the possibility of  succeeding  under  the  Immigration
   Rules on the basis of 14 years continuous residence because she  did  not
   meet this requirement.  When asked about the  documents  at  the  hearing
   before us, the appellant referred to the documents as including  payslips
   and letters.   This shows little more than that the  appellant  has  been
   working in the UK.  We were not referred to  any  particular  documentary
   evidence which would have been likely to have affected the outcome of the
   decision under Article 8.

17) In the application for permission to appeal it  is  submitted  that  the
   judge's findings under Article 8 were factually  incorrect  and  unsound.
   The appellant was under the age of 18 when she arrived in the UK and  had
   spent a considerable period of her youth here.  She had established close
   ties and adapted herself to the life and conditions here.

18) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the refusal  decision
   was an interference with the appellant's right to  private  life.   There
   was no evidence of having established a family life in the UK.  The judge
   referred to a list of correspondence attached to the refusal decision  as
   evidence of the appellant's private life but the judge  added  that  this
   evidence was not specific and not detailed in any way.  The  interference
   with the appellant's private life was lawful and proportionate.

19) At the hearing before us the appellant talked in a  straightforward  way
   about her private life in the UK.  She said that she had friends but  not
   really close ones and that her relationship with her former  partner  had
   ended.  The appellant referred to having sought  to  lodge  payslips  and
   letters, which would have shown that she had  been  working  and  provide
   evidence of contact with friends or relatives.  Although the  application
   for permission to appeal states that the appellant was under 18 when  she
   arrived in the UK, this was only 5 months before her 18th  birthday.   It
   appears from the refusal letter that the appellant entered with  a  visit
   visa.

20) Although the judge's reasoning in respect of Article 8  is  very  brief,
   the judge was entitled to find  that  the  refusal  decision  was  not  a
   disproportionate interference with the appellant's right  to  private  or
   family life.  It is contended in the application for permission to appeal
   that had the judge had the benefit of seeing the appellant's  documentary
   evidence then the outcome would have  been  different.   The  judge  did,
   however, refer to the list  of  evidence  attached  to  the  respondent's
   reasons for refusal letter of 13 December  1982  and  saw  nothing  there
   which would have  weighted  the  assessment  of  proportionality  in  the
   appellant's favour.  The appellant told us nothing in her  submission  at
   the hearing before us that would have similarly weighted  the  assessment
   in her favour.  Accordingly, it cannot be said  that  the  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to find as she did  in  relation  to
   the refusal decision not being disproportionate under Article 8.

21) Having considered the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  the
   further submissions made at the hearing before us, we are satisfied  that
   there is no error of law in the decision by the Judge of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, which accordingly shall stand.

Conclusions

22) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

23) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

24) The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for  anonymity  and  we
   see no reason for an order to  this  effect  to  be  made  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

