
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/10885/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2016                            |On 19 July 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                 IRENA YORSH
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Bazini (counsel) instructed by Paul L Simon,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge N J Bennett promulgated on 23 November 2015, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 November 1946 and is a  national  of  Israel.
The appellant entered the UK on 23 July 2014 as  a  visitor  with  leave  to
enter valid until 23 January 2015.

4. On 20 January 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK
on article 8 ECHR grounds. On 7 March 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused
the Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  N  J  Bennett  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 June 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Allen gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable as is contended in the grounds  that  the  findings  in
      respect of the Immigration Rules, which are relevant to the evaluation
      outside the Rules, are flawed as contended at paragraphs 5  and  6  of
      the grounds, and as regards the decision outside the Rules  which  has
      in any event to be seen in the light of the points made in respect  of
      the findings under the Rules, that the matters raised  in  respect  of
      the finding of an absence of family life between the appellant and her
      grandchildren and the health issues raised in particular at  paragraph
      22 of the grounds are also arguable.

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Bazini, counsel for the appellant, moved the  grounds  of  appeal.
He told me that although it is conceded that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil
the requirements of the immigration rules, the Judge failed  to  follow  the
guidance in SS (Congo) because (he  said)  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
appellant's claim under the immigration rules was flawed. He  told  me  that
the Judge  accepted  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's  daughter  to  be
credible witnesses, and accepted the medical  evidence  produced,  but  then
failed to resolve conflicts in the evidence at  [47]  of  the  decision  and
reached conclusions which were contrary to the weight of  evidence  accepted
by the Judge.

(b) Mr Bazini took me to the precise terms of  E-ECDR  2.4  &  E  ECDR  2.5,
correctly recorded by the Judge at [44] the decision, and then  argued  that
the Judge conflated the requirements of those paragraphs  of  the  rules  at
[47] and [48]. He placed great emphasis on the report dated 20 October  2015
from the London Psychiatry Centre, reading almost the entire  report  before
criticising the findings made between [63] and  [68]  of  the  decision.  He
told me that the decision contains a number of material errors of  law,  and
asked me to set it aside.

8.. For the respondent, Mr  Norton  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. He told me that the  Judge
had written a careful and detailed decision,  containing  findings  of  fact
which were open to the Judge before reaching  conclusions  which  were  well
within the range of conclusions reasonably open to the Judge  to  reach.  He
told me that there were no defects in the fact-finding  exercise,  and  that
the Judge had correctly directed himself in law. He said that the  arguments
advanced for the appellant amounted to  a  perversity  challenge  which  was
without foundation. He asked me to allow the decision to stand & to  dismiss
the appeal.

Analysis

9. The first ground of appeal is that although the appellant  cannot  fulfil
the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  there  has  been  inadequate
analysis of the appellant's case against the  immigration  rules,  and  that
analysis should have  informed  consideration  of  article  8  out-with  the
rules.

10. There is no merit to that ground of appeal. At [42] of the decision  the
Judge clearly considers paragraph 276  ADE  of  the  immigration  rules  and
focuses immediately of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi). At  [43]  of  the  decision
the Judge correctly sets out why the appellant cannot qualify for  leave  to
remain under appendix FM of the rules.  At [44] & [45] the  Judge  sets  out
the requirements of sections E-ECDR2.4 & E ECDR2.5 of  appendix  FM,  before
(at [45]) setting out the evidential requirements of appendix FM-SE.

11. At [47] & [48] the Judge sets out the reasons why the  appellant  cannot
meet the requirements of  appendix  FM.  In  doing  so,  the  Judge  clearly
demonstrates that he has considered the immigration rules, and is  carefully
followed the guidance given in SS (Congo).

12. It was argued that the Judge could not possibly come to the  conclusions
set out at [47] & [48], and from [[61] to [68] after accepting  the  medical
evidence  and  finding  the  appellant  and  her  witness  to  be   credible
witnesses.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
little weight or too much  weight  to  a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Disagreement with an Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility, does not  give  rise
to an error of law. Rationality is a very high threshold  and  a  conclusion
is not  irrational  just  because  some  alternative  explanation  has  been
rejected or can be said to be possible. In R and Others v SSHD  (2005)  EWCA
civ 982 Lord Justice Brooke noted that perversity represented  a  very  high
hurdle.  It embraced decisions which were irrational or unreasonable in  the
Wednesbury sense.

14. At [49] the Judge commences consideration of  article  8  ECHR  out-with
the rules. Counsel for the appellant argued that the Judge erred in  law  in
finding that family life does  not  exist  between  the  appellant  and  her
grandchildren and her son-in-law at [53] of the decision, and  at  [52]  the
Judge took account of irrelevant considerations when assessing  the  quality
of family life between the appellant and her daughter. Those criticisms  are
entirely without foundation.

15. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct  approach)  [2016]
UKUT 28 (a dependent relative case) the  First-tier  Tribunal  finding  that
there was family life as between an 85-year-old and  his  daughter  and  two
grandchildren of 17 and 16 was upheld.   The  Appellant  in  that  case  had
visited his daughter's family in England  almost  annually  since  2007  for
periods of between three and five months and had developed  a  strong  close
relationship with his grandchildren. The Upper Tribunal  in  Dasgupta  found
that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that there was  a  family  life
was one open to the Tribunal (although the Upper Tribunal noted that  family
life had not been in  dispute  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  find  in
Dasgupta that an alternative  finding  would  not  have  been  open  to  the
Tribunal). In Dasgupta the Tribunal held that the question of whether  there
is  family  life  in  a  child/grandchild  context  requires  a  finding  of
something over and above  normal  emotional  ties  and  will  invariably  be
intensely fact sensitive.

16. In Gupta, JR Petition from UT [2015] CSOH 9 the Indian claimant  entered
on a visitor's visa, stayed with her son and  his  children  and  sought  to
remain  on  the  basis  of  medical  difficulties.  It  was  held  that   in
immigration cases there was no presumption that a person had a family  life,
even with immediate family members: Kugathas [2003] INLR  170  applied.  The
First-tier Tribunal considered there was an absence  of  evidence  that  the
Claimant required  help  with  personal  care;  that  she  did  not  require
financial support; that she had lived in India whilst her son lived  in  the
UK for several years from 2006; that there was an absence of  evidence  that
she had enjoyed a family life with her daughter  in  law  and  the  children
between 2006 and 2010; and that she had  lived  alone  in  India  after  her
daughter in law moved to the UK in 2010.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  -  in
effect upholding the First-tier decision that there was no family life.


17. It was also held in Gupta, JR Petition from UT  [2015]  CSOH  9  that  a
host state's positive obligation to respect family life in terms of  Article
8 of the ECHR did not generally extend to reuniting  families  separated  by
voluntary relocation (paras 18 - 19).


18. On the facts as the Judge found them to be, it was open to the Judge  to
find that family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR  does  not  exist
between the appellant and her grandchildren and the appellant and  her  son-
in-law. The Judge found that family life exists between  the  appellant  and
her daughter and quite correctly, at [52] of the  decision,  considered  the
quality and extent of the family life that exists: that is a necessary  part
of the balancing exercise. In PT (Sri Lanka) V SSHD (2010) EWCA Civ 251  the
Court of Appeal said that the correct approach is to take into  account  the
nature and degree of family life between parents and their daughter  in  the
UK before the applicants came to the UK and joined their daughter  here  and
the Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  comparatively  short
duration of the emergence of those ties.   These were factors to put in  the
balance, rather than excluding or marginalizing them.

19. Counsel for the appellant suggested that the Judge had  only  considered
article 8 private life. That is wrong. The judge manifestly considered  both
family and private life, but even if that argument had some  foundation,  it
would be entirely without force because in  considering  article  8  private
the  judge  carried  out  a  proportionality  exercise  which  embraced  all
relevant article 8 ECHR considerations.  In Vikas and  Manesh  Singh  (2015)
EWCA Civ 630 the Court of Appeal said the factors to be  examined  in  order
to assess proportionality were the same, regardless of  whether  private  or
family life was engaged. To that extent  the  debate  in  this  case  as  to
whether there was family life was described as academic.

20. The remaining submissions for  the  appellant  related  to  the  medical
evidence and consideration of what would face the  appellant  on  return  to
Israel. It was argued that the appellant's health is  so  fragile  that  she
risks hospitalisation because of  the  rigours  of  the  journey,  and  that
violence in Israel is on the increase, creating a significant risk  to  this
vulnerable, elderly, isolated appellant.

21. Those submissions are nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  findings
made by the Judge, which were clearly drawn from the evidence placed  before
him. Between [62] and [68] the Judge carefully considered  the  impact  that
return to  Israel  (and  separation  from  her  family)  will  have  on  the
appellant. The Judge carefully considers the medical evidence and,  at  [68]
of the decision, considers the incidents of violence in Tel Aviv. The  Judge
bemoans the dearth of independent documentary evidence about  conditions  in
Tel Aviv and records the concession that  the  appeal  is  not  advanced  on
article 3 ECHR grounds.

22. The decision does not contain material errors of  law.  The  grounds  of
appeal amount to an expression of dissatisfaction with the  conclusion  that
the Judge reached,  but  on  the  evidence  placed  before  the  Judge,  his
decision is one which falls well within the range of conclusions  reasonably
open to the Judge.

23. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

24.  There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
appellant does not like the conclusion that the Judge has come to, but  that
conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal equation.  There  is
nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise. The  correct  test  in
law has been applied. The decision does not  contain  a  material  error  of
law.

25.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

27.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


