
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/10710/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 May 2013                                 |On 9 August 2013             |
|With further submissions on 9 May 2013        |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            mr edward adu-gyamfi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This appeal was originally listed before me on 28 January 2013, when  I
    found that there had been an error of law in the determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I set out below the chronology  of  this  appeal,
    which repeats large extracts from the Decision I  gave  following  that
    hearing.

 2. The appellant is a national of Ghana, who was born on  27  April  1977.
    He arrived in this country on 8 October 1994 (aged  17)  together  with
    his mother and younger brother, in order to join his father, who was  a
    British citizen living in London.

 3. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in  this  country,
    together with his mother and brother, on 17 April 1999.

 4. While in  this  country,  the  appellant  formed  a  relationship  with
    Michelle Stubbs, with whom he had two children, the first, Sharay, born
    on 6 December 1999, and the second, Amari, born on 8 May 2002.

 5. Over a period of about a year, the  appellant  committed  a  series  of
    armed robberies of betting shops, using an imitation  firearm,  in  the
    course of which many victims must have been terrified.  In  respect  of
    these offences, the appellant was convicted (having pleaded guilty)  at
    Harrow Crown Court on 30 June 2005 of  ten  counts  of  robbery,  seven
    counts of  having  an  imitation  firearm  with  intent  to  commit  an
    indictable offence and one account of  attempted  robbery.   For  these
    offences, on 2 August 2010, he was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  twelve
    years' imprisonment, reduced on appeal to ten years' imprisonment.

 6. In February 2008, the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation, and on 18 April 2009, a decision was made to  deport  him,
    which decision was served on him on 18 May 2009.   His  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed, and  eventually  his  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted on 30 August 2011.

 7. Removal directions were subsequently  set  for  8  December  2011,  but
    following an oral appeal to the Court of Appeal, on  24  November  2011
    these directions were cancelled.

 8. The  appellant  was  granted  bail  on  13  January  2012  and  shortly
    thereafter his application  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  withdrawn.
    However, on 7 February 2012 the appellant submitted an  application  to
    revoke the deportation order, which it seems was accepted  as  a  fresh
    claim.  However, the application was refused by  the  respondent  on  5
    April 2012.

 9. The appellant appealed against this decision, and his appeal was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davda, sitting with Mrs J  Holt  (Non-
    legal Member) at Taylor House on 1 October 2012.

10. In a determination promulgated on 18 October 2012, the panel  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

11. The appellant appealed against this decision, pursuant to leave granted
    on 7 November 2012 by First-tier Tribunal Nightingale.

12. In my Decision I set out the main arguments advanced on behalf  of  the
    appellant at that hearing, and I repeat them in this determination.

13. Mr Lewis,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  referred  the  Tribunal  to
    paragraph 43 of the panel's determination in which the  panel  set  out
    their "conclusion" as follows:

         "We  have  not  had  persuasive  evidence  from  the  appellant  to
         demonstrate that his removal would significantly impact on him, his
         children or his family".

14. Mr Lewis, who had represented the appellant before the panel,  informed
    the Tribunal that it was simply not correct that  there  had  not  been
    evidence before the panel  to  demonstrate  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would have a significant impact on his children, as  well  as
    on himself.  Although there was reference within the  determination  to
    the evidence given by Mr O'Brien, the  father  of  the  mother  of  the
    appellant's children (the appellant's former partner) and also  to  the
    statement made by Mrs O'Brien, his wife, there was no reference  within
    the determination to Mr O'Brien's oral evidence, which  had  been  that
    the appellant's removal would have a "disastrous" impact  on  his  (the
    appellant's) children (Mr O'Brien's  grandchildren).   The  failure  to
    deal with this evidence properly was a material error of law.

15. Mr  Lewis  acknowledged  that  the  offences  were  very  serious,  but
    submitted that there were cases where the removal  of  applicants  with
    equally serious criminal records had been held to be  disproportionate,
    depending on the particular facts  of  their  cases.   So  it  was  not
    possible to say that this appellant's  removal  must  be  proportionate
    without properly considering the individual circumstances in his  case,
    and in particular the effect of his removal on his children.

16. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Tanner suggested  that  the  panel  had
    probably meant to say that it had not heard persuasive evidence to show
    the removal of this appellant would be disproportionate, although  that
    is not what is actually said.  However, even if there had been an error
    in the terminology used in paragraph 43, the  respondent  would  submit
    that the panel had taken into account the relevant evidence relating to
    the appellant's family life, and in particular, at  paragraph  41,  had
    considered the interests of the children as being to remain in  the  UK
    with their mother.  Also, the panel had reached sustainable findings as
    to the nature of the crime, taking into account the length of  sentence
    imposed.  This appellant could not be said to be such a devoted father,
    because of his convictions.  He had not set  an  example,  and  he  had
    removed himself from  the  company  of  his  children  because  of  his
    actions.

17. The panel was also entitled to find that the appellant was a continuing
    risk to the community, as it did at paragraph 40.  The panel was  right
    to refer to his not having provided any details of employment.

18. It was accepted that it was inescapable that deportation would break up
    the family and that the appellant's children would  lose  contact  with
    their father, but that was the  nature  of  deportation.   However,  as
    against that, there was the deterrent and also  the  revulsion  element
    which had to be considered, as set out in N (Kenya).  The likelihood of
    re-offending was only one aspect which had  to  be  considered  by  the
    Tribunal.  The need to deter other potential criminals and  to  express
    the revulsion of the public were  also  important  factors.   In  those
    circumstances, even though once caught the appellant had apologised and
    was remorseful, removal was still proportionate.

19. The nature of the family life  had  been  recorded,  but  although  the
    children would not like the removal  of  their  father,  it  was  still
    entirely proportionate, because that was  what  happened  when  serious
    crimes had been committed. The children lived  with  their  mother  and
    they had other relatives they could turn to.

20. When one considered the history of the previous appeal, the deportation
    decision having been upheld in November 2011,  there  was  really  very
    little which had happened since then to make removal disproportionate.

21. I found an error of law, and gave my reasons as follows,  at  paragraph
    20:

         "Albeit with some hesitation, I find that the panel's determination
         did contain a material error of law, such that the decision must be
         set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.   Although  the  panel
         may have meant to say that it was not persuaded that the impact  on
         the appellant's children was so  significant  as  to  outweigh  the
         factors in favour of his removal such that  the  removal  would  be
         disproportionate, that is not what is said at paragraph 43.  Having
         heard Mr Lewis's submissions with regard to the evidence which  had
         been given before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is  simply  not
         recorded in the determination,  without  further  explanation,  the
         statement that it has not been shown that the  appellant's  removal
         "would significantly impact on him, his children or his family"  is
         not adequately reasoned.  I do not consider it would  be  right  to
         speculate as to what the panel might have meant.  Accordingly,  the
         decision will have to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. "

22. At paragraph 21 I stated  that  the  re-hearing  would  be  limited  to
    consideration of the impact on the appellant's children of his removal,
    and I also stated as follows:

         "However, I should  make  it  clear  that  although  this  evidence
         should, and must, be before the Tribunal before a decision is made,
         it by no means follows that even if the impact on the  children  is
         significant, this will be sufficient to  outweigh  the  factors  in
         favour of deportation.  The offences, as Mr Lewis has acknowledged,
         are vey serious indeed, and even if the impact of  removal  on  the
         appellant's children is significant, this might still be outweighed
         by those factors which will be relied upon by the respondent.   The
         reason  why  I  have  found  an  error  of  law  in   the   panel's
         determination is because it is not evident from this  determination
         that the impact on the children was properly taken into account  at
         all."

23. Among the directions which I then gave was that the evidence  would  be
    limited to considering the impact of the  appellant's  removal  on  his
    children.

24. The appeal then came back before me for hearing on 1 May 2013.

The Hearing

25. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Lewis informed  the  Tribunal  that  the
    evidence would be limited to the appellant and his  father-in-law;  the
    appellant would also rely on the  witness  statements  which  had  been
    filed with the Tribunal.  I also heard submissions on  behalf  of  both
    parties.

26. As I recorded the evidence and submissions  contemporaneously,  and  my
    notes are contained within the Record of Proceedings, I shall  not  set
    out below everything which was said to me  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing, but shall refer only to what is necessary for the purposes  of
    this  determination.   However,  I  have   taken   into   consideration
    everything which was said, as well  as  all  the  documents  which  are
    contained within the file, before reaching my decision.

27. The appellant relied on the statements he had made, and  described  his
    relationship with his children  before  he  went  to  prison  as  warm,
    affectionate and loving.  He claimed that he "couldn't stop what I  was
    doing", because he had "a problem at the time".  This  was  a  gambling
    problem; this was an addiction.  He knew that what  he  was  doing  was
    wrong, but it was an illness and he could not pull  himself  away.   He
    was relieved when he was caught, and had  co-operated  fully  with  the
    police.  He had received treatment whilst in prison.

28. While in prison, the children had visited him twice a month, or more if
    there was a special day.  Sometimes  they  could  stay  all  day.   The
    prison where he was receiving treatment was  different  from  a  normal
    prison; he was allowed to play with them and even  go  to  a  cafeteria
    area.  It was almost as if he was not in prison when he was with  them.
    His son always cried when it was time to go.

29. Mostly Peter and Kim, that is their maternal grandparents, would  bring
    them, after his ex-partner stopped coming in 2009.

30. The appellant then described his relationship now  with  his  children,
    which  he  described  as  close.   Even  though  his  ex-partner,   the
    children's mother, did not like him, she did not stop  him  seeing  his
    children.  He believed that he was a good influence on them, and one of
    his son's teachers had told him that since he was taking him to school,
    his son had improved; he thought that was important.

31. In cross-examination, the appellant said that he did not have a  letter
    to the effect that his son's behaviour had improved, this was  an  oral
    conversation.  He also did not have evidence apart from photographs  as
    to how often his children had visited him.   His  ex-partner's  parents
    had always come together with the  children,  and  the  visits  usually
    lasted about two hours.He

32. When he moved from this prison, he saw the children a little less.  The
    appellant accepted that his ex-partner looked after his  children,  and
    that she was a good mother.  Although there were concerns,  there  were
    no major concerns.

33. Mr O'Brien's evidence can be summarised shortly.  He is the  father  of
    the appellant's ex-partner, that is the children's grandfather.  He  is
    a former prison officer; his wife still works in  the  Prison  Service.
    He believes that the appellant is a positive influence on his children,
    in particular his son, because the appellant's son now has "someone  to
    look after him".  The appellant can help his son and give  him  advice.
    When it was suggested to Mr O'Brien by the Tribunal that  it  could  be
    said that the appellant was not the best role model Mr O'Brien  agreed,
    but said that the appellant had become more experienced and that he was
    not the same person he had been.  He had had an  addiction,  which  was
    like a disease.  He was brilliant with his children.  If he  was  taken
    out of the equation, it  would  be  difficult  for  them.   Mr  O'Brien
    thought a boy needed his father, because a boy would always  listen  to
    his father, "he is the leader".  The children would  be  devastated  if
    their father was deported.

34. In cross-examination, Mr O'Brien said that he had visited the appellant
    in prison as soon as he had  been  sentenced;  that  was  once  he  had
    settled in.  After his daughter had stopped  seeing  the  appellant  in
    2009, Mr O'Brien still took the children out on  a  regular  basis,  as
    much as he could.  That was once a month, or every five or  six  weeks.
    He could not remember where he was in 2009, and did not remember  which
    prisons he had been to, but he went to every prison  he  was  in.   The
    appellant went to his mother on release from prison.  Mr O'Brien always
    went with his wife, and took the children.

35. The appellant's ex-partner had coped with the children, on her own, but
    with his help.  They would help out if the  children  needed  anything.
    The appellant tried to be a father from prison, but their daughter  had
    him and his wife who were all trying to help her get through.  Although
    there were a few problems, the children were safe.  While  he  accepted
    that the position of the children was not  ideal,  and  they  would  be
    better with both parents, there was never a need for Social Services to
    get involved.

36. The last time the school had contacted their daughter about  her  son's
    behaviour was about three years ago.  He was getting  into  fights  and
    being disruptive, but they left it to his daughter  to  sort  out,  and
    they (that is Mr O'Brien and his wife) talked  to  him  as  well.   His
    granddaughter had not had any problems with school, but it was not good
    for her either not having a father about.  Since the appellant had been
    released from prison, she had really blossomed, and  had  come  out  of
    herself.

37. Although Mr O'Brien, had a good  relationship  with  his  grandson,  he
    would never be his dad.  However, he did like to think that he could be
    a role model in his life.   He  thought  that  his  grandson  had  been
    getting into trouble and having fights because he was frustrated at not
    having his dad about but now he  was  as  good  as  gold.   Mr  O'Brien
    accepted that his  grandson  was  older  now,  but  he  had  also  been
    encouraged to do stuff by his dad.

38. When it was suggested to him that his  behaviour  might  have  improved
    because he was getting older  and  had  his  mum  and  grandparents  to
    support him, Mr O'Brien said that he still needed his dad.   He  feared
    that he would go back to where he had been before  if  his  father  was
    deported.  Especially now, when he would be  very  vulnerable  to  peer
    pressure and gangs and so on.

39. In re-examination, Mr O'Brien said that although he and his  wife  were
    trying to support their grandchildren, grandparents could not have  the
    same connection as a father.  His grandson worshipped his father and Mr
    O'Brien was "100% convinced" that he would be a good influence on  him,
    much better than he or their grandmother could be.

Submissions

40. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Horsley relied on  the  refusal  letter
    dated 5 April 2012 (giving  the  reasons  for  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order).  This was an appeal against the refusal  to  revoke
    that order.  The deportation order had  already  been  signed  and  the
    appellant had lost his appeal against that order.  However, the refusal
    of that appeal was still relevant and was a  starting  point  for  this
    Tribunal.  There had been no change in circumstances since  the  making
    of a deportation order such as should lead to that order being revoked.



41. The Tribunal would be looking at Article 8, but  should  bear  in  mind
    that this was an automatic deportation.

42. Ms Horsley then made submissions as to why, with regard to  Article  8,
    the Tribunal should not look at any factors outside the Rules.  It  was
    the respondent's position that the new Rules encompassed  the  approach
    to Article 8, and  that  the  guidance  issued  by  the  respondent  in
    relation  to  consideration  of  Article  8  encompassed   a   complete
    assessment of Article 8.  That  was  still  the  respondent's  position
    notwithstanding the decision of this Tribunal in MF (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393.  There was then a  discussion  as  to
    the effect of the decisions in  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),  and
    Isuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45.  Ms Horsley  appreciated
    that the higher courts  have  said  that  reported  decisions  of  this
    Tribunal should bind the Tribunal, but in the respondent's view  if  an
    applicant could not succeed under the new Rules,  there  should  be  no
    separate assessment as to whether his or her claim could succeed  under
    Article 8.  This was not an  exceptional  case.   The  new  Rules  made
    provisions as to where the best interests of  the  children  lie,  when
    balanced against the public interest.

43. Ms Horsley then addressed the Tribunal on the basis that  the  Tribunal
    would follow the guidance given in both MF and  Isuazu,  and  that  the
    Tribunal would consider whether or not an appellant who did not succeed
    under the Rules might still have a separate Article 8 claim.

44. This appellant had committed serious crimes which had made  him  liable
    for deportation.  Case law emphasised the public interest  in  removing
    those who commit serious crimes in this country.  The respondent relied
    on various decisions, in particular DS (India) EWCA [2009] Civ 544  and
    A.D. Lee.  Ms Horsley then referred to the observations of  the  social
    worker, which, it was claimed, were generalised.  However, it was clear
    that the social worker did not suggest that the children  would  suffer
    maltreatment, loss of safety or impairment of health or development, if
    their father was removed.  These were factors which had  been  stressed
    by the court in Sanade.  Also, when considering the best  interests  of
    the children, the Tribunal should have in mind that the House of  Lords
    in ZH (Tanzania) was  considering  a  removal,  not  deportation.   The
    specific issue in that decision was the circumstances in which it would
    be permissible to remove or deport a  non-citizen  parent  where  as  a
    result of that decision a child would also  have  to  leave.   In  this
    case, the children would not be required to  leave.   Also,  while  the
    best interests of the children were a primary consideration,  this  was
    not the sole consideration.  In this case, it was in the best interests
    of the children to remain in the UK with their mother.  The issue  here
    was the effect of the removal of their father on these children.

45. With regard to Mr O'Brien's evidence, Ms Horsley asked the Tribunal  to
    find that he had embellished his evidence.  There was no  corroborative
    evidence regarding the prison visit after 2009,  and  no  corroborative
    evidence from the children's mother.  There  was  also  no  independent
    evidence from the children's school, and the  social  worker  had  been
    unable to carry out a complete assessment.   Also,  the  appellant  had
    apparently told the children's mother that the social worker coming  to
    do the assessment was in fact his probation officer.  So  the  evidence
    as to the impact on the children of the  appellant's  removal  was  not
    entirely satisfactory and was not as great as was made out.  Also,  the
    evidence did not suggest  anything  other  than  that  Ms  Stubbs,  the
    appellant's ex-partner, was a good mother who cared for her  children's
    well-being and their development.   There  were  no  safety  issues  or
    health issues.  The children did adapt to the appellant's absence  when
    he was in prison.  They had been a family unit up to that point.   They
    had adapted to his absence and to his presence in  their  lives  again.
    They should be able to adapt should he now be deported.

46. Mr O'Brien's evidence was neither objective  nor  independent;  it  was
    subjective.  For example, Mr O'Brien  said  that  the  appellant's  son
    would always listen to his dad, and his dad was the leader;  he  had  a
    view already that the appellant was absolutely needed in his children's
    lives.   So  far  as  his  evidence  in  relation  to  changes  in  the
    personality of the children were concerned, the children  were  getting
    older now, which may account for changes in their personalities.

47. It should also be noted that the relationship which the  appellant  had
    built up with his children since his release had been  built  up  while
    his presence here was precarious.

48. With regard to the letters from the appellant's children, the  daughter
    was aware that the appellant was liable to deportation.  She  has  said
    that she would have to adapt again.  The appellant's son was also aware
    his father could be returned to Ghana.  So both children were aware and
    that understanding went some way to  showing  they  would  be  able  to
    adapt.  The children had written letters, and had the support of  their
    mother and their grandparents, who were very  hands-on.   This  support
    would not cease.

49. The Tribunal had to take into account the public  interest  element  in
    deporting this appellant.  The appellant  had  committed  very  serious
    crimes  for  which  he  had  received  a  very  heavy  sentence.    The
    convictions were the starting point.  Although the Tribunal  had  heard
    about the motivation for his offences, it was not for this Tribunal  to
    speculate as to what the motive was.  He  has  committed  very  serious
    crimes and he did not stop until the police came knocking at his  door,
    even though he was aware of what he was doing.

50. With regard to the risk of re-offending, the offences were  so  serious
    that the public needed to be protected.  These offences took place over
    a twelve month period.  The public interest in removing this  appellant
    outweighed the Article 8 factors  relating  to  the  appellant  or  his
    children which suggested he should remain.

51. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Lewis accepted that the appellant's risk
    of re-offending had been assessed as  a  medium  risk  because  of  the
    nature of the offences.

52. Mr Lewis relied on his skeleton argument, and the focus of this  appeal
    was the best interests of the children.  The appellant had  resided  in
    the UK for a significant period of time, lawfully,  and  indeed  for  a
    long period of time he could have applied to be a British citizen.  His
    consistent evidence had been that he got indefinite leave to remain  in
    1994, so he could have acquired British citizenship before he  went  to
    prison in 2005.  However, it was accepted that he did not so apply  and
    that  theoretically  the   respondent   could   have   rescinded   this
    citizenship, if granted, although this was very rarely done.

53. The Tribunal was invited to accept the evidence which  had  been  given
    from the appellant and the witness as to the relationship  between  the
    appellant and his children.

54. Although the appellant had committed a series of serious  offences,  he
    was not an habitual criminal.  He had not  committed  offences  outside
    this period.  His driving offence was for drink  driving  in  2005  for
    which he was sentenced to a one year ban and a �400 fine.

55. Although no doubt there was some trauma suffered by  the  victims,  the
    appellant had written to every one of  them,  and  he  had  engaged  in
    therapy  treatment  to  overcome  his  addiction.   His  actions  while
    detained had not been a response to the  threat  of  deportation.   His
    evidence was that he had engaged in this process because of his  desire
    to be with his children, and his behaviour in prison in connection with
    his family is consistent with his behaviour before.  The  evidence  was
    that  the  treatment  programme  he  had  undergone  had  had  a   very
    significant impact on him which is why he was assessed  now  as  a  low
    risk of offending.  (I note, however, that it has  been  accepted  that
    because the offences are themselves  so  serious,  he  still  for  this
    reason would present a medium risk to society).

56. If this appellant was deported, he would not be able  to  have  contact
    with his children.  Mr O'Brien's evidence was that his  daughter  would
    be unlikely to allow the children to visit him in Ghana and she  lacked
    the financial means for them to do so.

57. According to Mr O'Brien's  evidence,  the  impact  on  the  appellant's
    children  now  would  be  devastating  if  they  were  removed.    This
    assessment  was  plausible.   The  public  interest  in  removing   the
    appellant should be assessed in that context.  We were dealing with  an
    individual whose deportation would  impact  on  the  lives  of  British
    citizens.  There was a public interest in these children being able  to
    develop into contributing members of society, which would  be  improved
    by the appellant remaining and being a guiding influence on them.   The
    main individuals who would suffer as a result of his deportation  would
    be these children.

58. With regard to the letters given by the children, their mother had  not
    wanted them to give evidence.  She had not been co-operative.  She  was
    not co-operative with  the  social  worker  either  and  did  not  give
    permission.  He had offers of work  and  he  always  had  had.   If  he
    worked, this would also reduce the  need  for  the  mother  to  receive
    public funds.  The appellant had been present in his  children's  lives
    for fifteen months since released.  To remove him now  when  there  had
    been an improvement in their lives would have a devastating impact.

59. Mr Lewis also indicated that the appellant's brother, mother and social
    worker had also attended, and he relied on their statements.   He  also
    relied on the statements of Peter Tinkler and Michael  Teale,  who  was
    the manager of a football club.

60. On 9 May 2013, Mr Lewis appeared before me again in order to enlarge on
    the submissions which  he  had  made.   He  informed  me  that  he  had
    discussed with Ms Horsley the  further  representations  he  wished  to
    make, and she did not object to his making them, although she  did  not
    agree with them.  I accordingly agreed to allow Mr Lewis to make  these
    further representations.

61. Mr Lewis informed the Tribunal that he had had  instructions  from  the
    appellant, and also from the  appellant's  father-in-law,  Mr  O'Brien,
    that the appellant's ex-partner would refuse to allow his  children  to
    visit him in Ghana.  After the hearing, Mr Lewis realised that  he  had
    not put that evidence before the Tribunal, which, in the light  of  his
    clear instructions, he should have done.  He was  very  concerned  that
    the Tribunal would not reach a finding that the children would be  able
    to visit the appellant in Ghana, because of his  failure  to  put  this
    evidence before the Tribunal.

Discussion

62. I deal with Mr Lewis's supplementary submissions first.  I accept, even
    though specific evidence was not adduced on this point, that  both  the
    appellant and Mr O'Brien believe that the  appellant's  children  would
    not be allowed by their mother to visit the appellant in Ghana.   I  do
    not know whether or not their fears will turn out to be justified,  but
    I am prepared to accept that it is more likely than  not  that  if  the
    appellant is deported, he will not be able to see  his  children  until
    they are older.  I will accordingly take account of this finding when I
    come to consider whether or not the removal of the appellant  would  be
    proportionate.

63.  I have noted Ms Horsley's submission that the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights are now covered by the Rules, and  if,  following  the  guidance
    given in MF, I had concluded that the removal of the appellant would be
    in  breach  of  his  protected  Article   8   rights   under   existing
    jurisprudence, I would  have  invited  further  submissions  from  both
    parties as to precisely what  impact  the  new  Rules  should  have  on
    existing jurisprudence, in light of the recent Court of Appeal decision
    in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  However, by reason of my findings
    which appear below, I do not need to do  so,  but  need  only  consider
    whether or not the removal of this appellant, in light of the  evidence
    I have considered, would be  in  breach  of  his  protected  Article  8
    rights, in light of existing jurisprudence.

64.  When  considering  the  basic  principles  which  should  inform   the
    Tribunal's decision, I have had regard initially to the Court of Appeal
    judgments in N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094, OH  (Serbia)  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 694, JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and AD Lee v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 348, and the principles enunciated in those decisions.

65. In N (Kenya), having considered previous case law,  May  LJ  summarised
    the approach a Tribunal should take in deportation cases at  paragraphs
    64 and 65, as follows:


               "64.   In a deportation appeal...  the  adjudicator  has  an
               original statutory  discretion....   The  discretion  is  to
               balance  a  public  interest   against   the   compassionate
               circumstances of the case taking  account  of  all  relevant
               factors  including  those  specifically   referred   to   in
               paragraph 364 of HC 395.  Essentially, the same  balance  is
               expressed as that between the appellant's right  to  respect
               for his private and family life on  the  one  hand  and  the
               prevention of disorder or  crime  on  the  other.   Where  a
               person who is not a British citizen commits a number of very
               serious crimes, the public interest side of the balance will
               include importantly, although not  exclusively,  the  public
               policy need to deter and to express society's  revulsion  at
               the  seriousness  of  the  criminality.   It  is   for   the
               adjudicator in the exercise of his discretion to  weigh  all
               relevant factors, but an individual adjudicator is no better
               able to judge the critical public interest  factor  than  is
               the court.  In the first instance, that is a matter for  the
               Secretary of State.  The adjudicator should then take proper
               account of the Secretary of State's public interest view.



               65. The risk of re-offending is a  factor  in  the  balance,
               but, for very serious crimes, a low risk of re-offending  is
               not the most important public interest factor...".

66. Judge LJ added as follows, at paragraph 83:

               "83.   The 'public good' and the 'public interest' are wide-
               ranging but undefined concepts.   In  my  judgment  (whether
               expressly referred to in any decision letter or  not)  broad
               issues of social  cohesion  and  public  confidence  in  the
               administration of the system by which control  is  exercised
               over non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United
               Kingdom are engaged.  They include an element of deterrence,
               to non-British citizens who are already here, even  if  they
               are genuine refugees and to those minded to come, so  as  to
               ensure that  they  clearly  understand  that,  whatever  the
               circumstances, one of the consequences of serious crime  may
               well be deportation...".

67. N (Kenya) was considered in the judgments of the Court of Appeal in  OH
    (Serbia).  Having considered the judgment of Judge LJ in N (Kenya),  at
    para 83, as set out above, Wilson LJ stated as  follows,  at  paragraph
    15:

               "From  the  above  passages  in  N  (Kenya)  I  collect  the
               following propositions:

               (a) The risk of re-offending is  one  facet  of  the  public
               interest but, in the case of very serious  crimes,  not  the
               most important facet.

               (b) Another important facet is the  need  to  deter  foreign
               nationals from committing serious crimes by leading them  to
               understand  that,  whatever  the  other  circumstances,  one
               consequence of them may well be deportation.

               (c) A further important facet is the role of  a  deportation
               order as an expression of  society's  revulsion  at  serious
               crimes and in building public confidence in the treatment of
               foreign citizens who have committed serious crimes.

               (d) Primary responsibility for the  public  interest,  whose
               view of it is likely to be wider and  better  informed  than
               that of the Tribunal, resides in the  [Secretary  of  State]
               and accordingly an appeal against  the  decision  to  deport
               should not only consider for itself all the  facets  of  the
               public  interest  but  should  weigh,  as   a   linked   but
               independent feature, the approach to  them  adopted  by  the
               [Secretary of State] in the context  of  the  facts  of  the
               case...".

68. In deciding that the determination  of  the  original  Tribunal  in  OH
    (Serbia) was unsustainable, Wilson LJ continued as follows at paragraph
    16:

               "16.   In my heart I would wish to propose that this  appeal
               be allowed.  The efforts of the  appellant  to  rehabilitate
               himself and to make himself a useful member of  our  society
               are, in the  light  of  his  childhood  experiences,  almost
               heroic, but my work in the court is supposed to be ruled not
               by my heart but by my head...  In the concluding  paragraphs
               there is, of course, a reference to the seriousness  of  the
               offence, and a finding, accepted to be amply  founded,  that
               there was a low risk of the appellant's  re-offending.   But
               such was only one facet for the public interest  engaged  by
               this street stabbing on the part of a teenager armed with  a
               knife.  There was  there  no  reference  in  terms  by  [the
               original Tribunal] to the public interest even  though  such
               was the matter against which the compassionate circumstances
               fell  to  be  balanced.   There  was  no  reference  to  the
               significance of a deportation order as a  deterrent.   There
               was no reference to its role  as  an  expression  of  public
               revulsion or in the building of public confidence...".

69.  In JO (Uganda), where the Court of Appeal reviewed the application  of
    "recent Strasbourg case-law on the compatibility with Article 8 ECHR of
    decision to deport, on grounds of criminal offending, foreign nationals
    who have spent most of  their  childhood  in  the  host  country",  the
    principle as expressed in N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia) were again restated
    by Richards LJ with whose judgment Toulson and Mummery LJJ agreed.   At
    paragraph 27, Richards LJ stated as follows:

               "It must also be borne in mind, of course, that even if  the
               difficulties  do  make  it  unreasonable  to  expect  family
               members to join the applicant in the country to which he  is
               deported, that will not necessarily be a decisive feature in
               the overall assessment of proportionality.  It is plainly an
               important consideration but it  may  not  be  determinative,
               since it is possible  in  a  case  of  sufficiently  serious
               offending that the factors in favour of deportation will  be
               strong enough to render deportation proportionate even if it
               does  have  the  effect  of  severing   established   family
               relationships".

70. Richards LJ then stated further, at paragraph 29, as follows:

               "There is, ... one material difference between  [deportation
               and administrative removal], in that they generally  involve
               the pursuit of different  legitimate  aims:  in  deportation
               cases it is the prevention of disorder or crime, in ordinary
               removal cases it is the maintenance of effective immigration
               control.  The difference in  aim  is  potentially  important
               because the factors in favour of expulsion are  in  my  view
               capable of carrying greater weight  in  a  deportation  case
               than in a case of  ordinary  removal.   The  maintenance  of
               effective immigration control is an  important  matter,  but
               the protection of society against serious crime is even more
               important and can properly be given correspondingly  greater
               weight in the balancing exercise.  Thus I think it perfectly
               possible in principle for a given set of  considerations  of
               family life and/or private life to be  sufficiently  weighty
               to render expulsion disproportionate in an ordinary  removal
               case, yet insufficient to render expulsion  disproportionate
               in a deportation case because of the additional weight to be
               given to the criminal offending  on  which  the  deportation
               decision was based...".

71. The other authority to which I have initially had regard is that of  AD
    Lee, in which Sedley LJ stated as follows, at paragraph 27:

               "27.   The tragic consequence [of deportation in that  case]
               is that this family, short-lived as it  has  been,  will  be
               broken up forever because of the appellant's bad  behaviour.
               That is what deportation does".

72. The Court of Appeal's summary at paragraph 21 of JO (Uganda) was itself
    set out at paragraph 8 of  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  Masih
    (deportation - public interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT
    00046, where the Tribunal set out the basic principles to be applied in
    deportation cases.  These principles, as  set  out  in  the  head-note,
    include the following:

               "The following basic principles can be derived from  present
               case law concerning the issue  of  the  public  interest  in
               relation to the deportation of foreign criminals:

               (a) in a case of  automatic deportation, full  account  must
               be taken of the strong public interest in  removing  foreign
               citizens convicted of serious offences, which lies not  only
               in the prevention of further offences on  the  part  of  the
               individual  concerned,  but   in   deterring   others   from
               committing them in the first place;

               (b) deportation of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
               condemnation  of  serious  criminal  activity  and  promotes
               public confidence in the treatment of foreign  citizens  who
               have committed them...".

73. While the interests of children whose lives will  be  affected  by  the
    deportation of a parent must be a primary consideration (and this  must
    also  be  so  when  the  Tribunal  considers  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
    deportation decision), I also have regard to the observations  of  Lady
    Hale in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, that there  can  be  circumstances
    where  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  although  of   primary
    consideration, are not necessarily determinative.

74. Subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal, such as AM [2012] EWCA Civ
    1634,  have emphasised the need to take account of the public revulsion
    towards those who have committed serious offences and the need to deter
    foreign nationals from committing serious crimes.

75. It is against this legal background that I now consider the  particular
    facts in this appeal.

76. I have regard to the guidance given  by  Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar  and
    accept that this appellant has a family life in this country  and  that
    his removal would have consequences of such gravity as  to  engage  his
    rights under Article 8.  This removal would be for  a  lawful  purpose,
    namely the  prevention  of  crime  and  disorder,  and  would  also  be
    necessary for this purpose.  The key question, as it so  often  is,  is
    whether or not the removal of this appellant would be proportionate for
    this purpose.

77. I accept, as I have already stated above, that it is more  likely  than
    not that one consequence of the appellant's removal is that he will not
    be able to see his children until they are older.   While  he  will  be
    able to maintain some  contact  with  them,  through  modern  means  of
    communication, this would not be the same as  seeing  them,  and  would
    amount to a serious disruption of his and the children's family  lives.
    I am prepared to accept also, in light of the evidence which  has  been
    put before me, that all other things being equal, it would  be  in  the
    best interests of the appellant's children that  he  should  remain  in
    this  country.   However,  as  already  noted,  the  interests  of  the
    appellant's  children,   while   of   primary   importance,   are   not
    determinative of this appeal.

78. I accept that the appellant presents  a  relatively  low  risk  of  re-
    offending, but that because of the very serious nature of the  offences
    which this appellant might commit, he still presents a medium  risk  to
    the public.  However, I must make it clear that even  if  I  considered
    that he presented no risk at all of re-offending, for the reasons which
    I give below, I would still feel obliged to come to the same decision.

79. While I accept that all other things being equal it would be preferable
    from the children's point of view if their father was present in  their
    lives, I do not accept that it would be "disastrous"  for  their  well-
    being if he was removed.  Mr O'Brien clearly  believes  they  would  be
    better off with their father in their lives, because all families would
    be better off with both parents, but I have noted that both he and  the
    appellant accept that Ms Stubbs, the appellant's ex-partner, is a  good
    mother, who cares for her children.  The appellant said in  terms  that
    although he had concerns, Ms Stubbs was a good mother, while Mr O'Brien
    also accepted that whilst there were a few problems with the  children,
    there had never been a need to involve Social Services.  The family was
    getting by with support from the children's grandparents,  although  Mr
    O'Brien did not believe that  the  grandparents  could  have  the  same
    connection as a father.

80. As I indicated at paragraph 21 of my earlier Decision, even if I  found
    that the impact of the appellant's removal on  his  children  would  be
    significant, it did not follow that this would outweigh the factors  in
    favour of deporting this appellant.  It was no doubt difficult for  the
    appellant's family to cope when he was sent to  prison;  unfortunately,
    when a man who has a partner and children is sent to prison, his family
    will usually suffer.  That is a sad consequence of his having committed
    offences sufficiently serious that he had to be imprisoned.

81. Similarly, when a foreign criminal, which is what  this  appellant  is,
    commits very serious offences, the normal consequence is that  he  will
    be deported.  Whilst there may be circumstances where the  reasons  why
    he should not be deported are so strong that they outweigh the  factors
    in favour of his deportation, in my judgment this is not such  a  case.
    While I accept that the children's lives  would  be  happier  if  their
    father was still seeing them (although I do not accept that he is  such
    a good role model as Mr O'Brien apparently believes) they will continue
    to be well cared for even when he is away from them, and they  will  be
    able to maintain some albeit  a  limited  form  of  contact  with  him.
    Social Services will not have to be involved and, in my  judgment,  the
    family will cope.   While  the  appellant  and  his  children  will  be
    separated (as their mother, although not grandparents, might prefer) as
    Sedley LJ said in A.D. Lee, "that is what deportation does".

82. I take account also that the appellant has been in this  country  since
    1994, when he was 17, and was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in
    1999.  That is a long period, and this is a factor which  I  take  into
    account as weighing against deportation.

83. Having given consideration to the reasons why it has been  argued  that
    this appellant should not be deported, I also have to consider  why  it
    is said that he should.  The offences which  this  appellant  committed
    were extremely serious.  Over the course of about a year, the appellant
    committed ten robberies, in the majority of which he used an  imitation
    firearm.  The victims must have been terrified, and  even  following  a
    plea of guilty, and after appeal, he was still sentenced to a total  of
    ten years' imprisonment.  These offences are so serious that,  in  line
    with the authorities cited  above,  it  is  very  much  in  the  public
    interests to deport this  appellant  first  in  order  to  deter  other
    foreign nationals from committing serious crimes  by  leading  them  to
    understand that, whatever the other circumstances, one consequence  may
    be that they will  be  deported,  and  secondly  as  an  expression  of
    society's revulsion at crimes such as those committed by this appellant
    and in building public confidence in the treatment of foreign criminals
    who have committed serious crimes.

84. In my judgment, these reasons why  the  appellant  should  be  deported
    outweigh by a wide margin the reasons why he should not.   Accordingly,
    I find that his removal  would  be  proportionate  for  the  legitimate
    purpose of the prevention of disorder and crime in the widest sense and
    would not be in breach of this country's obligations under Article 8 of
    the  ECHR.   It  follows  that  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
    respondent's  refusal  to  revoke  her  deportation  decision  must  be
    dismissed and he must be deported.

Decision

I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.






Signed:                                 Date: 26 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
