
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10523/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                          |On 26 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                             mr BENJAMIN KOOMSON
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Ms. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                                  DECISION


 1. No application for anonymity has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 13 June 1966.   He  applied
    for a residence card as the  husband  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  His application was  refused  and
    his appeal was subsequently considered on papers by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal M. D. Dennis who in a decision promulgated on 30  October
    2014 dismissed it under the European Economic Area Regulations 2006.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal.   His  application  was
    granted by Judge P. J.  M.  Hollingworth  on  17  December  2014.   His
    reasons for so doing were:-

         "An arguable error of law has arisen.  The grounds of appeal  refer
         to Article 8.  The judge has not dealt with this either  adequately
         or in accordance with  Razgar  principles.   The  appeal  was  only
         dismissed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. I was satisfied that the appellant had been properly served with notice
    of today's hearing.  He did not appear and in all the  circumstances  I
    decided to proceed.

 6. Ms. Petterson acknowledged that Article 8  was  at  large  within  this
    appeal and that the judge had erred in failing to deal with the issues.

 7. On my own analysis there is consequently here a material error of  law.
    It was incumbent upon Judge Dennis to deal with Article  8  as  it  was
    raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  and  clearly  referred  to  in  the
    appellant's  witness  statement  considered   within   the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. Therefore, having  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations (a decision which stands) the singular issue outstanding to
    be determined is that of Article 8.

 9. The appeal will therefore proceed to a remitted hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal where the singular issue will be Article 8 alone.   There
    is no reason why Judge Dennis should not complete his task  in  dealing
    with all matters within this appeal.

10. In deciding whether  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
    2007, I can dispose of the  appeal  in  one  of  two  ways,  either  by
    remitting the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the
    decision.  The choices regulated by  paragraph  7  of  Part  3  of  the
    Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  Upper
    Tribunal  which  only  contemplate   a   remittal   in   very   limited
    circumstances.  This though is such a case.   The  appellant  has  been
    deprived of a fair hearing in respect of his Article 8  claim  and  the
    opportunity of putting his case forward to be considered by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In those circumstances I remit the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal subject to the attached directions.


Signed                              Date 25 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
             DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


 1. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Glasgow and
    to be listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M. D. Dennis.






Signed                              Date 25 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

