
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10605/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 11th December 2015            |On the 5th January 2016               |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                        MISS FATIMAT AJOKE OGUNSHINA
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the  Appellant  (The  Secretary  of  State):   Mr  Norton  (Home  Office
Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent/Claimant: No Attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department's  appeal
       against  the  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Morrison
       promulgated on the 10th June 2015 in which he allowed the  Claimant's
       appeal under Regulation 15  (1)  (f)  of  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006, and  found  that  the  Claimant  had
       acquired the right to reside in United Kingdom permanently.  As  this
       is the Secretary of  State's  appeal,  for  the  purpose  of  clarity
       throughout this decision, Miss Ogunshina will be referred to  as  the
       "Claimant" and the Secretary of State for the Home Department will be
       referred to as the "Secretary of State".

    2. Despite Notice having been sent of the time, date and location of the
       hearing to both the Claimant and  to  her  legal  representative  ABS
       Legal Services on the 19th November 2015, listing the  appeal  to  be
       heard at 10 a.m. on Friday 11th December  2015  at  Field  House,  15
       Breams Buildings, London,  EC4A  1DZ,  by  11:30  a.m.,  no  one  had
       attended on behalf of the Claimant. I asked  my  clerk  to  check  to
       ensure that no message been received at the Tribunal, and no  message
       had been received on behalf of the Claimant at the Tribunal and there
       was no correspondence which sought to  explain  the  absence  of  the
       Claimant or her representative, and no request for an adjournment had
       been made. I further noted that the Claimant had agreed  to  a  short
       notice hearing date on the 8th November  2015,  and  although  having
       asked for further time to submit the Rule 24 response, that  response
       was  contained  within  the  appeal  papers  before   me.   In   such
       circumstances pursuant to Rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008, I was satisfied  that  the  Claimant  had  been
       notified of the hearing or that reasonable steps had  been  taken  to
       notify her of the hearing and that it was in the interests of justice
       to proceed with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  Claimant,  no
       explanation having been given for her failure to attend, there  being
       no adjournment request and the statement in her Rule 24 response that
       the appeal should be conducted on the papers.

    3. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it was argued that First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Morrison had found that the Claimant's EEA national husband had
       been exercising his Treaty rights from  mid-January  2012  until  the
       date of the divorce between the Claimant and her husband on  the  4th
       November 2014  and  that  thereafter  the  Claimant  had  been  self-
       employed. It was argued that this did not qualify  the  Claimant  for
       permanent residence as she was required to have lived  in  accordance
       with the Regulations for a continuous five-year period and  that  the
       Judge appeared to have taken periods  of  the  Claimant's  employment
       from 2009 and amalgamated those with that of the sponsor  to  give  a
       combined working total of 5 years. It  is  argued  that  as  the  EEA
       spouse's employment was recorded as  having  started  in  mid-January
       2014, the Claimant cannot be considered as having lived in accordance
       with those Regulations before then.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal
       Kimnell on the 29th September 2015 and he found that the Secretary of
       State's argument that the Judge erred in finding that  Regulation  15
       (1) (f) was satisfied had merit.

    5. In her Rule 24 response,  the  Claimant  argues  that  permission  to
       appeal should not have been allowed and that granting  permission  is
       contrary to the relevant provisions of Regulation 15  and  Regulation
       10 (5) of the Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 and that the Secretary
       of State knew that she was issued with a Residence Card as  a  family
       member of an EEA national who was exercising Treaty rights  in  2009.
       She argued that she had lived  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations and in particular Regulation 15 (1)  (b)  and  (f)  as  a
       family member of an EEA national who has retained right of  residence
       and that she had been living in accordance with the Regulations as  a
       self-employed individual in 2010, 2011, 2012 2013 and as a worker  in
       2014 and 2015. She argues that her Residence Card  was  issued  as  a
       result of evidence of her EEA sponsor  exercising  treaty  rights  in
       2009 and that the appeal is simply a waste time and money. She argues
       that the appeal should be conducted on the papers.

    6. In his oral submissions to me, Mr Norton contended that the  argument
       was fairly succinct and that the EEA Sponsor had only been exercising
       Treaty Rights since 2012. Although he agreed that the Claimant  would
       have a retained Right of residence following the divorce,  he  argued
       that she did not qualify for a permanent  right  of  residence  until
       2017, as the five-year requisite period commenced  upon  the  sponsor
       starting to exercise his Treaty Rights. He relied upon  the  decision
       of Senior Immigration Judge Storey in the case  of  OA  (EEA-Retained
       Right of Residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT 0003.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

    7. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison has  materially  erred
       in law at [18] of his decision, when he found that as a result of the
       Claimant had been self-employed for 4 years  between  the  6th  April
       2009 and her former husband being employed from mid-January  2012  to
       the date of the divorce in 2014, that there was therefore evidence of
       a continuous exercise  of  Treaty  Rights  for  a  five-year  period.
       Although the fact that the Claimant on  the  findings  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Morrison continued to be self-employed after the  date
       of the divorce, does mean that she was and is entitled to a  retained
       right of residence under Regulation 10 (5) and (6) of the Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2006. However, the fact that  the  Claimant  rather
       than her husband had been self-employed from the 6th April  2009  was
       not relevant for calculating the start of  the  continuous  five-year
       period for the purpose of Regulation 15 (1) (f).

    8. Under Regulation 15 (1) (f) a person shall acquire a right to  reside
       in the United Kingdom permanently if they have:

             "(i)      have resided in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
             with these Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years; and

             (ii)      was, at the end of that period, a family member  who
             has a retained right of residence".

    9. Both limbs of Regulation 15 (1) (F) have  to  be  satisfied.  As  was
       stated by Senior Immigration Judge Storey in the  case  of  OA  (EEA-
       Retained Right of Residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT 00003  at  [33]  to
       accord with the Regulations, the Claimant's status as a family member
       had to be based upon her EEA husband continuing  to  exercise  Treaty
       rights, but in that reported case there was insufficient evidence  to
       show her husband was continuing to exercise Treaty rights during  the
       relevant period.

   10. Given that Ms Ogunshina's ex-husband according  to  the  findings  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison did not start his employment until
       mid-January 2012 and therefore did not start to exercise  his  Treaty
       Rights as an EEA national until that date, the Claimant had not lived
       in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period
       of 5 years either by the date of the original decision or by the date
       that First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison considered  the  appeal.  The
       Claimant will not be entitled to achieve permanent  residence  status
       until mid-January 2017, when the five-year period has been completed.



   11. In reaching my decision I have fully taken account of the submissions
       made by the Claimant in  her  Rule  24  response,  and  although  the
       Claimant was issued with a Residence Card back in 2009, that  is  not
       proof that her sponsor, her ex-husband, was exercising Treaty  rights
       between 2009 and mid-January 2012, and  given  the  finding  of  FFTJ
       Morrison that her husband was exercising Treaty  Rights  since  2012,
       which has not been cross appealed, that submission has no merit.

   12. The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Morrison  therefore  does
       contain a material error of law  and  is  set  aside.  I  remake  the
       decision, dismissing the Claimant Miss Ogunshina's appeal  under  the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, given that her
       ex-husband on the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison  had
       not commenced employment in the UK until mid-January  2012,  and  was
       thereby not exercising Treaty rights until that stage.  The  Claimant
       therefore had not resided in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with
       the Regulations for a continuous period  of  5  years  and  therefore
       Regulation 15 (1) (f) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  is
       not satisfied and will not be satisfied until mid January 2017.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Morrison,  the  same
containing a material error of law;

I remake the decision dismissing the Claimant Ms  Ogunshina's  appeal  under
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006;

No Anonymity Order  is  made,  none  having  been  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and none having been sought before me.


Signed      Dated 14th December 2015
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
