
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10286/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th August 2016                      |On 22nd August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                ayesha azmat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Coffey made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 18 November 2015.

Background

 2. There is a very  lengthy  immigration  history  to  this  matter.   The
    claimant arrived in the UK on 16th October 2010 with entry clearance as
    a work permit dependant of her  spouse  Azmat  Rauf  Khan,  valid  from
    October 2010 until 30th September 2013. Mr Khan's entry  clearance  was
    then curtailed on 8th May 2012 although the Appellant's  was  not.   He
    commenced judicial review proceedings and  the  Appellant  was  granted
    leave outside the Rules for two months pending  their  conclusion.  Her
    leave then expired and she applied to  extend  it  for  twelve  months,
    which was refused on 24th June 2013.

 3. In a determination made following a hearing at Richmond on 13  February
    2014 Judge Blum allowed the Appellant's appeal. The Secretary of  State
    had mistakenly believed that the proceedings were at an end.

 4. Judge Blum recorded that it was  agreed  by  both  the  representatives
    before him that the appeal ought to be allowed so that the  Appellant's
    husband could pursue his  judicial  review  proceedings;  she  and  her
    daughter should not be required to leave the UK whilst  he  argued  his
    case.  He was arguing that  the  cancellation  of  his  leave  was  not
    lawful.  If that was found to be correct he would be in a  position  to
    apply for indefinite leave to remain before the expiry of his  original
    leave, and the Appellant would have been able to apply for ILR  as  his
    dependant. Hence the outcome was of significant importance.

 5. In  fact  the  claimant's  husband  lost  his  application  before  the
    Administrative Court but he was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  A date has been set for the hearing of that matter on
    6th or 7th December 2016.  On that basis the judge allowed  the  appeal
    and made a direction for discretionary leave for  twelve  months  under
    Section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. The Secretary of State challenged her decision both on the  basis  that
    she had exceeded her remit in directing the Secretary of  State  as  to
    the period of leave to be granted, relying on the case  of  IT  (Sierra
    Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 787
    which  held  that,  following  a  successful  Article  8  appeal,   the
    Respondent cannot remove the Appellant but it  is  for  her  to  decide
    whether to exercise her discretion to grant leave to remain and  if  so
    for how long.

 7. The Secretary of State also argued that the judge had  failed  to  have
    regard to the wider competing public interests set out in Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by Judge Hollingworth  on  12th  July
    2016.

The hearing

 9. It is not necessary to go into  any  detail  in  this  case  since  the
    outcome was agreed between the parties.

10. Mr Walker relied on his grounds.

11. Mr Nasim submitted that in fact the judge had referred to Section  117B
    at paragraph 6 of the determination but in any event  this  was  not  a
    precarious private life case.  The circumstances were most unusual  and
    117B had little application to these particular circumstances.

12. I do not agree with him. It is quite apparent  from  the  determination
    that the judge did not set out the requirements of  paragraph  117B  in
    the Secretary of State's favour and it is clear that they were  not  in
    her mind when she made the decision.  She was obliged to take them into
    account, and accordingly erred in law. Her decision is set aside.

13. Having said that I would make exactly the same decision as she did, and
    I follow the reasoning of  Judge  Blum.  The  circumstances  today  are
    essentially the same as they were then.

14. Mr Walker sensibly did not seek to argue otherwise.  It is quite  clear
    that the proceedings will be determined in a very short period of time.
    Within a matter of a very few months the family will know whether  they
    will be in a position to make another application or whether they  will
    need to leave the UK. Mr Walker made no argument  to  suggest  that  it
    would be proportionate for Appellant to be removed in the interim.   He
    said that he would indicate that a period of  six  months  would  be  a
    reasonable period of leave in order that the Appellant  can  remain  in
    the UK with her husband until  the  Court  of  Appeal  proceedings  are
    disposed of.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of Judge Coffey is set aside and remade in the same terms.
     The Appellant's appeal is allowed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 20 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
