
IA 10446 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2013                          |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MRS RUKAYA IBRAHIM LEAPER
                              AKA RAKAYA BEGUM

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on 4 October 1979, as  the
      appellant herein.

   2. The appellant came to the United  Kingdom  on  a  spouse  visa  on  28
      September 2010. The visa was valid until 28 December 2012. The  couple
      married on 7 February 2009 and lived together since November 2009.

   3. The appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  but  this
      application was refused by the Secretary of State on 22nd  March  2013
      on the basis there  was  not  evidence  of  co-habitation  during  the
      previous two years of the marriage and because the appellant  had  not
      provided an English Language  Certificate  from  an  approved  English
      language test provider as provided by the immigration rules.

   4. The appeal came before a First-tier Judge as a paper case on 26th June
      2013. She resolved both issues in favour of  the  appellant.  She  was
      satisfied that the parties had been living together over the two  year
      period and that the marriage was subsisting  and  there  has  been  no
      challenge to that aspect of her decision.

   5. In relation to the English Language Test Certificate, the judge  found
      the appellant had passed the test the month after the decision and she
      met all the relevant requirements of the rules  that  were  applicable
      given that she had leave to remain granted before 9 July 2012.

   6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on  the  basis
      that the judge had not set out the scores the appellant  had  achieved
      when passing the test and on whether the appellant  had  undertaken  a
      test by approved test provider.

   7. The Secretary of State had not seen the certificate.

   8. Permission to appeal was granted. It was noted the certificate  relied
      upon had been returned to the appellant and it was not  clear  whether
      the respondent's points were good ones or not.

   9. At the hearing the appellant produced the original certificate and  Mr
      Bramble had the opportunity to consider it.

  10. Having scrutinised it Mr Bramble  accepted  that  the  test  had  been
      conducted by an approved test provider. Had the document still been on
      the file it was doubtful that permission to  appeal  would  have  been
      granted. He was content that I should find that the  First-tier  Judge
      had not materially erred in law and that her decision should stand.

  11. As Mr Bramble did not seek to advance the arguments in the grounds  in
      the light of the test certificate the appellant produced  I  find  the
      decision of the First-tier Judge was not materially flawed in law. The
      decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

  12. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               23 September 2013
