
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/10936/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13th July 2016                        |    On 27th July 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                             BIPLAB Kumar SARKAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian, Counsel for DJ Webb & Co Solicitors
London
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1st  March  1978.   He
    appealed against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  3rd  March  2015
    refusing his application for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom based on the Appellant's asserted ten years' continuous  lawful
    residence here and against removal directions.  His appeal was heard by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Symes  on  23rd  December  2015.   The
    appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 8th January 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on  8th  June  2016.
    The permission states that the Appellant's long  residence  application
    was refused by the Respondent because of his alleged deception and only
    because of this.  The judge found that the allegation of deception  had
    not been discharged by the Respondent.  The judge however  went  on  to
    find that the Appellant had not proven  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence due to two breaks in his leave  to  remain.   The  permission
    states that as this particular issue had not been raised as a reason to
    refuse the application and the Appellant was not given notice that  his
    accrued lawful residence was an issue, the judge erred  by  failing  to
    give the Appellant the opportunity  to  properly  address  the  judge's
    concern on this issue.  The permission goes on to state that the  judge
    failed to consider the Home Office guidance relating to arguable errors
    of law.  Under  paragraph  276B(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  anyone
    awaiting  a  decision  on  an  application  made  within  28  days   of
    overstaying will not be prejudiced against because it is late.

 3. There is a Rule 24  response  on  file  which  states  that  the  judge
    addresses the breaks in residence in paragraph 20 of the  decision  and
    it is clear that the Appellant was well aware that this was  an  issue.
    Furthermore the Presenting Officer's note records that this  point  was
    conceded by the Appellant's  representative.   The  judge  raised  this
    issue as a preliminary point before the hearing.

 4. Counsel  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  on  26th  May  2016  the
    Appellant's representative made an application under Rule 15(2A) of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules.  This states  that  on  25th
    May 2016, (which is clearly  after  the  date  of  the  decision),  the
    representative had obtained  documentary  evidence  through  a  subject
    access request made to the Home  Office  on  27th  January  2016  which
    conclusively shows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law
    in dismissing the appeal.  With that letter of 26th May  2016,  General
    Case Information Database records from the Home Office are attached and
    these show that the Appellant's  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom was not an issue in dispute.   The  letter  states  that
    should permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  be  granted  the
    representative  seeks  to  adduce  this  document  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  A  further  letter  was
    sent on 7th July 2016 which states that the letter  of  26th  May  2016
    should be treated as an application under Rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.  Counsel submitted that this evidence was  not  before
    the First-tier Judge.  The evidence being  adduced  is  a  case  record
    sheet with notes by the Home Office which came to light after the First-
    tier application.  Counsel submitted that the Respondent in these notes
    has accepted that the Appellant has spent a continuous  period  of  ten
    years lawfully in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that this  goes  to
    the heart of the issue and the sole reason  that  the  application  was
    refused was an allegation of deception which the judge found could  not
    stand.  Counsel submitted that there was no delay  in  producing  these
    notes once they came to light.  As soon as the notes  were  received  a
    letter was sent to the IAC.

 5. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  these  notes  clearly  make  a
    difference to this claim.  They state that the Appellant  has  spent  a
    continuous period of ten years lawfully in the United Kingdom.

 6. The rejection of the application is purely based on the making of false
    representations or the failure to disclose  a  material  fact  for  the
    purpose of obtaining leave to enter.  This was not upheld by the judge.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that she accepts that  the  Respondent
    has accepted that the Appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of ten years lawfully and she cannot go  behind  what
    her colleagues have stated so there is an error of law in  the  judge's
    decision.

 8. Based on what is before me and in particular the GCID case record sheet
    now produced, which was not before the First-tier Judge, the First-tier
    Judge's decision cannot stand.  In paragraph 18 the judge  states  that
    there is no evidence of the asserted dishonesty by the Appellant before
    him and there is therefore no barrier to  the  Appellant's  suitability
    for consideration under the Immigration Rules.

 9. As this was the only reason the application was refused and  as  it  is
    clear that the Respondent has accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    lawfully in the United Kingdom for ten years I am going  to  set  aside
    the First-tier Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

Because of the evidence before me which has been  properly  submitted  under
Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules the  First-tier
Judge's decision, promulgated on 8th January 2016 must be set aside.

I am remaking the decision and am granting the Appellant's  application  for
further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  based  on  ten  years'
continuous lawful residence here.

I allow the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 27th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray




