
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 10 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                            mr Fehintola Bamidele
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Celia Record (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr Fehintola Bamidele, whose date of birth  is  12
    February 1960, a citizen of Nigeria, against a  decision  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Wellesley-Cole)  (FTT)  promulgated  on  29
    October 2014 in which she dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is the father of two children who  [are]  living  in  the
    UK.  Their mother is the extended family member of an EEA national, her
    uncle, and is dependent on him and lives together with her children  at
    the uncle's house in London.  The appellant's claim is  that  [he]  has
    resided in the UK for over  twenty  years,  is  settled  here  and  has
    established a private life.  The decision is  contrary  his  Article  8
    rights and his children would be  significantly  effected  if  he  were
    required to leave the UK (ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4  and  MK
    (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC)).

Reasons for refusal

3.   In  a  letter  dated  10  February  2014  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the
    suitability  requirements.   However  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant and Ms Oduyebo were  in  a  relationship  as  partners.   The
    respondent was not satisfied that  the  eligibility  requirements  were
    met.  Consideration was given to EX.1 but the appellant failed to  show
    an eligible relationship under the Rules and he failed to meet  EX.1(a)
    and (b) of Appendix FM.

4.   Even if it was accepted that  there  was  a  relationship  between  the
    parties and that the appellant enjoyed a parental relationship with the
    children, it was not established that  it  was  not  possible  for  the
    relationship to continue elsewhere such as Nigeria.  The appellant  was
    fully aware he no valid leave to remain  in  the  UK  and  should  have
    returned to Nigeria but chose not to.

5.   The respondent took into account that both children were under the  age
    of 3 years, not settled in the UK  and  could  move  to  Nigeria.   The
    children's mother was neither a British citizen nor settled in the  UK.



6.   Paragraph 276ADE was not established on length  of  residence  nor  had
    the appellant established that he had no  social,  cultural  or  family
    ties in Nigeria.

7.   The respondent found no exceptional circumstances outside of the  Rules
    to warrant discretionary leave being  granted  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    The respondent took into account that the appellant remained in the  UK
    without lawful authority since his arrival and failed to  obtain  leave
    in any category.  He failed to show how he was  financially  supporting
    himself and he failed to provide documentary evidence of his length  of
    residence in the UK.

First-tier Decision

8.   The FTT took as its starting point the  previous  determination  before
    Judge Mitchell in 2009.   That  Tribunal  accepted  that  there  was  a
    possibility that the appellant had resided in the UK  since  2006.   It
    was accepted that he had a private life but at  that  time  he  had  no
    children and worked illegally and led an unstable life.

9.   The FTT considered only Article  8  outside  of  the  rules,  it  being
    conceded that the appellant could not meet the  Rules.  The  FTT  found
    that the appellant was now the unmarried father of two children born in
    the UK and his partner (the children's mother) was dependent on her  EU
    uncle  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   The  FTT   considered
    freestanding Article 8 and followed  the  five  stages  established  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  It accepted that the appellant had  established
    a private life as the result of the length of residence and found  some
    measure of family life [16].  It accepted that  he  was  close  to  his
    partner and saw his children on  a  daily  basis  and  taking  them  to
    nursery.  The FTT considered that the main issue  was  proportionality.
    It placed weight on the fact that the appellant's  private  and  family
    life had been built up at a time when he had no lawful  status  in  the
    UK.  Section 117B Immigration Act 2014  was  taken  into  account  with
    regard to the public interest.  The appellant was not  contributing  to
    society by paying tax. Little weight should be given  to  private  life
    established when a person's immigration status was precarious. The  FTT
    had regard to the fact that his partner had a residence  card  expiring
    in 2016 and the children as yet had no settled immigration status.  The
    FTT took into account that the appellant was integrated  into  Nigerian
    society where he lived for over 30 years and spent his formative  life.
    It considered that he would be able to maintain relationships with  his
    family from  Nigeria  where  they  could  visit  him.   There  were  no
    obstacles to his returning to Nigeria.

Grounds of Application

10.  The appellant argued that the decision disclosed a  material  error  of
    law. The FTT failed to consider where the best interest of the children
    lie having regard to the fact that they were born in  the  UK  and  the
    appellant sees them every  day.   The  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
    account ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74  which  made
    clear that children must not be blamed  for  matters  for  which  their
    parents are responsible.

Permission to Appeal

11.  Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 21 January 2015 who  concluded  that  no  arguable  error  arose  as
    asserted through omitting to have regard to the best interests  of  the
    children.  The FTT had due regard to the interests of the  children  as
    per ZH (Tanzania) which formed the prime substance of the case together
    with the application of  Devaseelan  [2003]  Imm  AR  and  Section  117
    Immigration Act 2014.

Renewed Application to the Upper Tribunal

12.  In grounds dated 3 February 2014 it was argued that the FTT  failed  to
    consider the impact of the appellant's removal on the children at [14 -
    21]. This was the subject  of  submissions  made  at  the  hearing  and
    recorded at [13]. There was family life between the appellant  and  his
    children.

Upper Tribunal's Grant of Permission

13.  Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on 30 April 2015  on  the
    grounds that it was arguable that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  consider  the
    children's best interests in conducting the proportionality exercise or
    treating their best interests as a primary consideration.  At best  the
    FTTJ concluded that the children were small and could live with him  in
    Nigeria.  This was when they were not presently  living  with  him  and
    their mother had a right to reside  here.   It  is  arguable  that  the
    Tribunal did not follow the guidance provided in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4 or MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT  00475
    (IAC).

Rule 24 Response

14.  The respondent opposed the appeal in a letter dated 12 May  2015.   The
    Tribunal did consider the best interests  of  the  children.   The  FTT
    considered ZH (Tanzania)  with  reference  to  the  children  from  [2]
    onwards and conducted a thorough balancing exercise taking into account
    the partner's temporary status, lack of status  for  the  children  and
    lack of residence with the appellant.

Hearing

15.  At the start of the hearing Mr  Bramble  for  the  respondent  conceded
    that the FTT failed to specifically consider where the  best  interests
    of the children lie, however this error  was  not  material  given  the
    FTT's  findings  and  conclusions.   He  also  acknowledged  that   the
    Secretary of State failed to address its obligations under  section  55
    2009 Act.

16.  Ms Record submitted that the two children were UK born  aged  4  and  3
    years.  The appellant saw them daily.  The children were  supported  by
    his girlfriend's uncle in the UK.  Ms Record argued that  the  children
    were settled and their interests ought to  have  been  considered  more
    closely and separately from those of the  appellant  and  his  partner.
    The FTT should have taken into account  that  the  appellant's  partner
    stated that she would not go to Nigeria.

17.  Mr Bramble submitted that whilst no specific  consideration  was  given
    to Section 55 of 2009 Act the FTT took into  account  the  children  in
    considering the position as a whole.  The children have  no  status  in
    the UK and given their ages it was hard to see what more  could  go  in
    their favour.  Even if the FTT had  specifically  considered  the  best
    interests of the children, the FTT's decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    would not have altered.

18.  Ms Record submitted that the children's considerations  are  a  primary
    matter which should have been given more attention.  They are supported
    and accommodated by an EEA national.  There was no burden on the public
    purse.

19.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now  give
    with my reasons.

Findings of Fact and Conclusions

20.  I find that there was an error of law by the FTT  to  the  extent  that
    there was no direct reference to the issue of where the best  interests
    of the two children (aged 3 and 4 years) lie.  However,  it  cannot  be
    said that there was no consideration of the interests of  the  children
    at all [18].  I am satisfied that the FTT was fully  aware  that  there
    were two young children who were born in the UK and who  the  appellant
    saw on a daily basis. The FTT found that he  clearly  had  a  role  and
    family life existed to an extent.  The FTT qualified this having regard
    to the fact that the family did not live as a  unit  and  that  it  was
    built up in the knowledge that the appellant had no  lawful  status  in
    the UK and his position was precarious.

21.  Ms Record has submitted that the children would  suffer  in  the  event
    that the appellant left for Nigeria.  There was no evidence adduced  of
    any detrimental effect. There was no evidence to show that it would  be
    unduly harsh in the event that the appellant, his partner and  the  two
    children lived in Nigeria.  The FTT took into account that the children
    had no settled status in the UK and that his partner who was a national
    of Nigeria had a right of residence until 2016 as a  dependant  on  her
    EEA national uncle. There was no evidence of any independent  life  for
    the children nor in respect of their nursery education.  There  was  no
    evidence to show why it was not reasonable for the appellant's  partner
    and children to return to Nigeria with him.  The  FTT  found  that  the
    relationships could be continued with visits to Nigeria. There  was  no
    evidence to show that the partner's uncle would not be able to continue
    to provide financial support for the  family  in  Nigeria.  There  were
    other relatives of the appellant's partner  in  Nigeria  including  her
    mother and sister.

22.  I am satisfied that the FTT considered the relevant evidence and  which
    amounted to  an assessment of the best interests of  the  children.   I
    find that this formed a part the FTT's overall consideration [18].  The
    FTT considered, as  it  must,  the  public  interest  factors  and  the
    statutory  provisions  and  found  no  exceptional  circumstances  that
    outweighed the public interest [19]. I am satisfied that  there  is  no
    evidence in relation to the children, that was not  considered  by  the
    FTT, that would have resulted in any different outcome.

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law in the decision which shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated 8.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Dated 8.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
