


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10696/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2013                          |On 01 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     PF
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Armstrong, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:   Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.    The appellant is an Angolan citizen. He was born on 2 March 1983.

 2.      It has already been  found  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    Article 3 protection on the grounds of his mental health,  that  matter
    having been decided by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter in  a  determination
    dated 8 March 2011.

 3. However, the appellant also maintains that he is entitled to protection
    under Article (15)(b) of the Qualification Directive (QD) and qualifies
    for a grant of humanitarian protection (HP).

 4. In a determination dated 26 June 2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun found
    that the appellant was excluded from HP and also did  not  make  out  a
    substantive claim for HP. In a Consent Order  dated  4  June  2013  the
    challenge to Judge Eshun's decision to the Court of Appeal was  allowed
    and the matter remitted to the Upper Tribunal to re-decide  the  issues
    of exclusion from and entitlement to HP.  Thus the matter  came  before
    us.

 5. There are two outstanding issues that we are required to resolve.   The
    first is whether the appellant is excluded from HP on account of having
    committed "a serious crime". The second is whether he qualifies for  HP
    at all.

 6. The terms of the Consent Order dated  4  June  2013  and  Statement  of
    Reasons attached thereto were somewhat opaque as to  the  latter  issue
    being before us. However, the grounds of appeal to the Court of  Appeal
    challenged Judge Eshun's findings on the appellant's  HO  claim.  Also,
    there would have been no purpose in the  remittal  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal had the issue of the appellant's substantive  qualification  for
    HP not been at large as well as the exclusion issue. Ms  Holmes  agreed
    with Mr Armstrong that the question of whether the appellant  qualified
    for HP was before us.

Exclusion from Humanitarian Protection

 7. Article 15 of the Qualification Directive states:

        Article 15
        Serious harm
        Serious harm consists of:
        ...
        (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of an
        applicant in the country of origin ... "

 8. Article 17 of the QD states:

        Article 17
        Exclusion
        1. A third country national or a stateless person is excluded from
        being eligible for subsidiary protection where there are serious
        reasons for considering that:
         ...
        (b) he or she has committed a serious crime... "

 9. These provisions are incorporated into domestic  law  in  HC  395  (the
    Immigration Rules) at paragraphs 339C and 339D, thus:

        Grant of humanitarian protection

        339C. A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the
        United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

        (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry
        in the United Kingdom;

        (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of
        The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006;

        (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
        person concerned, if he returned to the country of return, would
        face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing
        to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that
        country; and

        (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.

        Serious harm consists of:

        ...

        (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a
        person in the country of return... .


        Exclusion from humanitarian protection

        339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection
        under paragraph 339C (iv) where the Secretary of State is satisfied
        that:

        (i) there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed
        a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or
        any other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated in
        such crimes ... "

10. This appellant has a conviction for possessing a false  instrument  and
    attempting to obtain services by deception  for  which  he  received  a
    sentence of 12 months imprisonment. The circumstances were that he  was
    a 20 year old failed asylum seeker, knew he had no right  to  work  but
    obtained a false passport in order to open a bank account so as to have
    documents that would allow him to work.

11. The sentencing judge was  concerned  about  the  appellant's  emotional
    health and directing that the Youth Offenders Institution to  which  he
    was sent be notified that he posed a high risk of self-harm. It was not
    disputed that the features observed by the sentencing judge were  signs
    of what was later diagnosed as complex PTSD and paranoid schizophrenia.
    It  is  not  disputed  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Latter   correctly
    identified that the appellant's fear of return to Angola (which led him
    to try to remain in the UK and work illegally) was a genuine subjective
    fear, essentially an unremitting psychotic feature of  the  appellant's
    mental illness.

12. The definition of what constitutes a "serious" crime for  the  purposes
    of exclusion from HP was settled in the cases of  R  (Mayaya)  v  SSHD,
    C4/2011/3273, on appeal from [2011] 3088 (Admin), [2012] 1 All ER  1491
    and AH (Algeria) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 395. Those cases  confirm  that
    the mere fact of a 12 month sentence cannot amount to a "serious" crime
    for the purposes of exclusion from HP.

13. In the light of the guidance in R (Mayaya) v SSHD and AH (Algeria), the
    respondent reissued her Humanitarian Protection Policy on 15 May  2013.
    The correct approach to the assessment of exclusion from HP is set  out
    as follows:

       " 5.1 Exclusion criteria


       . A person will not be eligible for a grant of Humanitarian
       Protection if he is excluded from it because one of the following
       provisions in paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules apply:


       (i) there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed
       a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or any
       other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated in such
       crimes;


       ...


       . This is to be interpreted in a manner consistent with the policy
       on Exclusion under Article 1F of the Refugee Convention. A "serious
       crime" for the purpose of exclusion from Humanitarian Protection was
       previously interpreted to mean one for which a custodial sentence of
       at least twelve months had been imposed in the United Kingdom, but
       it is now accepted that a 12 month sentence (or more) should not
       alone determine the seriousness of the offence for exclusion
       purposes.


       . In the Court of Appeal's judgment in AH (Algeria) v Secretary of
       State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 395, Lord Justice Ward
       noted (paragraph 54) that "Sentence is, of course, a material factor
       but it is not a benchmark. In deciding whether the crime is serious
       enough to justify his loss of protection, the Tribunal must take all
       facts and matters into account, with regard to the nature of the
       crime, the part played by the accused in its commission, any
       mitigating or aggravating features and the eventual penalty
       imposed."


       . The sentence must therefore be considered together with the nature
       of the crime, the actual harm inflicted, and whether most
       jurisdictions would consider it a serious crime. Examples of
       "serious" crimes include murder, rape, arson, and armed robbery.
       Other offences which might be regarded as "serious" include those
       which are accompanied by the use of deadly weapons, involve serious
       injury to persons, or if there is evidence of serious habitual
       criminal conduct. Other crimes, though not accompanied by violence,
       such as large-scale fraud, may also be regarded as "serious" for the
       purposes of exclusion. (our emphasis)"
14. We have set out above the circumstances of the offence that  gave  rise
    to the appellant's 12 month conviction above. It will be  obvious  that
    the nature of the offence is not analogous to those that  must  now  be
    considered  as  "serious"  such  as  "murder,  rape,  arson  and  armed
    robbery".  There  are  the  additional  mitigating  features   of   his
    relatively young age and incipient mental illness.  Ms Holmes  did  not
    seek to argue otherwise on these matters.

15. We find that the appellant has not committed  a  "serious"  crime  such
    that he is excluded from HP. We therefore proceed to assess whether  he
    has a substantive claim for HP.

Humanitarian Protection

16. Mr Armstrong formulated the appellant's clam to HP thus. The  appellant
    comes within Article 15(b) of the QD and paragraph 339C  (iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that, if he returned to Angola, he would face a real risk  of
    suffering serious harm in the form of "torture or inhuman or  degrading
    treatment or punishment".

17. It was submitted that the appellant can show this to be  so  for  three
    reasons:

          (a) the accepted risk of serious harm arising in the UK by way  of
             a very high risk of suicide if deportation were to proceed will
             persist on return to Angola.


          (b)      (i)  a  notable  feature  of  the  appellant's   paranoid
             psychosis is that his symptoms increase when he  is  confronted
             by those who seek to constrain or detain him, even for his  own
             good; see the incidents at [13] and  [14]  of  the  appellant's
             supplementary bundle (AB2) in which the presence of police  led
             to an acute exacerbation of the appellant's subjective fear  of
             harm. Mr Armstrong also referred us to the oral evidence  of  a
             mental  health  social  worker  recorded   at   [13]   of   the
             determination  of  Judge  Latter.  The  appellant  had   become
             psychotic and climbed  into  a  tree  in  response  to  hearing
             "spirits". When the police came he resisted violently  and  bit
             one of the police officers. The  appellant's  reaction  to  the
             presence of police was  "not  just  a  response  to  people  in
             uniform but he saw it as a threat to his life".

             (ii) the appellant's return to Angola will inevitably  involve
             exposure to officials and people in uniform. The 2012 US State
             Department Human Rights Report on Angola indicates at page  34
             of AB2 indicates that:


                  "Police and immigration officials at  border  checkpoints
                  extorted money from  travellers  and  harassed  returning
                  Angolan refugees as well as migrants  and  refugees  from
                  other countries."


              The appellant will inevitably have to deal with  officials  in
             uniform on return and they  will  be  looking  to  exploit  him
             rather than assist him. It follows that the undisputed risk  of
             serious harm arising in the UK by way of a high risk of suicide
             if deportation were to proceed will not only  continue  but  be
             exacerbated on return to Angola in these circumstances.


          (c) In addition to the country  evidence  on  extortion  regularly
             practiced on returnees by officials at the border, pages 31 and
             33  of  AB2  confirmed  longstanding  evidence  that   official
             corruption,   beatings   during   arbitrary   detention    were
             "repeatedly" committed by police and other security  forces  in
             Angola.


             The  appellant's  bizarre  and  violent  behaviour  that  would
             inevitably  arise  on   deportation,   additionally   so   when
             confronted with corrupt officials in uniform looking to  extort
             money from him, meant that there were substantial  grounds  for
             believing that he would suffer mistreatment by way of beatings,
             arbitrary detention and possibly torture.


             At that point, his case was longer a "medical" case but a  more
             standard one of the appellant being subjected  to  inhuman  and
             degrading treatment  or  punishment  directly  by  the  Angolan
             authorities.


18. We were grateful to Ms Holmes for her indication  that  the  respondent
    did not seek to resist any of these arguments. It was our view that the
    appellant's presentation as a result of his mental illness  places  him
    at a real and very high risk of suicide in Angola if he is returned. We
    also found that someone with his presentation is very likely be subject
    to the widespread physical mistreatment at  the  hands  of  police  and
    other security services that prevails in Angola.

19. It follows that it is our judgement that the  appellant  qualifies  for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C.

Decision

20. We remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  Humanitarian
    Protection grounds.

Anonymity

    Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  we
    make an order for non-disclosure of the identity of  the  appellant  in
    order to avoid the likelihood of  serious  harm  to  him  arising  from
    information about his health becoming known.


Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                        Date: 26 September 2013
