
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10590/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd March 2015                             |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Mr nabin gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs P Glass (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    K St J Wiseman, promulgated on 27th October 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Richmond on 16th September 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the  appeal  of  Nabin  Gurung.   The  Respondent  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nepal, who was born on 12th March
    1985.  He appealed against the refusal  of  a  variation  of  leave  to
    remain in the UK in a decision dated 21st February 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he wishes  to  stay  in  the  UK  as  the
    dependent of his father, Harka  Gurung.   Harka  Gurung  gave  evidence
    before the judge, that he left the Gurkhas  in  1977.   He  would  have
    settled in the UK had the opportunity presented itself.   It  was  only
    around 2009 that British policies  seemed  to  change  to  enable  such
    settlement to take place.  Mr Harka Gurung did not  apply  for  another
    three years because his son was studying in the UK and "he had  to  pay
    for his fees and could not afford  to  pay  the  costs  of  settlement"
    (paragraph 29).  Mr Harka Gurung explained that his son, the Appellant,
    had come to the UK as a student in 2009.  There was evidence before the
    judge from the Sponsor's wife, Dhanmaya Gurung, the Appellant's mother,
    that the family was a close-knit family and lived  together  (paragraph
    33).  The family had  lived  together  until  November  2009  when  the
    Appellant came to the UK and began living  together  again  immediately
    when the opportunity presented itself.  The Appellant's parents came in
    August 2013.  The Appellant was  the  youngest  child  of  his  parents
    (paragraph 37).

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a careful and detailed determination, the judge gave a comprehensive
    explanation as to how the law in relation to the settlement of  Gurkhas
    has taken place in the UK over a number of years.  The cases have taken
    many years  to  develop  (paragraph  41).   One  particular  difficulty
    remains and that is in relation to the admission  of  "adult  dependent
    children" (paragraph 42).  The  difficulty  is  exacerbated  where  the
    child becomes an adult even before the parent has  the  opportunity  to
    apply to settle in the UK (paragraph 42).  The cases have  referred  to
    the  rectifying  of  an  "historic  injustice"  (paragraph  43).    The
    development of cases is such that Gurkha cases appear almost to be  "in
    a category of their own in this respect" (paragraph 44).

 5. A pivotal case has been that of Patel v ECO (Mumbai)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    17.  The judge  held  that  the  factual  situation  there  was  almost
    identical to the factual situation here  (see  paragraph  48).   As  he
    observed,

         "The Appellant in this case is some three  years  older  but  quite
         frankly, once one is dealing with individuals who are in their  mid
         20s in any event, precise distinctions in age can surely mean  very
         little.  In all the cases in question, it could be  said  that  the
         Appellant is of an  age  where  he  could  and  perhaps  should  be
         independent both personally and financially but that does not  seem
         to have affected very much the eventual  result  of  the  cases  in
         question" (paragraph 48).

 6. I should make it clear at this stage that there is no suggestion at all
    that this observation is in any way incorrect and not brought about  by
    the cases that the judge referred to.

 7. The judge then referred to  three  lengthy  decisions  of  the  courts,
    namely, Ghising [2012] UKUT  00160;  Gurung  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8,  and
    Ghising (Gurkhas/BOCs; historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567.

 8. The judge, on the basis of these cases, concluded that,

         "There is no doubt in my  view  that  the  position  of  the  adult
         dependent children of  Gurkhas  who  have  settled  here  had  been
         significantly stronger and was even thought to be the  case  a  few
         years ago and as I have previously indicated, it is something of  a
         coincidence that the facts in this run of  judgments  in  the  same
         case and the  facts  in  the  case  before  me  are  very  similar"
         (paragraph 51).

    The appeal was allowed.  It was allowed under Article 8.   It  was  not
    allowed under the Rules.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge did not explain in  his
    determination the findings in  relation  to  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and the parents.

10. On 16th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the  judge  may  have  placed  too  much  reliance  upon  historic
    injustice.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 2nd March 2015, Mr Whitwell submitted  that
    the judge had not made proper  findings  in  relation  to  family  life
    between the Appellant, who was already in the UK, when his  mother  and
    father arrived here, and the relationship between them.  When the judge
    gives his reasons from  paragraph  41  onwards,  there  is  no  factual
    explanation of the evidence relied upon to support the  findings  made.
    It has simply been said that  there  is  an  historic  injustice  here.
    Indeed, at paragraph 31  to  32,  when  cross-examined,  the  Appellant
    stated at the hearing that he had heard on the grapevine that there  is
    a possibility of him settling in the UK and he  was  relying  on  this.
    That was no reason upon which to raise an  expectation  of  the  appeal
    being allowed.

12. For her part, Mrs P Glass submitted that the material facts are all set
    up in the body of the determination.  The finding  is  clear  that  the
    family members had all lived together until 2009.  Then  the  Appellant
    had come to the UK.  He had been joined by his parents in  2013.   They
    immediately  started  living  together  again.   Family  life  existed.
    Furthermore, the Appellant has been dependent upon his parents and this
    is made clear at paragraphs 27 to 28.  Therefore, all  the  matters  in
    issue are properly dealt with.  The  facts  of  this  case  are  indeed
    properly explained at paragraph 47.  The  judge  here  holds  that  the
    facts in this case, when compared to the facts in Patel, are "as  close
    as it could be".  Therefore, there could hardly be any  dispute  as  to
    why the appeal was  allowed.   Second,  insofar  as  the  judge  places
    reliance upon "an historic injustice" he does so because he is bound by
    the authorities.  He sets out the three  authorities  he  relied  upon.
    What is in operation here is a complimentary principle.  Mrs Glass also
    drew my attention to the latest guidance of 5th January 2015  from  the
    Home Office which actually reflects the case law  that  the  judge  had
    referred to.  All in all,  therefore,  there  could  be  no  basis  for
    challenging the decision.

13. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that the case was not on all fours with
    the evidence that was set out, because the onus did not  show  how  the
    case was similar to the others.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law  such  should  be  set
    aside.  This is  a  careful  and  detailed  determination.   The  judge
    clearly displays mastery of both the law in this complex area  as  well
    as the facts before him.  First, as far as the facts are concerned, his
    findings are made in the body of the determination, that,  even  though
    the Appellant had first arrived in the UK as a  student,  nevertheless,
    the family have been living together until 2009 in Nepal, and  as  soon
    as  his  parents  arrived  here,  they  began  living  together   again
    immediately.  Second, the  judge  makes  it  clear  that  the  son  was
    dependent upon his father.  Finally, and no  less  importantly,  it  is
    indeed the case that the facts here are very similar to  the  facts  of
    the cases that the judge refers to.  This is clear from what the  judge
    states at paragraphs 49 to 51.  Accordingly, the decision was one which
    was plainly open to the judge to make.

Notice of Decision

15. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        10th March 2015

