
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10106/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Birmingham Employment  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|Tribunal                           |                                   |
|On:             18 November 2016   |On: 22 November 2016               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DORCAS NIMOH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi, Counsel instructed by Rotherham & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju in which she allowed  the  appeal  of
    Dorcas Nimoh, a citizen of Ghana,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right
    of residence as the  former  spouse  of  an  EEA  national.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal under the EEA regulations and Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it by reference to  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules having treated a request made at the hearing,  in
    the absence of the Secretary of State, to consider Article 8 ECHR as  a
    request for permission to amend the grounds of appeal. For the sake  of
    clarity, I will refer to Ms Nimoh as 'the Applicant'.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 June 2009 using an EEA
    family permit as the spouse  of  a  Dutch  national  exercising  treaty
    rights. On application she was granted a residence card valid  until  9
    December 2014. On 13 November 2014 the Applicant applied for a  further
    residence card claiming retained rights of residence on the basis  that
    her husband had deserted her in April 2011 and  that  not  having  been
    able to contact him since the marriage had broken down.

 3. The application was refused by the Secretary of State and the Applicant
    exercised her right of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    and this is the appeal that came before Judge Lagunju  19  August  2015
    and was allowed. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal  against  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's   decision.   The
    application was granted on 31 January 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Brunnen in the following terms

         "The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  submit  that
         the Judge erred in law in that private life grounds were  not  open
         to the Appellant in this appeal. This is arguable: see  Amirteymour
         [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) and TY (Sri Lanka) EWCA Civ 1233

         Further, even if private life grounds were  open,  it  is  arguable
         that the Judge failed to apply the  correct  test  under  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of whether there were very significant  obstacles  to
         the Appellant's integration in Ghana and gave  no  adequate  reason
         for finding such obstacles to exist."

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Aboni appeared for the Secretary  of  State
    and Mr Azmi appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Submissions

 5. There was no rule 24 response filed on behalf of the Applicant  and  no
    skeleton arguments were submitted. Mr Azmi said that he  did  not  have
    instructions to concede but had explained  matters  in  detail  to  the
    Applicant.  The  Applicant  was  present  and   a   letter   from   her
    representatives was submitted  with  a  copy  of  NHS  pregnancy  notes
    revealing that the Applicant is expecting a child in February 2017.

 6. I said that it was inevitable that  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    would succeed and I reserved my written reasons.

Decision

 7. The factual matrix involved in  this  appeal  is  not  challenged.  The
    Applicant came to the UK as the spouse of an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights. The marriage broke down but they are  not  divorced  and
    the Applicant sought a residence card as  confirmation  of  a  retained
    right of residence. It is not challenged that  the  Applicant  did  not
    meet the requirements of regulations 10 and  13  of  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations  2006  and  that  her  appeal  by  reference  to  the   EEA
    regulations fell to be dismissed.

 8. There was no application for leave to remain made under the Immigration
    Rules and there was no decision made by reference  to  the  Rules.  The
    application for an EEA residence card (using form  EEA2),  made  on  12
    November 2014,  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  from  the  Applicant's
    solicitors asking for the application to  be  considered  'outside  the
    rules'.

 9. The Secretary of State's decision dated 3 March 2015  is  made  on  the
    basis that the Applicant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  EEA
    regulations. That is not contentious. The  decision  very  specifically
    points out that any application based on family or private  life  needs
    to be made separately and as such no consideration has  been  given  to
    such an application and further that no removal  directions  have  been
    given. There was no human rights  decision  and  no  Immigration  Rules
    decision. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  although
    professionally  drafted  do  not  mention  the  EEA  regulations,   the
    Immigration Rules or the Human Rights Convention. They do not give  any
    basis whatsoever for appeal.

10. When the matter came for hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Secretary of State was not represented. A skeleton  argument  submitted
    by the Applicant's counsel accepts that the Applicant cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the EEA regulations. The  skeleton  does  not  seek  to
    amend the grounds of appeal and there  is  no  written  application  to
    amend the grounds. The skeleton does however ask for  'a  consideration
    of her Article 8 rights as if a putative consequence  of  the  decision
    was a removal to Ghana'. The Judge treated this as  an  application  to
    amend the grounds to include Article 8 ECHR,  allowed  the  application
    and went on  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    reference to paragraph 276ADE.

11. It is difficult to see the decision of the First-tier tribunal Judge as
    anything other than perverse. It was an appeal that was bound  to  fail
    under the EEA regulations.  It  was  an  appeal  that  put  forward  no
    coherent grounds. There was no Immigration Rules or Article 8  decision
    but nevertheless the Judge allowed what appears to have been an implied
    application to amend the grounds of appeal to  include  Article  8  but
    then went on to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

12. In fact, the only decision open to the Judge was the one correctly made
    under the EEA regulations. There was in my judgement  no  other  appeal
    before her and nor could there be because there was no other appealable
    decision and no removal directions.




Conclusion

13. The Judge erred in law for the reason detailed above  in  allowing  the
    appeal by  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  set  aside  that
    decision.

14. There is no error of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal
    by reference to the EEA regulations. That decision stands.


Signed:                                      Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
