
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 20 November 2014                       |On 25 November 2014         |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                          DAVID ASAMOAH POKU GYEMFI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Mensah counsel instructed by A J O Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Carswell promulgated on
    12 May  2014  which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 18 May 1987 and is a citizen of Ghana.

 4. On 13 December 2013 the Appellant applied for a Residence card  as  the
    spouse  of  an  EEA  national,  his  spouse  being  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands, exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 5. On 19 February 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons but in essence
    did not accept that the proxy marriage between the  Appellant  and  her
    EEA sponsor was valid for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carswell (hereinafter called "the  Judge")  allowed  the
    appeal finding that the marriage  was  valid  under  Ghanaian  law  and
    therefore valid under United Kingdom law.

 7.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6 August 2014 First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Chohan gave permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge  had
    failed to take into account the case of  Kareem  (Proxy  Marriages-  EU
    Law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24.

 8. Mr Mc Vitie relied on the grounds of appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms  Mensah  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that she conceded that the Judge had made an error of law  in
    failing to take into account the guidance in the case of Kareem and had
    therefore failed to consider whether the Appellant's marriage was valid
    under the law in the Netherlands. As a result of that no  consideration
    had  been  given  to  the  issue  of  whether  theirs  was  a   durable
    relationship under  regulation  10(5).  She  asked  that  the  case  be
    remitted to the First Tier as the Appellant had been deprived of a fair
    hearing in relation to all the live issues in the case.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

11. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to  address  and  determine  the
    issue of whether the marriage was valid under Netherlands  law  as  set
    out in Kareem constitutes a clear error of law. This error  I  consider
    to be material since had  the  Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise  the
    outcome would have been different as there was no evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in relation to that issue. That in my view is the correct test
    to apply.

12. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety to be redetermined afresh.

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or


         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to  the  failure  of  the
    Tribunal to consider the issue of whether the parties were in a durable
    relationship.

15. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on 25 February 2015 before me.





Signed      Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

