
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA114252015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 18 May 2017                     |On 21 June 2017                         |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                            miss arathi somarajan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by R H & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes before  me  pursuant  to  an  interlocutor  dated  16
    December 2016 by the Court of Session in respect of a joint  minute  of
    the parties' process in the following relevant terms:

         "WINTER for the appellant and SMITH FOR THE Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department concur in stating to the court that the parties
         are agreed that the Upper Tribunal erred in law in:

         Finding that the First Tier Tribunal's  finding  on  the  following
         matter was properly reasoned:

         (a)      The First Tier Tribunal's finding in fact at paragraph  54
             of its decision dated 15th July 2015 that it  was  likely  the
             appellant will not remain staying with her parents and  sister
             for much longer: There was no basis in fact  on  the  evidence
             before the Tribunal for this finding.

         The Secretary of State therefore hereby withdraws  her  Answers  to
         the Grounds of Appeal and consent to the granting  of  the  appeal.
         The parties therefore crave the Court:

         (i)      to allow the appeal and to set aside the decision  of  the
             Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  dated  11th
             February 2016; and

         (ii)     to remit the references to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration
             and   Asylum   Chamber),    differently    constituted,    for
             consideration anew of all grounds originally before the  Upper
             Tribunal (immigration and Asylum Chamber)  and  which  grounds
             are not limited to the ground identified in (a) above."

Introduction

 2. Mr Winter explained at the outset that it had been agreed  between  the
    parties in the Court of Session that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
    in law.  Such agreement does not however appear in the  minute  and  he
    and Mr Mathews accepted that it was therefore necessary for me to first
    decide whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in  its  decision
    dated 13 July 2015 based on the grounds of the renewed  application  to
    the Upper Tribunal which led to the grant of permission by UTJ  Plimmer
    dated 30 November 2015.   I  am  grateful  to  the  parties  for  their
    extensive submissions including the written submissions by Mr  Matthews
    which he relied in addition to argument de bene esse in  respect  of  a
    proposed amended ground by Mr Winter based on the  procedural  fairness
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge having considered  material  that  had
    not been provided by the parties.

 3. I reserved my decision on error of law and sought  counsels'  views  on
    any remaking that might ensue.  Mr Winter was content to  rely  on  his
    oral argument before me in respect of the error of law challenge as  to
    any such remaking. Likewise, Mr Matthews was content  to  rely  on  his
    written submissions supplemented at the hearing and  had  no  questions
    for the witnesses. This was understandable as there was no evidence  of
    any material change to the evidence given  by  the  appellant  and  her
    witnesses before the First-tier Tribunal  two  years  ago  save  for  a
    procedural updating. The appellant however now  seeks  to  rely  on  an
    expert report by Olivia Holden as well as the 2015  country  report  on
    India by UK Border Agency.  Mr  Matthews  wished  the  chance  to  make
    written submissions on this material and a short timescale was set  for
    this exercise giving Mr Winter the chance  for  responding.  Mr  Winter
    however took this as an opportunity to add to his submissions on  error
    of law in addition.  The opportunity to the  make  further  submissions
    was confined to the country evidence based on a speculative finding  of
    error of law. It was not intended to be an  opportunity  to  expand  on
    matters discussed at length at the hearing let alone one  to  resurrect
    an abandoned ground challenging rationality on which there has not been
    full argument. I have therefore disregarded the additional  submissions
    and make my decision on error of law based on what was  argued  at  the
    hearing.

    Background to the case

 4. The appeal is against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Murray who, for
    reasons given in her determination dated 13 July  2015,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds and under the Immigration Rules
    against the respondent's decision dated 5 March 2015 refusing  to  vary
    leave to remain and to remove the appellant who is a national of India.
     She was born in Libya on 9 January 1989 but has  retained  the  Indian
    nationality of her parents who left India 30 years ago.   In  2007  the
    appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom from Libya  with  a  work
    permit; her husband and the appellant's younger sister accompanied  her
    as dependants.  The appellant was granted leave at  the  same  time  to
    enter as a student and pursued courses of studies leading to the  award
    of a BSc Honours in July 2013 and an MA  in  3D  Designs   for  Virtual
    Environments in July 2015. She was granted successive periods of  leave
    as a student with the most recent expiring on 19 January  2015.  On  12
    January 2015, the appellant applied on form FLR(FP) for  further  leave
    to remain indicating that the basis was Private Life on the UK (10-year
    route) and Family Life. The refusal of that application is the  subject
    of this appeal.

 5. In refusing the application, the  respondent  explained  that  she  had
    considered the appellant's circumstances  under  paragraph  276ADE  (in
    respect of her private life) and considered exceptional  circumstances.
    This included consideration of mental health issues that the  appellant
    was suffering from.  The view  was  taken  that  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to return to India or Libya and  to  pursue  her  studies  or
    employment there or otherwise make an application for  entry  clearance
    under points-based system to continue a presence in the United Kingdom.

 6. The appellant gave evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray who
    heard  also  from  the  appellant's  parents  and  her   sister.    The
    conclusions that she reached can be summarised as follows:

     a) The appellant has family and cultural ties  to  India  and  it  was
        considered that she could integrate and establish  a  private  life
        there.  The appellant spoke Hindi and English.   She  has  been  to
        India on holiday where she had family members and where had  stayed
        on her own with her aunt.

     b) It is not the case that in Indian culture, no single woman live  on
        their own. The judge noted the amendment to  the  evidence  by  the
        appellant's father who initially statement was  in  terms  that  in
        Indian culture no single woman lives on her own. It appears at  the
        hearing he explained that no single women in his family were living
        alone.  With the appellant having spent short periods  of  time  in
        India, she must have "a good idea of what life there is about".

     c) The appellant's health issues were not sufficient for an Article  8
        claim on health grounds in the light of  available  healthcare  (in
        India).

     d) It was clear that the appellant and her family members  are  close.
        She was however 26 years old and although single,  it  was  "likely
        that she will not remain staying with her parents  and  sister  for
        much longer".  The evidence that the family would be split  if  the
        appellant could not remain in the United Kingdom was "unrealistic".
        There relatives that the appellant could stay with. The judge  also
        relied on a COI report being in the public domain, which  indicated
        that single Indian women lived in major cities.

     e) The appellant has always been legally in  the  United  Kingdom  and
        that she is close to her  family  members  but  "there  is  nothing
        unusual in this case".

     f) The appellant had confirmed that she was  aware  that  one  of  the
        terms of her student visa was that she had to return  to  India  at
        the end of her studies and she was aware of  this.   There  was  no
        legitimate expectation on her part or her family members  that  she
        would be able to stay.

     g) Although the appellant's family members have ILR, this did not mean
        that they have to stay here. If the appellant is returned to India,
        her mother and sister could go there or  her  sister  could  remain
        behind as a student in the UK.  With her father working abroad  for
        most of the time, it would not  be  unreasonable  that  the  family
        could have its base in India instead of the United Kingdom.

     h) The appellant speaks English to a high standard as  do  her  family
        members. She has integrated well into the  society  in  the  United
        Kingdom and has never claimed benefits and relies  on  her  parents
        for her funds.  Her immigration status is precarious with reference
        to s.117B(5) and has always been so  with  no  automatic  right  to
        remain  here.   There  were   no   exceptional   circumstances   or
        compassionate or compelling factors and accordingly, little  weight
        was given as to the appellant's private life.

     i) It was clear that the appellant  has  family  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom but she has been an adult for eight years.   Her  financial
        dependency on her parents could continue if she goes to India.  The
        appellant's emotional dependency on her parents (and they  on  her)
        and  the  wish  that  the  family  remain  together  was   "totally
        unrealistic".  The appellant has studied and has qualifications and
        it is "now time for her to start a life outwith the  family  unit".
        This would not be "unreasonable".

     j) "When  public  interest  is  taken  into  account  [sic]  and  when
        proportionality is assessed, public interest must succeed over  the
        appellant's Article 8 rights and her parents' and sister's  Article
        8 rights".

     k) One of the factors in the proportionality exercise must be that the
        appellant cannot meet the terms of the  Rules.   "Even  taking  her
        health issues into account and her relationship with her family the
        weight must fall in favour of public interest  as  opposed  to  the
        appellant's and her family's human rights".

Did the First-tier Tribunal err in Law?

 7. Mr Winter confirmed that it was accepted the appellant could  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) on  the  basis  that  she  was
    unable to demonstrate very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration
    into India where she would have to go  to  if  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. Mr Winter however emphasised  that  reliance  was  also
    placed on the unchallenged finding by  the  judge  of  the  appellant's
    family life.  As a preliminary matter, I sought clarification from  the
    parties at to the circumstances that led to the family's departure from
    Libya in 2007 when the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  with  her
    parents and younger sister.  There was no  evidence  before  the  judge
    that this was compelled  by  the  current  unsettled  situation  there.
    There was therefore no requirement  for  the  judge  to  focus  on  the
    practical and financial realities that were relevant in Rai v ECO  (New
    Delhi) [2007] EWCA Civ 320.

 8. I now turn to the specific grounds of challenge.  Ground 1 is in  terms
    that approach by the Tribunal that the family could relocate  with  the
    appellant to India was not the correct approach and was legally flawed.
    Had the correct approach been taken, there were no sufficiently weighty
    factors justifying separation where the appellant has always lived with
    her family taking account of her lawful stay  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    never having lived in India, her emotional and financial dependence  on
    her family, her competence in English, not being a burden  on  the  tax
    payer and having a limited number of relatives in India where she would
    have language difficulties.  This is coupled with her health issues and
    the fact that her  parents  own  a  house  and  have  a  mortgage.  The
    Immigration Rules are "not a legitimate aim in their  own  right".  The
    Tribunal had erred in finding that the weight must fall  in  favour  of
    the public interest and had the Tribunal approached  the  case  in  the
    correct manner it would have not reached these findings.  The  Tribunal
    had reached an irrational decision as on no view could have  been  said
    that there was any public interest in removing the appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom when  all  the  factors  were  properly  considered  and
    assessed.

 9. This ground is somewhat discursive and although a rationality challenge
    is raised, Mr Winter confirmed at the hearing that he no longer  relied
    on this part of the ground on although he argued that the challenge was
    more than a disagreement.  Mirza v SSHD [2015] CSIH  28  is  among  the
    authorities relied on.

10. Mr Matthews' arguments are set out  in  a  detailed  skeleton  that  he
    adopted. He submits that the  scope  of  Mirza  has  been  subsequently
    significantly narrowed and is confined to its facts  having  regard  to
    Butt, re: judicial reviews [2015] CSIH 72 and more importantly to  Khan
    v SSHD [2016] CSIH 13 and Lardjani  v  SSHD  [2016]  the  latter  being
    decisions of the Lord President of the Court of  Session.   He  further
    argues that Mirza's  utility  has  perhaps  been  even  further  eroded
    following the decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11.

11. The starting point for any article 8 consideration is the  Rules  which
    is how the judge began her analysis. With  Mr  Winter  having  accepted
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant living  in
    India, there was no error by  the  judge  reaching  such  a  conclusion
    herself on the evidence. Indeed, ground  1  does  not  seek  to  assert
    otherwise. The appellant's representatives have accepted  that  she  is
    unable to meet the requirements of the Rules in respect of her  private
    and family life.  As I have observed above, paragraph 276ADE  sets  out
    the Secretary of State's policy in relation to private life.   Appendix
    FM includes provisions in relation to adult dependent  relatives  which
    are confined to circumstances where there are serious  disabilities  or
    illness of which the appellant is fortunately free. The next matter  to
    be addressed is whether the judge correctly directed herself as to  the
    approach she was required to take under article  8  since,  absent  the
    rationality challenge, ground 1 can only succeed if  it  can  be  shown
    that the judge took an unlawful approach or  failed  to  take  all  the
    relevant factors into account.  There is no suggestion that  the  judge
    failed in respect of the latter but instead, the challenge  is  to  the
    way in which the she undertook the balancing exercise.  The  judge  saw
    her task as finding whether there were exceptional  circumstances  (see
    [52]) and concluded that there was "nothing  unusual"  (see  [55]).  In
    [59] she  concluded  that  "in  this  case  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances or compassionate or compelling factors".

12. The Supreme Court in Agyarko was concerned with  applications  made  by
    foreign nationals residing unlawfully in the UK  for  leave  to  remain
    here as  the  partners  of  British  Citizens  with  whom  they  former
    relationships during the period of unlawful residence.   The  appellant
    before me is in a  different  category.  She  had  an  existing  family
    relationship before she arrived in the UK and it has been accepted that
    family has continued into her adulthood with lawful leave during  which
    she pursued her tertiary studies dependent on her father for  financial
    support. The nature of the family  life  was  therefore  not  one  that
    engaged consideration of insurmountable obstacles under FM Section  EX,
    which is concerned in part with partner based family life.

13. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court considered aspects of  article  8  that
    are relevant to this appeal. At [39], Lord Reed  posited  a  number  of
    issues for consideration including the role that  precariousness  plays
    in article 8 and how it should be interpreted.  In  paragraph  [50]  he
    concluded with the observation  that   "..."precariousness"  is  not  a
    preliminary hurdle to be overcome. Rather, the fact  that  family  life
    has been established by an applicant in the  full  knowledge  that  his
    stay in the UK is unlawful or  precarious  affects  the  weight  to  be
    attached to it in the balancing exercise." Lord Reed also  observed  in
    his concluding remarks on precariousness at [53] "One can, for example,
    envisage circumstances in which people  might  be  under  a  reasonable
    misapprehension as to their ability to maintain a family life in the UK
    and in which a less stringent approach might therefore be  appropriate.
    Here again, the distinguishing feature in the appeal before me is  that
    the family life existed at the time of entry  and  continued  during  a
    period of lawful residence that however did not  have  the  promise  of
    settled status.  It cannot be said that the judge  was  not  alive  the
    fact of the appellant's lawful leave and  the  history  of  the  family
    since their departure from  Libya.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant was under any misapprehension about the  uncertainty  of  her
    immigration status.

14. The task before the judge was to strike  a  fair  balance  between  the
    competing public and private and family life interests in play  and  to
    apply a proportionality test in doing so. The judge made an observation
    over the absence of anything "unusual" in part of her analysis but  she
    was otherwise was correct to consider whether there were  compassionate
    or compelling factors. Having regard to the overall  reasoning  in  the
    decision and  the  analysis  undertaken  which  included  all  relevant
    factors, my conclusion is that the reference to "unusual" is not  fatal
    to the lawfulness of the proportionality exercise. I am satisfied  that
    the judge departed from the correct legal test or that she was imposing
    a test of exceptionality.

15.  By  the  time  the  case  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant's parents and sister had achieved indefinite leave to remain.
     Her father had worked in Libya  in  2010,  in  2011  in  Algeria,  and
    returned to Libya in 2014.  He is now working in Iran.   There  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the appellant had embarked on a  further
    course of studies when she applied for the extension of leave to remain
    before expiry of her leave on 15 January 2015.   Mr  Matthews  accepted
    that by August 2017, in the light of the s 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, appellant may succeed on an application for  permanent  residence
    simply by effluxion of time.  This would be of  possible  relevance  in
    any remaking of the decision in the light of the observations by  Sales
    LJ in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [44]:

         "... There is a very wide range of cases  in  which  some  form  of
         leave to remain short of ILR may have been granted,  and  the  word
         "precarious" seems to me  to  convey  a  more  valid  concept,  the
         opposite of the idea that a person could be regarded as  a  settled
         migrant for Article 8 purposes,  which  is  to  be  applied  having
         regard to the overall circumstances in  which  an  immigrant  finds
         himself in the host country.  Some immigrants with leave to  remain
         falling short of ILR could be regarded as being very settled indeed
         and as having an immigration status which is  not  properly  to  be
         described as "precarious".  The Article 8 context could be taken to
         support this interpretation.   However,  it  is  not  necessary  to
         decide in this case whether the Secretary of State  is  correct  in
         her  submission  or  not,  since  whichever  view  is  correct  the
         appellant clearly loses on this point."

16. I am however concerned at this stage whether the FtT erred  in  law  in
    2015. At the time of the judge decided the case, the appellant was some
    way short of being within reach of an application for settlement and no
    prospect of that arising in the absence  of  any  evidence  of  further
    studies being contemplated.

17. The judge was unarguably entitled to look at the likely future for  the
    appellant (see [54]), to consider what she  might  encounter  in  India
    ([54) and to consider the possibility of the family unit relocating  in
    the context of the appellant's father working outside the UK. These are
    all factors that are relevant to the assessment of whether  there  were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences. The judge was correct to consider the
    reasonableness of the impact of leaving her family in the UK and living
    in India. The  judge  was  also  correct  in  her  analysis  under  the
    provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

18.  It  is  understandable  why  Mr  Winter  felt  unable  to  pursue  the
    irrationality challenge in ground 1 which asserted that on no view  was
    there any public interest in removal of the appellant. This was plainly
    not correct. Taking an overall view of the judge's consideration of the
    various factors in play, I am not persuaded that having regard  to  the
    remaining basis of challenge in ground 1, there was any material  error
    in the judge's approach. The judge was required to  weigh  the  factors
    relied on by the appellant in order to remain in  the  UK  against  the
    competing public interest. She gave adequate reasons why that  interest
    prevailed and left nothing out of her consideration.

19. Ground 2  brings a challenge  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  reached
    findings which were unsupported by the evidence with reference  to  the
    conclusion expressed at [54]:

        "... It is clear that the appellant  and  her  family  members  are
        close.  The appellant is however 26 years  old.   Although  she  is
        single just now it is likely that she will not remain staying  with
        her parents and sister for much longer."

20. The joint minute acknowledges that the judge's conclusion in  [54]  was
    not properly reasoned.  Mr Matthews' response to  this  ground  in  his
    skeleton argument accepts that the FtT went too far but nevertheless he
    relies on observations by Elias LJ in AP (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
    89 at [26]:

         "...  The Tribunal must have regard to all  relevant  circumstances
         when considering the issue of proportionality, and in my view  that
         includes in an appropriate case  having  regard  to  likely  future
         events.  That is not taking into  consideration  later  events  but
         assessing matters in the round at the point when  the  decision  is
         made.  Moreover, in my view the Tribunal  must  in  an  appropriate
         case be entitled to make common  sense  inferences  about  what  is
         likely to happen in the future based on  the  facts  as  they  were
         before the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   It  does  not  necessarily
         require specific evidence on the point."

21. The evidence of the appellant's plans are  set  out  in  her  statement
    which sets out  in  positive  terms  her  business  activities  with  a
    worldwide customer  base.  The  medical  evidence  indicates  that  the
    appellant had attended her doctor on 28 January 2014 with  symptoms  of
    depressed  mood  secondary  stress.   She  attended  "Doing  Well"   by
    Depression Service on a number of occasions in 2014 and  2015.   Scores
    provided indicated that she had a  significant  anxiety  disorder  with
    depressive illness but she  had  improved  with  cognitive  behavioural
    therapy and was discharged in February 2015.  The  appellant  was  free
    from any mental illness at the time the appeal was heard and there  was
    no indication that it had an adverse impact on her post-graduate course
    which she had completed in May 2015 or her future business plans.

22. The judge has also heard evidence from the appellant's father  that  it
    was likely that he would be arranging a marriage for  her  although  it
    was up to her to decide when that would happen (see [5]).

23. It seems to me that  although  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
    reasons, the available evidence shows that such a  prediction  was  the
    only common sense inference from what was known. There was no  evidence
    that the family life between the appellant and her family was  of  such
    intensity that there would be no question of her ultimately pursuing an
    independent life which was in reasonable prospect.

24.  AP (India) in part was concerned with the correct  approach  to  adult
    males remaining in a family home and bringing their spouse to join them
    and their parents so that family life may indeed  remain  close  for  a
    lengthy period of time.  The error by the court below  was  because  it
    undermined the analysis of the strength of family  life  and  the  full
    impact which separation would have on each member of the family.  There
    was no such evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in the instant case
    that any prospective marriage would result in the  appellant  remaining
    in the family household thereafter. Accordingly, I do not consider  the
    acknowledged error material which  required  the  decision  to  be  set
    aside.

25. Ground 3 is a challenge to reference by the  judge  to  the  background
    evidence as support for her conclusion that there  were  single  Indian
    women living in major cities in India.   She  indicated  that  she  had
    referred to a COI report which was in the public domain.  The challenge
    essentially is that the judge had failed to exercise  anxious  scrutiny
    in looking at that material.   I  asked  the  parties  whether  it  was
    permissible for the  judge  to  examine  evidence  that  had  not  been
    provided by the parties.  After giving  the  matter  some  thought,  Mr
    Winter sought to amend the grounds on the basis  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness in this course being adopted.  Such an  amendment
    was strongly opposed by Mr Matthews in the context of  the  history  of
    this appeal when there had been plenty of opportunity for amendment  to
    the  grounds.   Although  my  initial  inclination  was  to   encourage
    exploration of this limb, on reflection, I find merit in  Mr  Matthews'
    argument and I do not grant permission.

26. There remains a challenge to the adequacy of the judge's assessment  of
    that Country of Origin information, being the 2012 UKBA report.  It  is
    correct that having embarked on this course the judge was  required  to
    consider that evidence with  care  particularly  as  she  had  not  had
    submissions on the document from the parties. Mr Matthews' response was
    that on close analysis of the passages referred to in  the  grounds  it
    was somewhat doubtful that the absence of reference to  the  paragraphs
    raised  in  the  grounds  could  have  made  a   material   difference.
    Specifically, he submits that [24.03] of the COI report identifies that
    the greatest  inequalities  are  felt  by  women  belonging  to  weaker
    sections of Indian society who remain poor and socially  excluded.   He
    contrasts the position of the appellant who comes from a  well-educated
    family and is highly educated herself.  As to [24.06] which the grounds
    rely on the support for the proposition  that  women's  marginalisation
    within the Indian economy has increased, Mr Matthews observes that that
    passage does not comment on the prospects of a woman educated to  post-
    graduate level who comes from an apparently  well-off  family  and  who
    will continue to be financially supported by them. [24.07] of  the  COI
    report refers to sexual harassment of women in the work place including
    physical and verbal abuse from male supervisors.  Mr Matthews makes the
    valid submission that the fact of sexual harassment at work  could  not
    undermine the judge's conclusion that single women do live on their own
    in India.

27. I am not persuaded that the judge was incorrect to observe  that  women
    live on their own and that the appellant has relatives whom  she  could
    stay with.

28. As to Ground 4, Mr Winter accepted in the  course  of  his  submissions
    that this ground which argues a failure to give adequate reasons  or  a
    failure to take account of all relevant factors, a  failure  to  assess
    all relevant factors in reaching an irrational finding does  not  raise
    anything that was not addressed in ground 1.  Reference is made to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's observation that the appellant had studied, had a
    qualification and that it was time for her to start a life outside  the
    family unit.  A judge is required to assess the  evidence  rather  than
    impose her own view but when this  observation  is  considered  in  the
    context of the whole of [60], it appears that the judge  was  assessing
    the reliability of the evidence of the  future  dependence  the  family
    members had on one another.  It was legitimately open to the  judge  to
    question  that  evidence  and  whilst  the  language  she   chose   was
    unfortunate, I am not persuaded that she fell into material error.  The
    issue at  stake  in  the  appeal  was  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the public interest in  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom following completion  of  her  studies.
    The appellant had relied on the strength of the family  unit  and  also
    the difficulties she anticipated she would have if living in India.  In
    both respects the judge took all relevant factors into account and came
    to a conclusion rationally open to her on the evidence.

29. Ground 5, challenges the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  two
    respects.  The first was its direction at [52] to  see  if  there  were
    exceptional circumstances in the case.  The  second,  in  [25]  is  the
    observation by the judge that there was nothing unusual in the case.  I
    have dealt with the latter above. As to the former, Mr  Winter  readily
    conceded that in the light of the decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko, such a challenge was not open to him.  He was right to do  so.
    As observed by Lord Reed at [56]:

         "The European Court's use of the phrase "exceptional circumstances"
         in this context was  considered  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR  544.   Lord  Dyson  MR,  giving  the
         judgment of the court, said, at para 42:

             "In our view, that is not to say that a test of exceptionality
             is being applied.  Rather  it  is  that,  in  approaching  the
             question of whether removal is  a  proportionate  interference
             with an individual's Article 8 rights, the scales are  heavily
             weighted  in  favour  of  deportation   and   something   very
             compelling  (which  will  be  "exceptional")  is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal."

         Cases are not, therefore, to  be  approached  by  searching  for  a
         unique or  unusual  feature,  and  in  its  absence  rejecting  the
         application without further examination. Rather, as Lord  Dyson  MR
         made clear, the test is one of proportionality.  The  reference  to
         exceptional circumstances in the European case law means  that,  in
         cases involving precarious family life, "something very  compelling
         ... is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest",  applying  a
         proportionality test. "

    For the reasons I have already given, when reading the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal as a whole, I do not consider the finding  that
    there was nothing "unusual" in the case is fatal.

30. By way of conclusion I am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  fell  into
    material error in her reasons for dismissing  the  appeal.  The  appeal
    before me is dismissed.



Signed                                             Date 16 June 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

