
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11022/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2016                                |On 7th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS SAIMINATU TEJAN SAVAGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant :     No legal representation.  Claimant in person.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  and
    reasons of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid) promulgated on 11 November
    2015 in which he allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, Regulation 7.
2.    The First-tier Tribunal found that the marriage between the  claimant,
    a citizen of the Gambia, and her sponsor/husband was  genuine  and  was
    not a marriage of convenience entered into for the purposes of  evading
    immigration controls.  In a letter dated 3 March 2015 the Secretary  of
    State raised concerns about the proxy marriage and the evidence of  the
    EEA sponsor's employment.  There was no evidence of domicile in  Gambia
    and no evidence that the marriage was legally registered  according  to
    Gambian law.  The claimant relied on a marriage  certificate  dated  20
    August 2014 which stated that the marriage took place on 18 April 2014.
     The Secretary of State also considered Regulation 8  and  found  there
    was insufficient evidence to show that there was a durable relationship
    between the parties.  Reliance was placed on a  marriage  interview  in
    which there were major  discrepancies  in  the  answers  given  by  the
    parties.

Ground of application for permission

3.   In the grounds of appeal the Secretary  of  State  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with the particular issues in  the
    appeal, namely proxy marriage, and failed to provide  adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the requirements of Gambian law were met.  Further,
    there were inadequate reasons given for finding that the  marriage  was
    genuine and the parties were in a durable relationship.  Concerns  were
    raised that the decision and reasons  was  devoid  of  any  significant
    reasoning and/or any understanding of the issues  or  legal  principles
    involved.

Permission
4.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Robertson on 25 April 2016 who found that the grounds were arguable.

Error of law hearing
Application for adjournment
5.   This morning the claimant has made an application  for  an  adjournment
    on the basis that she wishes to instruct Counsel to represent  her  and
    has limited finances available  to  her.   She  had  already  consulted
    lawyers but the cost was prohibitive. A  brief  discussion  took  place
    involving the Tribunal, Mr Bramble and the Claimant as to how  best  to
    proceed.  I had  in  mind  the  overriding  objective  Rule  2  of  the
    Procedure Rules (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I indicated  that  in  the
    event that I found a material error in law that there would need to  be
    a fresh hearing. Mr Bramble agreed. I explained to the  Claimant  that,
    whilst I appreciated that she wished to have a legal representative for
    the error of law hearing, it would in practice make  little  difference
    given that I find that the errors in the decision and reasons  were  so
    fundamental that a new hearing would be needed.  To put it  bluntly,  I
    explained that she would be better off  spending  her  money  on  legal
    representation at the next hearing.  I refused the application  for  an
    adjournment as I was satisfied that the Claimant  was  not  caused  any
    disadvantage or unfairness.

6.   I am satisfied that the grounds of appeal are made  out.  The  decision
    and reasons makes no reference to the specific reasons for  refusal  of
    the application under the EEA Regulations and further fails to  provide
    any adequate findings or reasoning with reference to  the  evidence  to
    show that the proxy marriage was lawful under Gambian  law  and  indeed
    under Spanish law.  The decision and reasons, which fails to go  beyond
    a finding that the marriage was genuine [10], is simply inadequate.  It
    repeats the claimant's representative's submissions that  there  is  no
    issue to be taken as to proxy marriage or Gambian domicile but there is
    no reference to  evidence  relied  on  in  reaching  this  finding  and
    furthermore there is no engagement  with  the  evidential  requirements
    under Gambian law.  The main substance of the  decision  amounts  to  a
    generalised commentary on the issue of English language in EEA cases.

7.   As there is no part of the decision  and  reasons  to  demonstrate  the
    Tribunal has fairly and properly considered  the  issues  and  evidence
    relevant to the appeal, the findings as they are  cannot  be  preserved
    and it is therefore necessary for this matter to proceed at the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo. The  matter  is  therefore  to  be
    relisted for further hearing at Taylor House on a date to  be  arranged
    in due course.

Decision

8.   I find a material error in law and the  decision  and  reasons  is  set
    aside.
      The matter is to be reheard at Taylor House on  a  date  to  be  fixed
    (excluding Judge Majid).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6.6.2016
GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed                                  Date 6.6.2016
GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
