
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11498/2013
     IA/11499/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2013                          |On 1 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCKEE



                                   Between

                          binalben gaurangkumar ray
                         gaurangkumar manharbhai ray

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by  Mrs  Binalben  Gaurangkumar  Ray,  appeal  number
    IA/11498/2013, and her husband Mr Gaurangkumar  Manharbai  Ray,  appeal
    number IA/11499/2013.  They are husband  and wife and  both  hail  from
    Gujarat in India. Mrs Ray is the principal appellant and her husband is
    her dependant.  The couple came to this country in 2009 with visas as a
    student and her dependant. They obtained further  leave  to  remain  in
    2011 to expire in 2014 but in August 2012 the sponsoring college  which
    Mrs Ray was  attending,  that  is  Allied  College,  lost  its  sponsor
    licence.

2.   Subsequently the Border Agency wrote to Mrs  Ray  on  26  October  2012
    informing her that because her sponsoring college had lost its  licence
    her own leave would be curtailed.  She would be given 60 days in  which
    to find an alternative sponsor or, if she failed to do  so,  she  would
    then have to leave the United Kingdom with her husband.  Her leave  was
    to be curtailed after 25 December 2012.

3.   Before that date Mrs Ray was  able  to  find  an  alternative  sponsor,
    namely West City College, and this institution issued a Confirmation of
    Acceptance for Studies on 21 December 2012 whereupon Mrs Ray put in  an
    application to study at that college. Her application was decided on 22
    March 2013.  The application was refused on the sole basis that Mrs Ray
    had failed to demonstrate knowledge of the English language at Level B2
    of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.

4.    There  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which  this  competence  can   be
    demonstrated. One of them is mentioned  in  the  refusal  letter  which
    says: "You  have  not  obtained  an  academic  qualification  at  least
    equivalent to a UK  Bachelors  degree  taught  in  a  majority  English
    speaking country."

5.   On receipt of the refusal of her application Mrs Ray  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  She and her husband both gave  notice  of  appeal
    indicating that they wanted their  appeals  to  be  determined  on  the
    papers. What happened next is perhaps an illustration of  the  unwisdom
    of asking for one's appeal to be determined on the papers because  when
    those papers were put before Judge Davies in Manchester  sitting  on  1
    July 2013 he mistakenly thought that the decision letter of 26  October
    2012 was the decision against  which  Mrs  Ray  and  her  husband  were
    appealing.

6.   Had he read that letter thoroughly he would have seen that it  informed
    the recipients that they had no right of appeal because they still  had
    leave to remain.  Judge Davies dismissed the appeals  but  clearly  his
    misunderstanding as to the decision against which the  appellants  were
    appealing completely vitiates his determination.  So much was suggested
    by Judge Parkes  when  granting  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 12 August this year.

7.   The appeal came before  me  today  when  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Mr Steven Walker.  The  appellants  themselves  did  not
    attend and indeed I gather from  Mr  Walker  that  they  are  making  a
    voluntary departure from the United  Kingdom  on  6  October.   However
    their appeals remain in being and therefore it is my task to  determine
    their appeals.

8.    Mr  Walker  is  in  full  agreement  with  me  that   the   First-tier
    determination does evince a material error of law and must therefore be
    set aside and that the Upper Tribunal ought to remake the  decision  on
    the appeal.  This I now do.

9.   The sole reason for refusing the application was  the  failure  by  Mrs
    Ray to meet the language requirement,  one  of  which  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 188(b)(ii)(2) of the Immigration Rules which states  that  an
    appellant is deemed to have reached the level required (B2) if she  has
    obtained  an  academic  qualification  which  meets  or   exceeds   the
    recognised standard of a Bachelors degree in the UK from an educational
    establishment in a majority English speaking country.  Those  countries
    are then listed and one of them is the United Kingdom.

10.  Mrs Ray had in fact adduced a diploma which she  had  obtained  at  the
    College of IT and E-Commerce in April 2011.   This was a Level 7  BTech
    Advanced Professional Diploma in Management Studies.   It  was  on  the
    strength of that diploma that she was awarded  a  place  at  West  City
    College.

11.  Mr Walker agrees with me that  this  diploma  obtained  in  the  United
    Kingdom at a level actually in excess of a UK Bachelors degree which is
    Level 6 fulfils the requirement of paragraph 118 of Appendix A  to  the
    Immigration Rules  and  this  being  the  sole  reason  why  Mrs  Ray's
    application was refused, it follows that her  appeal  succeeds  and  so
    also does the  appeal  of  her  husband  which  is  linked  with  hers.
    Hopefully the determination of these two appeals will reach the  couple
    before they depart from the United Kingdom.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


