
[pic]


      Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
      Number: IA/11030/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


      |Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2015                          |                              |
|                                             |On 17 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                 MR ALI RAZA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)


                                                                  Respondent
      Representation


      For the appellant: no appearance
      For the respondent: Mr M Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




   1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State. The respondent
      is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17 January 1991. However for the sake
      of convenience, I shall refer to Mr  Ali  as  the  appellant  and  the
      Secretary of State as the respondent which are the  designations  they
      had before the first-tier Tribunal.




   2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 12
      February 2014 refusing him further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student pursuant to paragraph 245 ZX (a)
      and paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).


   3.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
      pursuant to the Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal was granted to
      the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on 26 November 2014
      stating that it is arguable that the Judge fell into material error by
      failing to consider  the  respondent's  verification  report  when  he
      concluded  that  there  is  no  "clear  and  convincing  evidence"  of
      deception on the part of the appellant.


   4. Thus the appeal came before me.


First-tier Tribunal's decision


   5. The first-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  respondent  had  not
      demonstrated that the appellant had deliberately  practised  deception
      as defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration  Rules  and  that  he  as
      opposed to someone acting without his or her knowledge  has  contrived
      in a significant way to frustrate the intentions  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The Judge concluded  that  he  does  not  see  any  "clear  and
      convincing evidence" of production of forgery or deception. He  stated
      that he  cannot  accept  data  against  the  appellant  which  is  not
      supported by admissible evidence and that "over suspicious  evaluation
      of evidence cannot justify serious allegations of mall doing against a
      human being". He found the appellant to be a bona fide student and the
      discontinuance of his education will be devastating for the appellant.
      The Judge noted that the appellant has spent a lot  of  money  on  his
      education and therefore it should not be allowed to go  to  waste.  He
      stated that the appellant "should be helped and I am  happy  to  allow
      the appeal". The remaining part of the Judge's decision  is  based  on
      policy of the United Kingdom on students who come to this  country  to
      study and is of no relevance to the issues in the appeal.

Grounds of appeal


   6. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The first
      ground is that "failing to  take  into  account  opinion  on  material
      matters". The Judge concluded that the respondent did not produce  any
      admissible evidence regarding her assertion  that  the  appellant  had
      submitted a false document with this application.  This  is  factually
      incorrect because the respondent in her  appeal  bundle  provided  and
      sought  to  rely  as  on  as  corroborative   evidence,   a   Document
      Verification Report which the Judge failed to take into  account.  The
      Judge did not make findings on the merit of the document  verification
      report but concluded that the respondent had failed to produce  "clear
      and convincing evidence".


   7. At the hearing Mr Melvin stated that the respondent does not  seek  to
      rely on the second ground  of  appeal  other  than  to  say  that  the
      appellant  produced  the  same  statement  with   a   different   date
      purportedly from the bank.



The hearing


   8. At the hearing  a  letter  from  the  appellant  solicitors  dated  14
      February 2015 stated that they are now withdrawing their  instructions
      to act on behalf of the appellant. The appellant did  not  attend  the
      hearing and I confirmed that the hearing notice was issued to  him  on
      20 January 2015 stating that the appeal will be heard  on  Monday,  16
      February 2015. Having satisfied myself that the appellant was properly
      served, I continued with the hearing and  heard  submissions  from  Mr
      Melvin.

   9. Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  bank  statement  that  the  appellant
      provided was false. He said that the Home Office has spent  a  lot  of
      public funds to create relationship with banks  around  the  world  in
      order to verify bank statements. He stated that the Judge's conclusion
      that the respondent did not provide any evidence that the document was
      false is without foundation.  The  bank  emailed  the  respondent  and
      stated that the account number given by the appellant does  not  exist
      and the document verification report states that that  bank  statement
      provided by the appellant is false. The appellant has not provided any
      evidence other than the same letter he provided  earlier  and  changed
      the date. The Judge  was  approaching  irrationality  by  accepting  a
      letter provided by the appellant rather than  given  consideration  to
      the document verification report or concluding why he did not or could
      not rely on it.


Findings as to whether there is an error of law


  10. The Judge materially erred in law because he did not take into account
      all  the  documentary   evidence   provided   including   a   document
      verification report provided by the respondent. The Judge stated  that
      which has considered all the documentary evidence in  the  appeal  but
      failed to make any findings on the document verification report  which
      clearly stated that the bank statement provided by the  appellant  was
      false. Furthermore, the Judge relied on a letter  dated  29  September
      2014 provided at the hearing, which was the same letter provided dated
      13 January 2014 from the same bank stating the  same  thing  that  the
      appellant has nearly Rs.2 million in his account. Mr Melvin said there
      therefore would have been no need for an adjournment at  the  previous
      hearing because it was clear that the same letter  had  been  produced
      bearing  different  dates  which  were  completely  inconsistent  with
      document verification report which stated that bank statement provided
      by the appellant was false. The judge did not take  into  account  the
      case of Tanveer Ahmed when he found that the document provided by  the
      appellant can be relied upon in light  of  the  document  verification
      report.


  11. I therefore find that the Judge materially erred  in  law  and  I  set
      aside the decision in its entirety and re-determine the appeal.

Findings of fact

  12. I have considered all the evidence in this appeal  including  evidence
      to which I have not specifically referred. I have also considered  the
      documents provided by the respondent and the appellant.


  13. The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate on a balance of
      probabilities that he meets all the requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules relevant to his application. The  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
      respondent to show that the appellant's appeal stands  to  fail  under
      paragraph 322 (1A) of the Immigration  Rules.   He  who  asserts  must
      prove. As the respondent asserts that  the  bank  statement  that  the
      appellant provided with  his  application  for  leave  to  remain,  to
      demonstrate funds is false, it is for the respondent to prove this  to
      a higher burden of proof.


14. From 29 February 2008 paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules  states
   that  an  applicant  must  be  refused  entry   clearance   where   false
   representations have been made or false  documents  or  information  have
   been submitted (whether or not material to the application,  and  whether
   or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material  facts  have  not  been
   disclosed, in relation to the application.


  15. The features of the general grounds for  refusal  in  Part  9  of  the
      Immigration Rules  were  considered  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal in JC (Part 9 HC395 - burden of  proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
      00027 ('JC').  Part 9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contains  'general
      grounds' for the refusal of entry clearance or leave  to  enter.   The
      applicant is not showing why he qualifies; rather  the  decision-maker
      is seeking to show why  the  applicant  is,  or  should  normally  be,
      disqualified.  (See JC, paras. 8, 10 and 14.)


16. I have taken into account the case of AA (Nigeria) [2011]  1W.L.R.   564
   submitted by the appellant where, the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
   interpretation of paragraph 322 (1A) in the case of a  Nigerian  man  who
   had not disclose previous convictions in  an  application  for  leave  to
   remain.  The court  heard  that  "false"  within  the  meaning  of  those
   paragraphs required dishonesty or deception and  could  not  simply  mean
   "incorrect".


  17. Each of the  general  grounds  depends  for  its  application  on  the
      decision-maker being able to establish a precedent fact or facts,  and
      in relation to all of the general grounds the burden of  proof  is  on
      the decision-maker to establish the facts relied upon (JC, para.  10).
      The reason why the burden rests on the decision-maker is that each  of
      these grounds alleges in one way or another failing or a wrongdoing on
      the part of an applicant (JC, paras. 11-12).  The standard of proof is
      at the higher end of the spectrum of balance of probability,  but  the
      standard is flexible in its application,  and  the  more  serious  the
      allegation or the more serious the consequences if the  allegation  is
      proven, the stronger must be the evidence before a court will find the
      allegation proved on the balance  of  probabilities  (JC,  para.  13).
      However, once the decision-maker establishes the underlying facts, the
      burden shifts to the  appellant,  stating  why  the  refusal  was  not
      properly refused.


18. In respect of paragraph 320  (1A),  the  precedent  fact  on  which  the
   application of this provision depends is that the  appellant  provided  a
   bank statement from the Bank of Alfalah (hereinafter the Bank)  which  is
   false, and the burden of establishing this fact lies  on  the  respondent
   (JC, paras. 16-17).  The  respondent  produced  a  document  verification
   report which after contacting the bank after verifying with the bank on 4
   February 2014 , found that the bank statement provided , by the appellant
   to prove finances was false. I  find  that  the  precedent  fact  of  the
   appellant having produced false documents has  been  established  by  the
   respondent on the higher spectrum of the balance of  probabilities.   The
   burden of proof now shifts to the appellant to demonstrate on  a  balance
   of probabilities that he did not submit a false document by deception.


19. The appellant states in his witness statement that  the  bank  statement
   is genuine and that the respondent has been mistaken and had she has  not
   made a proper enquiry from the bank regarding  the  bank  statements.  He
   argues that the refusal letter is completely silent about  the  mode  and
   accuracy of the verification made  by  the  respondent.  He  stated  that
   paragraph 322 (1A)  does  not  require  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the
   appellant of  the  deception  as  the  wording  of  paragraph  6  of  the
   Immigration Rules requires knowledge of the deception on the part of  the
   applicant. Therefore deception or false representations  must  have  been
   made knowingly by the appellant which the respondent has not proved.


  20. The document verification report clearly states that the  document  is
      false. There is no reason that the appellant has given for me to  find
      otherwise. His alternative argument is that even if they are false, it
      was not to his  knowledge.  He  however  does  not  suggest  to  whose
      knowledge the document is false and why the document is not  false  to
      his knowledge, given  that  it  was  him  who  provided  it  with  his
      application as proof of his finances. The Bank stated that  there  was
      no such account at their Bank and  that  the  document  was  false  as
      stated in the document verification report on which I rely.


  21. The appellant has not provided any documentary evidence from the  Bank
      other than the letter dated 29 September 2014 stating "to whom it  may
      concern" that the appellant has a bank account at the Bank  "which  he
      is maintaining to our entire satisfaction" and the closing balance  is
      about rupees 1,974,450. The letter does  not  say  that  the  document
      verification report is erroneous. I therefore  place  no  reliance  on
      this document to show that the appellant's bank statement is genuine.


22. I find that paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules requires that  an
   applicant's application must be refused if false documents  are  produced
   whether or not to the applicant's knowledge and in this case I have found
   that it is to the appellant's knowledge. I therefore find that  in  light
   of this the appellant's application must be denied under this section 322
   (1A) of the Immigration Rules.


  23. Having considered all of the evidence in the case as a  whole  in  the
      round, the appellant's application has been irretrievably  compromised
      by him producing a false document. I find that he has not demonstrated
      on a balance of probabilities that he has the necessary funds to  meet
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  the  category  that  he
      seeks to remain.


  24. The appellant seeks to rely on Article 8 of the European Convention on
      human rights in respect of his private life. I have considered all the
      evidence in this appeal in respect of his private life and I find that
      the appellant came to this country as a student and could not have had
      an expectation that he could live in this country  permanently  unless
      he fulfilled the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  for  further
      leave to remain.


  25. The appellant provided a false document with his application in  order
      to prove that he had adequate finances to continue to  study  in  this
      country. I find that the respondent's decision does not  infringe  the
      appellant's Article 8 rights in any manner whatsoever.  The  appellant
      has not been able to fulfil the Immigration Rules  and  there  are  no
      circumstances in his case for me to  consider  which  is  not  already
      covered by the Immigration Rule which are Article 8 compliant.


  26. I have taken into account the statutory rights of the respondent for a
      fair  and  transparent  immigration  control  and  I  find  that  this
      dishonest  appellant's  circumstances  do  not  trump  those  of   the
      respondent.



Conclusions


  27. I find that the appellant's appeal is properly denied under  paragraph
      322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  I also find that as a  consequence,
      the  appellant  has  not  satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  the
      circumstances the appeal is therefore refused.


DECISION


Appeal dismissed pursuant to the Immigration Rules.
Appeal dismissed pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
   Rights






                                                                       Dated
          this 17th day of February 2015


Signed by


A Deputy Judge of the Upper tribunal
Mrs S Chana

















