
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th October 2014                 |On 11th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS LYDIA GYAMFI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ene, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bagral  who,  in  a  determination
   promulgated on the  11th  July  2014,  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
   against refusal to grant her a Residence Card as the  spouse  of  an  EEA
   national exercising European Union Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

2. The respondent, who is a citizen of Ghana, was  married  by  proxy  to  a
   German citizen, Mr David Amponsah (hereafter, "the sponsor"). In order to
   show that she qualified as his  family  member,  the  respondent  had  to
   demonstrate that her marriage was legally recognised.

3. Judge Bagral was  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  proxy  marriage  was
   legally recognised in Ghana, which was where  it  had  taken  place.  The
   Secretary of State does not challenge that finding in  this  appeal.  The
   Secretary of State's appeal arises from the fact that the judge  went  on
   to hold that that finding was sufficient for the appellant  to  establish
   that she was a 'family member' for the purposes of Regulation  7  of  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.  She  based  this
   conclusion upon the following passage from the headnote to the report  of
   the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)
   -

    It should be assumed that, without independent  and  reliable  evidence
    about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of the EEA country
    and/or the country where the  marriage  took  place,  the  Tribunal  is
    likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence has been  provided
    to discharge the burden of proof. [Judge Bagral's added emphasis]

   On the strength of this statement,  the  judge  rejected  the  Presenting
   Officer's submission that it was necessary for the appellant to show that
   her marriage was legally recognised under German law.

4. However, whilst the headnote to the report in Kareem might be  considered
   misleading, the legal position has now been clarified by the decision  in
   TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  000316  (IAC).  The
   headnote of the latter decision reads as follows -

    Following the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    00024  (IAC),  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
    relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State
    from which the Union citizen obtains nationality. [Original emphasis]

5. It follows from the above that the judge erred in  law  by  holding  that
   recognition of the appellant's marriage under Ghanian  law  sufficed  for
   the purposes of the requirements of the Regulations. Moreover,  as  there
   was no evidence before the Tribunal  that  the  marriage  was  recognised
   under German law, it follows that the judge ought not to have allowed the
   appeal outright on the basis that she did.

6. However, that is not the end of the matter. The decision-maker  had  also
   considered,  in  the  alternative,  whether  the  appellant  was   in   a
   relationship akin to marriage, and thus an 'extended  family  member'  of
   the sponsor under Regulation 8. Having held  that  the  appellant  was  a
   family member of the sponsor, the judge did not consider the  alternative
   possibility of extended family membership.  It  is  thus  appropriate  to
   remit the appeal in order for Judge Bagral to make a  finding  upon  this
   matter.

7. It may be appropriate to sound a note of caution. Should the  judge  find
   that the appellant is as a matter of fact  in  a  relationship  with  the
   sponsor which is akin to marriage, it would only be appropriate to  allow
   the appeal to  the  limited  extent  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
   application for a Residence Card is not in accordance with the law.  This
   is because, in contrast  to  the  position  of  a  'family  member',  the
   Secretary of State's  decision  to  issue  of  a  Residence  Card  to  an
   'extended family member' is discretionary [see Regulation 17(4)]. Whether
   or not that stage is reached is something that will of course depend upon
   how Judge Bagral finds the facts in accordance with the evidence.

Notice of Decision

8. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  outright  is
   set aside, and the matter  is  remitted  for  Judge  Bagral  to  consider
   whether the Secretary of State's refusal to grant the application  for  a
   Residence Card was in accordance with the law.

Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date 29th October 2014

David Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
