
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                AKRAMUL KARIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 10 February 2014, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
    appellant leave to remain, following an application made on his  behalf
    on 27 December 2013.  In a decision promulgated on  28  November  2014,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts ("the judge") purported to decide  the
    appellant's appeal against that decision.   The  appellant  advanced  a
    case that his removal to Bangladesh, the country  of  his  nationality,
    would breach his rights under Articles 3 and  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, in the light of his mental  ill  health  and  the  risk  of
    suicide on return.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

2.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in failing to properly apply D, a  decision  of  the  Grand
    Chamber and  in  failing  to  properly  assess  the  risk  of  suicide.
    Permission to appeal was granted on 21 January 2015.  In a  brief  Rule
    24 response, the Secretary of State opposed the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed  himself  appropriately  in
    relation to the appellant's human rights.

3.   We were told by Mr Richardson that it  appeared,  in  the  light  of  a
    conversation with Mr Tufan, that a jurisdictional point arose which was
    not taken before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, served on the appellant, was a refusal to grant  leave  which
    was not, of itself, an "immigration decision" falling  within   section
    82(2) of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration 2002 ("the 2002  Act")
    and so was incapable of giving rise to an appeal.   The  basis  of  the
    decision was that the application for leave was  made  on  27  December
    2013, after expiry of the appellant's extant leave on 8  November  that
    year, so that he had no leave at the time of the application.   If  so,
    there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and  no  valid
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

4.   Mr Tufan said that the case was on  all  fours  with  Virk  and  Others
    [2013] EWCA Civ 652.  In that case, applications for  leave  to  remain
    were made after expiry of the claimants' current leave.  The point  was
    not taken before the First-tier Tribunal, which dismissed the  appeals.
    In the Upper Tribunal, the  point  having  emerged,  the  appeals  were
    dismissed as the First-tier  Tribunal  acted  without  jurisdiction  in
    entertaining them.

5.   Mr Tufan was able to confirm  that  the  Secretary  of  State  held  no
    removal decision on file.  The appellant remained without any leave but
    a removal decision might be expected in due course,  which  would  give
    rise to an appeal.

6.   In Virk and Others, the Court of Appeal held  that  the  jurisdictional
    point was properly open to be taken by the Upper  Tribunal,  which  was
    entitled to rely on the First-tier Tribunal's lack of  jurisdiction  to
    decide the appeal and dismiss it.   We take a similar course.

7.   As the decision made by the Secretary of State was not an  "immigration
    decision" falling within section 82(2) of the 2002 Act, the  First-tier
    Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against  it.   That
    point having been raised before us, we dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction has been applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

