
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11074/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination given orally at|
|                                              |hearing. Promulgated on      |
|On 10 February 2014                           |On 28 February 2014          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and



                          THEOPHILUS KUMANYI TANDOH
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Cantor, Counsel, instructed by Ronik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State (whom I refer to as the respondent) appeals with
    permission against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birk
    which was promulgated on 28th November 2013 in  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal of Mr  Theophilus  Kumanyi  Tandoh  (whom  I  refer  to  as  the
    claimant) against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  to
    issue him with a derivative residence card as confirmation of his right
    of residence under European law as  the  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen, in this case his minor son.

 2. The claimant is married to Miss Felicia Barnes who has indefinite leave
    to enter the United Kingdom. They have a son who is a  British  citizen
    by virtue of his birth in the United Kingdom in February 2011. His case
    is that he is the child's primary carer because Miss Barnes  holds  two
    part-time jobs and attends college and that it would  not  be  possible
    for them to remain together in the United Kingdom with  the  child,  or
    rather that the child would not be able to remain here because  of  his
    parents.

 3. The claimant submits that he requires to be in  this  country  to  look
    after his son and that he does most of the day to day care because Miss
    Barnes is working part-time and at college.  It is said that the effect
    of requiring him to leave the United Kingdom  would  be  that  his  son
    would not  be  able  to  exercise  his  treaty  rights  and  thus  that
    Regulation 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations") are met.

 4. The respondent was not satisfied that that was so for the  reasons  set
    out in refusal letter dated 26th March 2013.  In summary the  Secretary
    of State found that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that  the
    child would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if  the  claimant
    were forced to leave, noting that he failed to provide evidence  as  to
    why the appellant's mother is not in a position to care for  the  child
    and thus there was no evidence that the mother would  not  be  able  to
    care for him if the claimant were required to leave.

 5. The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birk  who  heard
    evidence from the claimant and his wife. He allowed  the  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations finding:

          i) that there was no appeal before him with regard to  Article  8
             since no removal directions had been set;

         ii) that the issue before him was whether or not the appellant was
             entitled to a residence card;

        iii) that the claimant's son is a British national; that  they  had
             formed part of the same household since the child's birth,

         iv) that he was not satisfied that the claimant  had  demonstrated
             that he had sole responsibility for the child as  he  did  not
             place much weight on the assertions by the  claimant  and  his
             wife that the child was primarily in the care of the claimant;



          v) that the issue was whether or not the child could  continue to
             reside in the United Kingdom if the claimant were removed  and
             found that the child could not, accepting that if the claimant
             were required to leave the United Kingdom his son  was  likely
             to go with him because although there is joint  responsibility
             for the child it is clear that the family  dynamics  are  that
             the claimant makes all the decision regarding  the  long  term
             future of the child;

         vi) that if the claimant  was  removed  then  his  son  could  not
             exercise his right of free movement; and,

        vii) having had regard to the principles set out in  ZH  (Tanzania)
             applying  Section  55  of   the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
             Immigration Act 2009 that it  was  not  in  the  child's  best
             interests to be separated from the two parents  and  therefore
             allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Secretary of State then sought permission on the grounds  that  the
    judge had materially misdirected  himself in law in that:

          i) The judge did not accept the  assertion  that  the  child  was
             primarily in the care of the appellant, but  had  gone  on  to
             allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations

         ii) the judge had erred in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
             Regulations in light  of  these  findings  and  had  erred  in
             applying this test under Section  55  under  the  Borders  Act
             2009; and,

        iii) that the judge had failed to take account  the  refusal  under
             the EEA  Regulations  would  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
             British citizen child could not exercise freedom  of  movement
             because the appellant is free to make a paid application under
             the Immigration Rules as the spouse of a  person  present  and
             settled in the United Kingdom.

 7. On  20th  December  2013  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted
    permission on all grounds, noting  that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
    overlooked  the  fact  that  the  child's   mother   who   has   shared
    responsibility for his care is settled in the United Kingdom.

 8. Whilst there was initially no letter  pursuant  to  Rule  24  from  the
    claimant or the claimant's solicitors, submissions were in fact made by
    fax sent on 6th February which I will deal with later.  Suffice  it  to
    say at this point that the greater part of the  submissions  relate  to
    the decision of the Tribunal in MA  and  SM  (Zambrano  -  EU  children
    outside the UK) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 and that  the  submissions  also
    make the point that sole responsibility is not the issue within the EEA
    Regulations, the reference being to primary responsibility which is not
    the same concept.

Submissions on error of law

 9. I heard submissions from Miss Holmes  and  Miss  Cantor.   Miss  Holmes
    submitted that the judge had erred in  finding  that  there  was  joint
    primary care and that it was clear that he had not found that there was
    sole responsibility.  She submitted also, relying on the  grounds,  the
    judge had erred in applying Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009.

10. Miss Cantor submitted that the  requirements  under  Regulation  15(2A)
    were cumulative; that the judge had stated [8] that what the father had
    said in  his evidence is that he is the head of the  house and that the
    wife follows him and in effect all the decisions are made by the father
    who also takes care of the child on a daily basis.  She  submitted  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant was a  primary  carer
    and that having heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife the
    judge was  aware  of  the  family  dynamics  and  had  thus  reached  a
    conclusion open to  him.

11. Even assuming that the judge was entitled to reach the  conclusion,  or
    did in fact reach the conclusion that the claimant was a primary carer,
    it is less easy to see that it was open to him  to  conclude  that  the
    final part of 15(2A) is met, that is that the child would be unable  to
    remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant were required to leave.

12. I asked Miss Cantor to address me  on  what  was  said  in  Harrison  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736  in
    particular at [63] where Elias LJ (with whom the other members  of  the
    Court agreed) said:

         "I agree with counsel for the Secretary of State,  that  there  is
         really no basis for asserting that it is arguable in the  light  of
         the authorities  that  the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to  cover
         anything short of a situation where the EU  citizen  is  forced  to
         leave the territory of the EU.  If the EU citizen, be it  child  or
         wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave  the  country  if
         the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of residence,
         there is in my view nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU
         law is engaged. Article 8 Convention rights may then come into  the
         picture to protect family life as the Court recognised  in  Dereci,
         but that is an entirely distinct area of protection."

13. Here, when considering whether the child would be unable to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom if the claimant were required to leave,  Judge  Birk
    stated [19]:

         "I accept that the evidence demonstrates that if the [claimant]  is
         required to leave the UK that his son is  likely  to  go  with  him
         because although there is joint responsibility for the child it  is
         clear that the family dynamics are that the  [claimant]  makes  the
         decision regarding the long term future of the child."

14. In the light of what was said in Harrison it  is  not  clear  that  the
    Judge directed himself properly as to the law, or  that  he  has  given
    adequate or sufficient reasons for a conclusion that the child would be
    unable to remain here; finding that it  was  "likely"  that  the  child
    would leave is a not sufficient to reach the  threshold  which  follows
    from force or compulsion. Further, there is little in  MA  &  SM  which
    assists the claimant.

15. That is not a finding of inability and is certainly  well  outside  the
    bounds of what is considered to be the law in Harrison and  accordingly
    I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in misdirecting himself  and
    that it was not open to him to conclude that the child  was  unable  to
    remain here.  The judge appears to have misunderstood the nature of the
    Regulation and on that basis I indicated that it would be necessary  to
    remake the appeal on that part.

Remaking the decision

16. I heard evidence from the claimant and his wife and further submissions
    from both representatives. The claimant said that it would be difficult
    for his wife and child were he  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  as  he
    supports her looking after the child whilst his wife does two part-time
    jobs and goes to college. It would be difficult for them to follow  him
    to Ghana. In cross-examination the claimant said that he had applied to
    remain as a spouse under the Rules but that had  been  refused  and  it
    would be difficult to pay the cost of making a fresh application now.

17. Miss Barnes said that if the claimant were returned to Ghana,  she  and
    her child have to go with him.  She said that she did not want to raise
    the child by herself and did not want to take his father away from him,
    that she had two jobs which she would not be able to hold down  if  she
    were removed and that she would not be able to cope. She  said  it  was
    not just the financial reasons that made it difficult but  because  the
    father would be taken  away  from  the  child  and  it  would  be  very
    difficult physically and mentally.  She said in the worst case scenario
    she would go with the claimant to Ghana.

18. Cross-examined Miss Barnes said that it cost a lot of money to  make  a
    fresh application for her  husband  to  remain  but  whilst  there  was
    nothing stopping that, it was likely, she believed, that  it  would  be
    refused and there would be nothing to stop the Secretary of State  from
    refusing the application again. She said it would be difficult  if  not
    impossible for her to pay for nursery education or care for  her  child
    and she would have to stop college and probably at least one other  job
    and that  she simply could not afford it and she was struggling at  the
    moment even with two jobs.

19. Miss Holmes submitted that the application could not succeed given that
    it had not been  shown that the child was unable to remain here if  the
    father was removed.

20. In reply Miss Cantor relied on the submissions made  by  the  solicitor
    although she accepted that to a great extent they relied on MA  and  SM
    (Zambrano) which she accepted was not of particular  relevance  to  the
    facts of this case.  She drew my attention again  to  the  decision  in
    Harrison at paragraph 67 onwards.

21. I accept that it would be difficult financially for the claimant's wife
    and child were he to leave the United Kingdom given  that  without  his
    presence here and looking after the child, it would be  very  difficult
    for Miss Barnes to hold down two jobs as she does  at  present  and  to
    return to college. In reality it may well be  that  she  is  unable  to
    continue college or to continue more than one job but  as  Miss  Holmes
    submitted, that is something that people have to do.

22. I have considered carefully what was said in Harrison at [67] and [68].
    Lord Justice Elias said[68]:

         "It is highly pertinent that the CJEU has confirmed in Dereci  that
         the fact that the right to family life is  adversely  affected,  or
         that the presence of the non-EU national is desirable for  economic
         reasons, they will not of themselves constitute factors capable  of
         triggering the Zambrano principle. In practice these are  the  most
         likely reasons why the right of residence would  be  rendered  less
         beneficial or enjoyable. If these considerations do not engage this
         wider principle, it seems to me  extremely  difficult  to  identify
         precisely what will. What level  of  interference  with  the  right
         would fall short of de facto compulsion and yet would constitute  a
         form of interference which is more than  simply  the  breakdown  of
         family life or the  fact  that  the  EU  citizens  are  financially
         disadvantaged by the removal of a non EU  national  family  member?
         The scope for this right to bite would be extremely narrow  and  in
         my judgment there would be very real uncertainty as to  the  nature
         and scope of the doctrine."

23. In essence I consider having had regard to what was  said  in  Harrison
    that what must be shown is that the EU national would be  compelled  to
    leave the UK.  That would not be as a result of  any  legal  compulsion
    here. There is no suggestion that the mother is  incapable  of  looking
    after the child ( unlike the situationof the First Appellant  in  MA  &
    SM). Even though there would be quite strong factors likely to cause it
    to happen, those are primarily  financial  and  emotional  and  do  not
    amount to the necessary legal compulsion to fall within the  ruling  in
    Zambrano.  The factual situation is not materially different  from  the
    Second Appellant in MA & SM about whom the panel said [56]:

         56.  There is no suggestion that the  sponsor  is  not  capable  of
         looking after JM and FM. He has tailored his working hours thus far
         to ensure that they fit in with the need to care  for  JM,  and  we
         have no doubt he would also ensure that FM was similarly cared for.
         There mere fact that the sponsor cannot be as  economically  active
         as he would wish, because of his care responsibilities  to  JM  and
         FM, is not sufficient to support a conclusion that JM and FM  would
         be denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU citizenship rights, nor
         would this be the case even if the sponsor were  required  to  stop
         working altogether. The right of residence is a right to reside  in
         the territory of the EU. It  is  not  a  right  to  any  particular
         quality of life or to any particular standard of living (see Dereci
         at paragraph 68, and Harrison at paragraph 67).

24. Accordingly I conclude that the appellant has failed to show  that  the
    effect of his removal from the United Kingdom would  be  that  his  son
    would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom.  He therefore fails to
    meet the requirements of Regulation 15A and  I  therefore  dismiss  his
    appeal under the EEA Regulations.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Signed                                  Date: 27 February 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
