



UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11044/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                      Determination      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 27 May 2015                   |                      On: 9 June 2015    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Ms Ichiko Watanabe
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, counsel (instructed by Aschfords Law)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      Secretary of State and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Japan, born on 10 April  1976.  She  has
      been granted successive periods of leave to remain in the UK following
      her grant of leave to enter as  a  student  in  April  2003.  She  was
      granted leave to remain until 31 December 2012. However, on 1 May 2012
      her leave to remain was curtailed so as to expire on 14  October  2012
      and she was given 60 days to find another Tier 4 sponsor.


   3. On 12 November 2012 she applied outside the rules for further time  to
      obtain an English language test certificate at the appropriate  level.
      That was refused on 14 June 2013. On 5 December 2013, she  was  served
      with "overstayer papers."


   4. On 23 December 2013 she applied for leave to remain under Article 8 of
      the Human Rights  Convention.  That  application  was  refused  on  11
      February 2014. It was on that date that the secretary  of  state  made
      the decision to remove the claimant.


   5. Her appeal against that decision was allowed on human  rights  grounds
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell in a determination promulgated on
      3 October 2014.  The Judge did not accept that  the  claimant  had  no
      ties to Japan even though she had not visited there  since  2010.  Her
      family who supported her in her studies and with whom  she  maintained
      contact were still there.


   6. The Tribunal had regard to her relationship to  her  British  partner,
      which although not amounting to family life was nevertheless  relevant
      to a finding about her private life. That  relationship  commenced  in
      about May 2013 and became serious in December 2013.  The  Judge  found
      that  "in  that  sense  the  relationship  is  developing."  This  was
      nevertheless a nascent relationship and they cannot be  considered  to
      have formed a family life together, nor had  her  partner  turned  his
      mind as to how the relationship would continue if the claimant were to
      be removed to Japan.


   7. The Judge found that the decision had a  basis  in  law,  taking  into
      account the considerations under  s.117B  of  the  amended  2002  Act.
      Accordingly, the  decision  to  remove  was  disproportionate  to  the
      achievement of that aim, having regard to the strength of her  private
      life here, including the length of time she had remained here and  the
      positive attributes in the shape of speaking fluent  English  and  her
      integration into society here.


   8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  in  December
      2014.


   9. Following a hearing before the Tribunal on 20 January  2015,  I  found
      that the Judge had made an error of law by  failing  to  set  out  and
      identify the basis for the summary conclusion that  he  "agreed"  that
      there may be arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
      rules. No analysis  or  consideration  was  given  as  to  what  those
      compelling or compassionate reasons were. He  stated  that  "the  only
      ground" is Article 8.


  10. As noted above, the Judge did not accept that the claimant had no ties
      to Japan. He gave no reasons as to why  no  proper  consideration  was
      given to  s.117B  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
      relationship was started and developed at a time when her  status  was
      precarious and when she had no leave to be in the UK. That  submission
      had been  advanced  by  the  secretary  of  state  but  had  not  been
      adequately dealt with by the Judge.


  11. The failure by the Judge to set out and identify the  basis  for  that
      conclusion resulted in the secretary of state not  knowing  the  basis
      upon which she had lost before the First-tier Tribunal.


  12. The Judge needed to look at the evidence to see if there was  anything
      which had not already been adequately considered by the  secretary  of
      state in the context of the immigration rules and which could lead  to
      a successful Article 8 claim. That exercise did not take place.


  13. In the event, I set the decision aside and directed that the  claimant
      file and  serve  on  the  Tribunal  written  submissions  setting  out
      anything which had not been adequately considered in  the  context  of
      the immigration rules and which could lead to a successful  Article  8
      claim.


  14. At the resumed hearing on 27 May  2015,  Mr  Nath  on  behalf  of  the
      secretary of state contended that there was nothing  additional  which
      could be added to the secretary of state's reasons  for  refusal  with
      regard  to  exceptional  circumstances.  There   has   been   adequate
      consideration given.


  15. Despite the opportunity given to the claimant to file any  submissions
      as  to  whether  there  was  anything  which  had  not  been  properly
      considered in the context of the immigration  rules  and  which  could
      lead to a successful Article 8 claim, no such written submissions were
      filed.


  16. Moreover, at the hearing, Mr Khan did not seek to make any submissions
      with regard to that issue. He stated that there was nothing additional
      to be added.


  17. I have had regard to the Court of Appeal decision  in  Singh  v  SSHD;
      Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74. At [63] and [64], where Lord Justice
      Underhill found that Aikens LJ's observations in MM (Lebanon) was  not
      questioning the substantial point made by Sales J at paragraph  30  in
      Nagre. He was simply stating that it was unnecessary for the  decision
      maker, in approaching the "second  stage"  to  have  to  decide  first
      whether it was arguable that there was a good Article 8 claim  outside
      the rules - that being what he calls "the  intermediary  test"  -  and
      then, if he decided that it was arguable, to  go  on  to  assess  that
      claim: he should simply decide whether there was a good claim  outside
      the rules or not.


  18. Lord Justice  Underhill  would  not  himself  have  read  Sales  J  as
      intending to impose  any  such  intermediary  requirement,  though  he
      agrees with Aikens LJ that if he  was  it  represents  an  unnecessary
      refinement. But what matters is that there is nothing in  Aikens  LJ's
      comment which casts doubt on Sales J's basic point that  there  is  no
      need to conduct a full separate examination of Article 8  outside  the
      rules where, in the circumstances of this  particular  case,  all  the
      issues have been addressed in the consideration under the Rules.


  19. The second stage can, in an appropriate  case,  be  satisfied  by  the
      decision maker concluding that any family life or private life  issues
      raised by the claim have already been considered at the  first  stage,
      in which case obviously there is no need to go through it  all  again.
      That is a conclusion which must be  reached  by  way  of  a  conscious
      decision and cannot simply be assumed. That the decision maker must be
      in a  position  to  demonstrate  that  she  has  given  the  necessary
      consideration is simply a reflection of  the  ordinary  obligation  to
      record a material decision.


  20. If the decision maker's view is straightforward, that all the  Article
      8 issues raised have been addressed in determining the claim under the
      rules, all that is necessary, as Sales J says, is to say so.


  21. Neither MM (Lebanon) nor Ganesalaban undermine the point made by Sales
      J in Nagre, which together with his endorsement  of  the  approach  in
      Izuazu remains good law [67].


  22. In the reasons for refusal in the current  appeal,  the  secretary  of
      state has considered whether there were any exceptional  circumstances
      warranting a grant of leave. These have been considered in  full  from
      paragraphs 24 to 31 of the reasons for refusal. In addition there  has
      been consideration of her claim based upon the  approach  outlined  in
      Razgar [2004] UHL 27.


  23. The circumstances relating to the  claimant  as  set  out  were  fully
      considered. The secretary of state noted that the appellant failed  to
      meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM  of  the
      rules.  That  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  In
      particular it was not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very  serious
      obstacles to her integration into Japan if she were required to leave.


  24. I accordingly find that in the circumstances, there are no factors  of
      a sufficiently compelling or compassionate nature warranting the grant
      of any period of leave to remain in the UK exceptionally  outside  the
      rules.


  25. I have also had regard to the provisions of s.117 of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That requires me to  have  regard  to
      the public interest  considerations  applicable  in  this  case.  This
      includes the maintenance of effective immigration controls,  which  is
      in the public interest. This is not a case where there is any parental
      relationship with a qualifying child.


  26. In the circumstances, there was no need to  conduct  a  full  separate
      examination of Article 8 outside the rules where all  the  issues  had
      been addressed  in  consideration  under  the  rules.  The  conclusion
      reached by the secretary of state in this  regard  was  by  way  of  a
      conscious decision. The secretary of state has demonstrated  that  she
      has given the necessary consideration as to whether there  is  a  good
      claim outside the rules or not.


  27. Having regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
      decision of the respondent was in accordance  with  the  law  and  the
      immigration rules.


  28. For these reasons, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal of  the  secretary
      of state is allowed and I substitute a fresh decision  dismissing  the
      claimant's appeal against the secretary  of  state's  refusal  of  her
      claim for leave to remain and a decision to remove her.


         Notice of Decision


         The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a       point of law is set aside.


         I substitute a fresh decision dismissing the appeal.


         No anonymity direction is made.


          Signed                                                    Date   8
June 2015


           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer







