
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           BISOLA VICTORIA IBINOLA
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed by David A Grand
(OISC)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J.R.W.D. Jones  QC  allowing  the  Claimant's
    appeal on human rights grounds with reference to Appendix FM.

 2. In a Refusal Letter dated 26 February 2014, dated  3  March  2014,  the
    Secretary of State refused the Claimant's human rights  application  in
    relation to her right to private and family  life  and  issued  removal
    directions dated 3 March 2014 (IS151B) set for the  Claimant's  country
    of origin, Nigeria. The First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision
    allowing the Claimant's appeal against that decision on 12 March 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  The  grounds  may  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in considering the question of whether the children
         could be expected to move to Nigeria by asking  himself  the  wrong
         question. The judge wrongly focussed on  whether  the  family  life
         between the  Claimant  and  her  husband  could  be  replicated  in
         Nigeria. The judge considered whether the children  could  live  in
         Nigeria but failed to  consider  whether  the  Appellant's  husband
         could visit his children in the  UK  periodically  or  whether  his
         children could visit him in Nigeria if they wished to, which is  in
         keeping with the family's situation as there is often some distance
         between the family but  their  relationships  are  maintained.  The
         partner's choice not to move to Nigeria with the Claimant does  not
         of itself satisfy Appendix EX.1.(b).  In  short,  the  difficulties
         faced could be overcome by the children being left in  the  UK  and
         their father moving with the Claimant to Nigeria which is a  choice
         reasonably expected of all of them in the circumstances;

     ii) The judge  has  erred  by  failing  to  consider  the  'precarious'
         relationship as the Claimant has been in the UK without leave since
         31 December 2010.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne.

 5. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Claimant  but  was
    addressed in oral submissions by her counsel.

    No Error of Law

 6. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

 7. In relation to the first ground, I find that the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal must fail in relation to  the  judge  having  allegedly  omitted
    consideration of whether it was an insurmountable obstacle to  separate
    the husband from his British children  from  a  previous  relationship.
    With respect to both advocates, they appear to my mind to  have  missed
    the point entirely.

 8. The Secretary of State cannot require a  British  citizen  to  relocate
    abroad or quit the UK. This is because citizens possess an  inalienable
    right of abode and are not subject to immigration control  pursuant  to
    section 1(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971.  For  ease  of   reference,
    section 1(1) states as follows:

         'All those who are in this Act expressed to have the right of abode
         in the United Kingdom shall be free to live in, and to come and  go
         into and from, the United Kingdom without let or  hindrance  except
         such as may be required under and in accordance with  this  Act  to
         enable their right  to  be  established  or  as  may  be  otherwise
         lawfully imposed on any person'

 9. Therefore, as the Secretary of  State  cannot  require  the  Claimant's
    British husband nor his British children to move  to  Nigeria,  if  the
    British husband refuses to go to Nigeria, it is unclear to what  extent
    a judge could consider the  hypothetical  scenario  of  such  a  person
    quitting their country of residence, particularly where that individual
    has already expressed that they do not wish to or will not go.  In  the
    light of that stance, it is of little application or use that  a  judge
    consider what would happen if they did go, given  that  the  individual
    has made their stance abundantly clear. To this extent, nothing may  be
    expected of a British citizen as they are not  subject  to  immigration
    control and one cannot 'expect' them to go as Ms Savage contends.

10.  Furthermore,  I  do  not  accept  Ms  Savage's  submission  that   the
    consideration of visits by British children to a British parent  abroad
    is a mandatory requirement to be considered under Appendix FM EX.1.(b).
    Despite a request from me to point to any relevant wording in a rule or
    any relevant guidance, Ms Savage was unable to refer me to any specific
    rule or guidance which could support her contention. Further still  and
    notwithstanding the above, she was  unable  to  demonstrate  that  this
    point was taken by the Secretary of State in her refusal decision  (see
    paragraphs 10-24 of the Refusal), or that it was pursued at the  First-
    tier Tribunal below. Consequently, it is an entirely new point that has
    been raised for the first time by the Secretary of  State's  Specialist
    Appeals Team when bringing this appeal to the Upper Tribunal and has no
    place in these proceedings which seek to demonstrate an error of law in
    the way the judge addressed the Secretary of State's bases for refusal.



11. I further reject Ms Savage's contention that the choice of the  parties
    to relocate is unimportant compared to whether separation of the father
    and children is within the range of what can reasonably be expected  of
    them. The practicality of removal  and  the  status  quo  is  of  great
    importance in an Article  8  assessment,  particularly  where  a  party
    chooses not to go (as Ms Savage accepts they  may  do)  and  where  any
    further discussion on whether they leave the UK is  therefore  laid  to
    rest (for further discussion on this concept, see [42] of Lord  Justice
    Sedley's judgment in VW (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 5). In my view, it would  be  unhelpful  for
    judges to be expected to speculate on potential  scenarios,  especially
    where such assessment is rendered  unnecessary  by  a  British  citizen
    making clear that they will not leave their country of abode, which the
    Secretary of State must respect and observe given the British citizen's
    right is inalienable and given that the Secretary of State's powers  of
    control do not apply to individuals mentioned in section  1(1)  of  the
    1971 Act.

12. In any event, even if it were required  of  a  judge  to  consider  the
    hypothesis of a British parent relocating  abroad  with  their  foreign
    spouse and whether the British children from  a  previous  relationship
    should be deprived of their regular parental contact and  whether  they
    should now maintain contact via international visits,  I  have  serious
    doubts as to the lawfulness or usefulness of any such  application  for
    the reasons given above, and particularly given that such a  hypothesis
    does not allow for the best interests of a child to  form  the  primary
    consideration in that analysis, as it appears to be presumed  that  the
    British parent must go and the child's involvement is therefore reduced
    to merely whether it is  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  curtail  the
    child's contact to international visits. That presumption and  starting
    point  implicitly  places  the   public   interest   as   the   primary
    consideration as  opposed  to  the  child's  (see  [10]  of  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74).

13.  The  judge  at  paragraph  57  rightly  considers  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  relationship  continuing  abroad  and
    considers the children an important part of  that  assessment.  I  find
    that the judge was unarguably entitled to consider the relationship and
    contact between the husband and the children in the manner that he did,
    which clearly held the best interests  of  the  children  in  mind  (as
    stated at paragraph 59). Furthermore, as highlighted by  Mr  Al-Rashid,
    it is trite but correct that it is in the best interests of a child  to
    be raised by both  parents  (see  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197, for example).

14. Further still, and notwithstanding my findings above, I reject ground 1
    as there is little utility in considering whether the  contact  between
    the British husband and children can be  maintained  via  international
    visits because the British husband is financially responsible  for  his
    children. The husband's business is in the UK and if he  were  to  quit
    the  UK  that  would  also  clearly  interfere  with  his  ability   to
    financially support his three British  children.  His  departure  would
    therefore affect the rights that those children enjoy  as  citizens  of
    the European Union pursuant to  the  decision  in  Sanade   and  others
    (British children-Zambrano-Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48  which  is  a  matter
    that makes the Secretary of State's contention further tenuous  to  say
    the least.

15. Turning to ground two, the weight to be given to the public interest is
    given statutory voice in the form of section 117B(1) for all Article  8
    matters arising before the Tribunal. The judge considered the  relevant
    factors before him and his decision is compliant with  the  observation
    in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) that not  every  subsection
    of section 117B need be examined explicitly in turn, as what matters is
    substance not form.

16. However, notwithstanding that observation, this ground is immaterial as
    pursuant to  the  second  headnote  and  [45]  of  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules)  [2015]  UKUT  415  (IAC),  there  is  no
    requirement for judges to consider the public interest when considering
    the Immigration Rules as it is distilled into the Rules as laid  before
    Parliament. The consideration  given  at  paragraph  61  was  therefore
    immaterial to the appeal under the rules and appears to  be  a  nominal
    mention at best. For the avoidance of doubt, I find that the judge  has
    not erred in his brief reference to the public interest  considerations
    under section 117A-D, which go in favour of both parties at  respective
    sub-paragraphs anyhow.

17. The grounds do not reveal an error of law such that the decision should
    be set aside.

    Decision

18. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
