
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/11389/2014
                                                               ia/11393/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 April 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD KAMRAN ASGHER
                                MARIAM MUNIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs H Price, Counsel instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellants who  are  citizens  of  Pakistan  appealed,  the  second
    Appellant as the dependant of the first,  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent of 18 February 2014  to  refuse  the  application  of  first
    Appellant for leave to remain in the UK  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the points-based system.

2.   The ensuing appeal was heard at Taylor  House  on  9  October  2014  by
    Judge Canavan.  Both parties were represented,  the  Appellant  by  Mrs
    Price, who appeared  before  me  at  the  error  of  law  hearing.  The
    Appellant was not called to give evidence, so that the hearing took the
    form of submissions.  In a determination  promulgated  on  11  December
    2014 Judge Canavan dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

3.   Grounds of appeal, not settled by Mrs Price, resulted in the  grant  of
    permission to appeal on 30 January 2015 by Judge  Hollingworth  in  the
    following terms:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to  the  scope  of
         consideration by the Judge of the factors identified  in  paragraph
         245DD.  This is further relevant in the context  of  analysing  the
         relationship between the current operations of any  business  being
         carried on and the scope of the business plan.  A further  arguable
         error of law arises since Article 8 was raised in  the  Grounds  of
         Appeal but the decision is only concerned with  a  dismissal  under
         the Immigration Rules."

4.   In two Rule 24 responses of 18 and  20  February  2015  the  Respondent
    submitted that  the  judge  directed  herself  appropriately  and  made
    findings which were properly open to her.

5.   The Appellant, together with his wife and children, attended the  error
    of law hearing before me, which took the form of submissions.   I  have
    taken these into account, together with the grounds of application  for
    permission to appeal and the Rule 24 responses.

Error of Law

6.   The decision of 18 February 2014 stated  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    have  access  to  the  requisite  funds,  with  the  result  that   his
    application was not genuine.  It accepted that he met the  criteria  of
    the Immigration Rules for English language and maintenance (funds).

7.   As  to  funds,  the  Refusal  Letter  extracted  from  the  Appellant's
    interview  and  concluded  that,  as  he  had  provided  business  bank
    statements  showing  large  amounts  of  money  transferred  from  four
    different bank accounts but without any evidence that he had  money  in
    those four different accounts, the viability  and  credibility  of  his
    funds and where the money came from  was  brought  into  question.   In
    paragraph 15 of her determination the judge stated that the Appellant's
    witness  statement  confirmed  only  that  the  funds  were   genuinely
    available but provided no further details about how the  Appellant  had
    accrued his savings or where they had been transferred from.

8.    The  requisite  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is   paragraph
    245DD(h)(iii), which requires that the  requisite  money  is  genuinely
    available to the applicant and will remain available to him until  such
    time as it is spent for the purposes of his business.  At his interview
    the Appellant explained the different sources of his funds.  There  was
    no apparent reason for this to be challenged, either by the  Respondent
    or by the judge.  The Immigration Rule requires only that the funds are
    genuinely available and will so  remain.   The  evidence  was  to  that
    effect.  The finding by the judge  to  the  contrary  was  against  the
    evidence and introduced an irrelevant requirement of an explanation  of
    how the savings had been accrued, which in any event the Appellant gave
    at interview.  This was, I find, an error of law.

9.   This fed into  the  requirements  in  paragraph  245DD(h)(i)  that  the
    applicant genuinely intends and is able to establish a business  within
    the next six months or has established a business which he continues to
    operate.  The Refusal Letter listed at  pages  2/3  nineteen  documents
    relevant to  his  business  which  the  Appellant  submitted  with  his
    application.  The permission application lists at paragraph  8  and  10
    thirteen of them which were not referred to, even generically,  by  the
    judge in her determination.  Whilst recognising at  paragraph  13  that
    the Appellant had an MBA qualification which might give him some  basic
    understanding of how a small business is run - itself an  unjustifiably
    marginalised finding - the judge at paragraphs 12 and 13 discussed  his
    lack of business experience.  This was again to introduce an irrelevant
    consideration, because the requirement of the Immigration Rules is  not
    experience but a genuine intention to establish a  business  or  having
    genuinely established one.   Had  the  judge  taken  into  account  the
    copious documentary evidence about the business, it is hard to see  how
    it would have been open to her to  find  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    genuinely intend and was not genuinely able to establish a business  or
    had not genuinely established one.  The  failure  to  take  account  of
    relevant evidence was a material error of law.

10.   So  also  was  the  finding  at  the  end  of  paragraph  13  of   the
    determination that the Appellant had not addressed the  enquiries  made
    by the Respondent of his previous employer.   The  Respondent  had  not
    produced any direct evidence of these enquiries, and the onus was  upon
    the Respondent to establish their import, not  upon  the  Appellant  to
    disprove it.

11.  Cumulatively, these errors of law  were  material,  because  they  were
    capable of affecting  the  decision,  as  I  find  that  they  did.   I
    accordingly find that the determination cannot  stand,  and  I  set  it
    aside.

Decision

12.  The Respondent has exercised a discretion, which the Tribunal must,  if
    unpersuaded that it should have been exercised differently, uphold,  or
    alternatively reach a different decision in the  exercise  of  its  own
    discretion: Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2010] UKUT 00307 (IAC).
     For the reasons which I have stated, I conclude  that  the  discretion
    should have been  exercised  differently.   I  therefore  exercise  the
    discretion and, for the reasons stated above, allow  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

13.  I do not therefore need to address the arguments  adduced  in  relation
    to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

14.  The original determination contained an error of law.  I set  it  aside
    and re-make the decision.

15.  The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

16.  As the Appellants have paid a fee, I make a full fee award.



Signed   Dated: 20 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

