
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11863/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd June 2015                       |On 8th June 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              Mrs Shahida Kazam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Sharkey (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  her  leave
    and to remove her from the United Kingdom was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Ross ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  31st
    October 2014.  The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  17th
    February 2013 with a visit visa and applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, shortly before expiry, on  15th  August  2013.   Her  case  was
    advanced on the basis of ties to the United Kingdom, where three of her
    children are settled, and her ill-health.  The Secretary of State found
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the rules")  were  not
    met and that the appellant's removal to Pakistan would not  breach  her
    human rights (or those of anyone else).  The judge heard evidence  from
    two of the appellant's  children  and  took  into  account  documentary
    evidence which included a medical report from a consultant neurologist.

2.   The judge found that the appellant could not succeed under Appendix  FM
    as she had not applied for entry clearance as a dependent relative  and
    could not succeed under the private life provisions of the  rules.   He
    went on to make an Article 8  assessment  outside  the  rules  and  had
    regard to section 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") in  so  doing.   He  took  into  account  the
    presence of family members in the United Kingdom and the extent of  the
    appellant's remaining ties to Pakistan.  The judge concluded  that  the
    adverse  decisions  and  the  appellant's   removal   amounted   to   a
    proportionate response.  In relation to the appellant's ill-health, she
    could not succeed under Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

3.   An application was made for permission to appeal.  In the  grounds,  it
    was contended that the judge's Article 8 assessment  was  flawed.   The
    appellant was an elderly woman in poor health with no  family  to  look
    after her in Pakistan other than a daughter who planned to move to  the
    United Kingdom.  As such, there were  arguably  good  grounds  for  the
    grant of leave outside the rules.   What  was  required  was  that  the
    decision maker should assess  whether  or  not  there  were  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.  The judge failed
    to act in accordance with guidance given in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640.
    He identified the need for  "exceptional  circumstances"  to  be  shown
    before leave might be granted and this amounted to a higher  test  than
    the "compelling circumstances" set out in Gulshan.

4.   The judge erred in the proportionality assessment  as  he  weighed  the
    potential cost to the state as paramount, regardless of the fact  that,
    thus far, the appellant had cost the United Kingdom very little.  There
    was no evidence of potential costs in terms of medical care and so  the
    appellant was unable to counteract any suggestion to  opposite  effect.
    The judge referred to  an  apparent  failure  to  sign  an  undertaking
    regarding maintenance, but this  was  unfair  as  no  such  requirement
    existed where a person applied for leave to remain, in contrast  to  an
    application for entry clearance.

5.   The judge's suggestion that there  was  no  reason  why  the  appellant
    could not return to Pakistan to apply for entry  clearance  within  the
    rules  was  contrary  to  the  "Chikwamba"  principle.   It  would   be
    disproportionate to expect her to return for this purpose.

6.   Permission to appeal was initially refused.    On  renewal,  permission
    was granted on the basis that it was reasonably arguable that the judge
    misdirected himself when  considering  Article  8  outside  the  rules.
    Although the judge granting permission  was  less  confident  that  the
    alleged error was material, he  could  not  say  confidently  that  the
    outcome could not be different and so permission to appeal was granted.

7.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State  opposed  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge directed himself appropriately and the grounds
    amounted to a disagreement with his findings.  The appellant could  not
    bring  herself  within  the  substantive  requirements  of  the   adult
    dependent relative rules in Appendix  FM  and  Appendix  FM-SE  and  so
    Chikwamba had no real application.

 8. Mr Melvin provided written  submissions  in  support  of  the  rule  24
    response.  The judge clearly set out why the requirements of the  rules
    could not be met and also found that, as at the date of hearing,  there
    were family members in Pakistan who could provide or organise care  for
    the appellant on her return.  The judge found that there was nothing to
    show that care would be unavailable in Pakistan and that there was some
    doubt regarding whether the family could maintain the appellant  within
    the United Kingdom.  The judge properly took into account section  117A
    to D of the 2002 Act and correctly  weighed  the  competing  interests.
    Any  error  regarding  "exceptional  circumstances"  was  plainly   not
    material.  Moreover, in the light of  the  judgment  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT  260,  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant's position in the United Kingdom was precarious and thus  the
    higher threshold of "exceptional circumstances" was the correct one.

Submissions on Error of Law

9.    Ms  Sharkey  said  that  the  grounds  were  relied  upon.  The  judge
    misunderstood  Gulshan.   If  there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave outside the rules, a two-stage assessment was  required.
    Paragraph 17 of the decision contained a material  error  of  law.   In
    that paragraph, the judge referred to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in
    this context.

10.  At paragraph 20, the judge found that the  appellant  needed  care  but
    appeared to disregard this finding in the  proportionality  assessment.
    He focused on the cost to the NHS, whereas  the  evidence  before  him,
    which included a letter  from  St  Bartholomew's  NHS  Trust,  (in  the
    appellant's bundle at  pages  9  to  11)  showed  that  there  were  no
    medicines available that could  assist  the  appellant.   Although  she
    needed care, this was provided by the family and from  private  sources
    of help and so there was no cost to the NHS.  In  relation  to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act, the judge misdirected himself at paragraph 21  as
    he assumed that there would be a cost to the NHS.

11.  Mr Melvin said that there  was  no  material  error.   The  judge  made
    findings of fact that were open to him on the evidence.  He found  that
    the family appeared to be trying to circumvent the rules and he did not
    err in considering the long-term  impact  on  the  taxpayer,  including
    costs falling on the NHS.

12.  The judge made a clear finding that alternative  arrangements  for  the
    appellant's care could be made in Pakistan, perhaps with  funding  from
    the United Kingdom.  There were family members in Pakistan at the  time
    of the decision and as at the date of  the  hearing.   So  far  as  the
    Gulshan point was concerned, guidance from SS (Congo) and  AM  (Malawi)
    showed that the appellant's immigration status was precarious.   In  an
    Article 8 case, this had the consequence that exceptional circumstances
    were required to succeed outside the rules.   In  effect,  the  Gulshan
    point fell away.  There was no misdirection in law and the decision  of
    the First-tier Judge should be upheld.

13.  In response, Ms Sharkey said that in relation to the latter  point,  AM
    (Malawi) concerned a family claiming  private  life  ties  while  their
    status was precarious.

14.  The judge made a clear assumption that a cost would fall on the NHS  at
    paragraph 21 of the decision.  At  paragraph  18,  there  was  again  a
    circling around the same assumption.  This flew  in  the  face  of  the
    evidence from St Bartholomew's NHS  Trust.   Ms  Sharkey  said  that  a
    different outcome might result from a remaking of the decision  and  if
    an error of law were found,  the  venue  ought  to  be  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, so that up-to-date medical evidence  and  evidence  regarding
    the presence of family members in Pakistan might be made available.

Conclusion on Error of Law

15.  Dealing first with the contention that the judge erred in  relation  to
    Gulshan, particularly at paragraph 17, where he directed  himself  that
    exceptional circumstances were required to show success under Article 8
    outside the rules, I conclude that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law.
    Alternatively, the error, if shown, was not material.

16.  I accept Mr Melvin's submission that guidance given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Congo) and by the Upper Tribunal in AM (Malawi) (the full
    citations appear above) falls to be applied in this case.   Of  course,
    the judgment and decision were not available to the  judge  in  October
    2014, when he heard the case and decided it.  Nonetheless,  it  is  now
    clear that the precariousness of a person's  immigration  status  is  a
    legally relevant factor.  In SS (Congo), at paragraphs 40 and 41 of the
    judgment, the Court of Appeal explains that, in general, those  with  a
    non-precarious family life seeking leave to remain  may  succeed  under
    Article 8 outside the rules,  where  they  cannot  rely  on  particular
    provisions such as paragraph EX.1, so long as compelling  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under the rules are present.  By  contrast,
    where relationships are precarious,  the  test  that  applies  is  "the
    exceptionality" or "very compelling circumstances" test  applicable  in
    the special contexts  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)  (precariousness  of
    family relationship and deportation of foreign nationals  convicted  of
    serious crimes).  This formulation is one which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    observes is aligned to that proposed in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin).
    More recently, the Upper Tribunal adopted  a  similar  approach  in  AM
    (Malawi).  In that decision, the Upper Tribunal  held  that  those  who
    have been granted a  defined  period  of  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom, or, to remain in the United Kingdom, hold during the  currency
    of that leave, an immigration status that is lawful but "precarious".

17.  The appellant is a person who had precarious  immigration  status  when
    she made her application for indefinite leave  in  August  2013,  being
    present here at the time with a visit visa,  and  her  status  remained
    precarious, as did any family life claimed to have been established  or
    deepened during her presence here as a visitor, up until the  time  her
    appeal was heard and decided by the judge.  It follows that  the  judge
    did not err in law in directing himself that exceptional  circumstances
    were required to be shown to enable  the  appellant  to  succeed  under
    Article 8 outside the rules, on the basis  of  her  relationships  with
    family members and the care they provide in view of her ill-health.

18.  In any event, even if the judge did err at paragraph 17,  and  even  if
    he ought instead  to  have  confined  himself  there  to  finding  that
    arguably good grounds were required to be shown for leave to  be  given
    outside the  rules,  before  then  moving  on  to  make  an  Article  8
    assessment, the error is plainly not material.  The decision shows that
    the judge did indeed move to make an assessment outside the  rules  and
    he gave cogent reasons, at paragraphs  19  to  21  in  particular,  for
    concluding that the decision to refuse to vary the appellant's leave as
    a visitor and the decision to remove her  to  Pakistan  amounted  to  a
    proportionate response.  He  had  clearly  in  mind  the  relationships
    existing in the United Kingdom between the  appellant  and  her  family
    members and also the extent of the remaining ties  to  Pakistan,  where
    there was, as at the date of hearing,  a  daughter  present,  albeit  a
    daughter who intended to move here to join a spouse.   The  judge  made
    clear findings of fact that the medical evidence did not show that  the
    appellant was unable to return to Pakistan.  He found that there was no
    evidence showing that care would be unavailable to her  there  or  that
    the appellant would be unable to afford to purchase care in the country
    of her nationality.  He noted that no explanation had been provided for
    large amounts of money appearing in a family bank account in  September
    2014 but this did not displace his findings regarding the  support  the
    appellant might expect to receive following her return to Pakistan.

19.  So far as mention of the NHS is concerned, there was, again,  no  error
    of law.  The self-direction at paragraph 18 was an appropriate one  and
    the observation, at paragraph  21,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled to lay down strict rules to ensure that elderly  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom are not a burden on the state, and in particular  on
    the NHS falls very far short of revealing an error of law.   The  judge
    did not misunderstand the medical evidence  before  him,  which  showed
    that the appellant's position was unchanged from the state  it  was  in
    when the neurologist provided a report in  January  2014.   The  letter
    from St Bartholomew's NHS Trust, to  the  effect  that  family  members
    provide care at present and that  there  are  no  medicines  which  can
    substantially assist the appellant, makes no material difference.   The
    judge clearly understood that the appellant's case was advanced on  the
    basis that her close family here would provide the care she needs  but,
    as she is a person born in 1949 who has had a number of strokes and  is
    diabetic and who needs help  to  perform  personal  functions,  he  was
    entitled to have regard to at least the potential cost to the state  of
    her presence here.  Similarly,  his  observation  that  no  undertaking
    regarding  maintenance  had  been  signed  was   not   based   on   any
    misunderstanding.  The judge correctly noted that such  an  undertaking
    would have been required in an application for entry clearance.

20.  Overall, the  decision  shows  that  the  judge  had  all  the  salient
    features of the appellant's case in mind, including the extent  of  the
    family relationships and her ill-health.  The requirements of the rules
    were not met.  He went on to make an Article 8 assessment  outside  the
    rules and my primary finding is that there was no material misdirection
    on the law.  Even if an error does appear in this context,  it  is  not
    material.  The judge carefully weighed the competing interests  in  the
    light of his findings of fact and reached a conclusion that was open to
    him on the evidence.

21.  As no material error of law has been shown, the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction has been applied for and none is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

