
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 12 February 2015                          |On 19 February 2015            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           MR David Okello Wamalwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a 29 year  old  citizen  of  Kenya,  has  appealed  with
    permission against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carroll
    who, in a decision promulgated on 24 October 2014, dismissed his appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant him leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom by virtue of Article 8 of the ECHR.  The grounds seeking
    permission did not seek to argue that the  appellant  fell  within  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  but  argued
    that his claim should have been allowed under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

2.   The background to this appeal is that the appellant entered the  UK  in
    January 2013 on a Tier 5 (Charity) Migrant visa which was valid for one
    year.  The application for further  leave  under  Article  8  was  made
    shortly before the one year visa expired.

3.   In granting  permission  to  appeal  on  11  December  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers noted that the grounds complained, inter  alia,
    that the respondent had conceded that there was  family  life  existing
    between the appellant and his family in the  UK,  that  the  judge  had
    disregarded evidence that there was an element  of  dependency  of  the
    appellant's mother on the appellant. Essentially it was argued that the
    proportionality assessment should have been in favour of the appellant.

4.   At the hearing before me written evidence was  submitted  from  Counsel
    who had appeared in the First-tier Tribunal - appropriately it was  not
    the same Counsel as was before me  -  confirming  that  the  Presenting
    Officer in the First-tier Tribunal had conceded that there  was  family
    life.  That evidence was not challenged by Ms Holmes.

5.   In his submissions as to error of law Mr Jaisri relied on  the  grounds
    and acknowledged that the question of Article 8 outside the  Rules  was
    the only issue.  He argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account adequately the evidence from the appellant's  mother  and  from
    his half-brother particularly as to the degree  of  dependency  between
    them.

6.   Having reviewed the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  in  detail,  I  am
    satisfied that there was no error of law in that decision such that  it
    should be set aside.  It was argued that the judge found that there was
    no family life between the relevant parties but that  was  plainly  not
    the case.  At paragraph 8 of the decision he makes it clear  that  "the
    question which falls to be considered is that of proportionality".   In
    the same paragraph he correctly refers to the requirement to take  into
    account the public interest considerations incorporated into  the  2002
    Act by virtue of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

7.   At paragraph 9 of the  decision  the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    background.  He referred to the evidence that he had heard "at  length"
    from the appellant's mother and from his half-brother and  acknowledged
    the degree of affection between them.  But he went on at  paragraph  10
    to give clear and adequate reasons for finding  that  the  elements  of
    dependency did not go beyond the normal emotional ties within a family.
      It  was  to  that  extent  only  that  he  found,  perhaps   slightly
    ambiguously, that "the appellant does not enjoy a family life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 with his family members in  the  United  Kingdom"
    [my underlining].

8.   At paragraphs 11 and 12 of the decision the  judge  continued  to  deal
    with the question  of  private  life  and  found  that  there  were  no
    exceptional or compelling circumstances which  could  give  rise  to  a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

9.   For these reasons I am satisfied that although  the  determination  and
    reasons were brief and to the point, they disclose no error of law such
    that the decision should be set aside.  Any minor ambiguity was of such
    a nature that they were not material to the decision and I am satisfied
    that any rehearing of the  case  would  not  result  in  any  different
    outcome.


Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
19 February 2015


