
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11148/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th September 2016                         |On 6th October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                ALI IFTIKHAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  On  2nd  September  2016  representatives  for  the  appellant,  Juris
    Solicitors, wrote to the Upper Tribunal  requesting  that  this  matter
    should be decided on the papers having regard to  all  the  documentary
    evidence previously submitted.  However, they also enclosed a  31  page
    bundle of documents stated to be items already submitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal but which were important  having  regard  to  the  matter
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Having noted the request, I decided that I could hear the appeal in the
    absence of the appellant applying the provisions of paragraph 38 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to do so.

Background

 3. On  3rd  May  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Martins  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal P S White who dismissed the appeal against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to grant further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 Student in accordance with the points-based system.

Submissions

 4. Judge Martins noted that the grounds of application asserted  that  the
    appellant was a genuine Tier 4 (General) Student who had submitted  all
    requisite documents  with  his  application,  including  a  valid  CAS.
    However, the appellant contended that, not  having  received  the  Home
    Office refusal letter at the correct time, he  had  no  option  but  to
    lodge his appeal late and was awaiting the outcome of  his  application
    for an extension of time and notification of when to submit his  bundle
    of evidence but the Tribunal made its decision on the appeal.   He  was
    not, therefore, afforded an opportunity to fully present  his  case  to
    the Tribunal.  The grounds also submitted that there were two different
    refusal letters containing different reasons and so the judge erred  in
    law in deciding the matter.  Finally, it was also argued that the judge
    had failed to consider human rights under  Article  8.   Judge  Martins
    thought all grounds were arguable.

 5. On 11th May 2016  the  respondent  submitted  a  reply  under  Rule  24
    opposing further appeal.  It was pointed out  that  the  appellant  had
    requested that his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    decided  on  the  papers  and,  as  such,  it   was   the   appellant's
    responsibility to ensure that any evidence he wished to rely  upon  was
    submitted to the Tribunal.  No  evidence  had  been  submitted  by  the
    appellant to establish that he had, at any time, sought to contact  the
    Tribunal to find out whether or not his application to  appeal  out  of
    time had been accepted.  The appellant  submitted  his  application  to
    appeal in March 2015 which was seven months before it was heard by  the
    First-tier Judge in October 2015.  The grounds failed  to  explain  why
    the appellant was unable to submit any evidence within this period.  As
    to the point concerning a second refusal letter the judge was right  to
    rely upon the refusal submitted with  the  original  appeal.   On  that
    basis the appellant would have been well aware of the case against  him
    and be in a position to submit any relevant evidence he wished to  rely
    upon.  As to the human rights claim, the  appellant  had  submitted  no
    evidence of any family or private life in the United Kingdom and so the
    judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish a basis for that claim.

 6. Mr Bates  confirmed  that  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  He also made further brief submissions.  He pointed out that
    the judge had dealt fully with the issue  of  two  refusal  letters  in
    paragraphs 3 and  4  of  the  decision.   He  also  drew  attention  to
    paragraph 8 of the decision in which the judge considered  whether  the
    respondent should have allowed the appellant 60  days  to  find  a  new
    sponsor on the basis that  the  sponsor's  licence  had  been  revoked.
    However, the judge was right to point out  that  the  refusal  was  not
    based on the revocation of the sponsor's licence but the withdrawal  of
    the CAS by the sponsor itself.  This did not raise the same  issues  of
    justice and fairness.  The judge also gave cogent reasons in  paragraph
    9 for the appellant being  unable  to  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  As to the human rights claim, the judge was  right  to  dismiss
    this in the absence of any supporting evidence.  On  this  basis  there
    were no compelling circumstances which would warrant  consideration  of
    human rights outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. Mr Bates also pointed out that a notice sent to the appellant  and  his
    solicitors on 31st July 2015 required the appellant to file any written
    evidence and submissions by 28th August 2015 which clearly he  had  not
    done.

Conclusion and Reasons

 8. At the end of the hearing and after I had considered the matter  for  a
    few moments, I announced that I was not  satisfied  that  the  decision
    showed an error on a point of law and now  give  my  reasons  for  that
    conclusion.

 9. The appellant's main contention is that he was not made aware that  his
    appeal  was  to  proceed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   when   he
    acknowledged that he had given late notice  of  appeal.   The  Tribunal
    file  shows  that  on  20th  April   2015   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives at the time, One Source Solicitors, were  given  notice
    to file evidence to show that either the appeal was in  time  or  there
    were special circumstances for failing to give notice in time.  On 26th
    June 2015 a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal decided to extend time  on
    the basis of reasons submitted by the  appellant.   The  Tribunal  file
    also shows that notice of that decision was sent to the  appellant  and
    One Source Solicitors by  second-class  mail  on  28th  July  2015.   A
    further notice was sent to the  same  addressees  on  31st  July  2015,
    noting that the appellant had  indicated  that  he  wanted  his  appeal
    decided on the papers and  giving  directions  for  the  appellant  and
    respondent to file any written evidence and submissions to the Tribunal
    by 28th August 2015.  Notices had been sent to the  addresses  notified
    by the appellant and One Source Solicitors  in  the  notice  of  appeal
    which was originally lodged on 18th March 2015.  The Tribunal file does
    not show that any of the notices were returned  in  the  post.   It  is
    therefore evident that the appellant knew or ought to have  known  that
    an extension of time to appeal had been granted and he  had  to  submit
    evidence before the appeal was decided on the papers.

10.  Further,  the  file  suggests  that  the  appellant  did  not  appoint
    alternative representatives  until  after  receipt  of  the  First-tier
    decision when Clearview solicitors submitted the notice of  application
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Since  then,  the  appellant  changed
    representatives again as documents relevant to  this  application  were
    submitted by Juris Solicitors on 2nd September.  I have noted that  the
    bundle submitted by the latter  includes  the  notice  of  late  appeal
    decision sent out by the Tribunal on  28th  July  2015  to  One  Source
    Solicitors.  This further supports my conclusion that, at the  relevant
    time,  notices  were  being  received  by  both   appellant   and   his
    representatives.  On the basis that the appellant was, at least,  aware
    that his appeal was proceeding, it  was  incumbent  upon  him  and  his
    representatives to ensure that evidence and submissions to support  the
    paper appeal were submitted  without  delay  or,  at  least,  enquiries
    should be made of the likely progress of the appeal from that time.

11. In view of my comments, above, Judge White was clearly not in error  in
    proceeding to deal with the appeal on the papers on 15th  October  2015
    taking into account the documentary evidence which had  been  submitted
    to that date.

12. As to the issue concerning two refusal notices it  is  clear  that  the
    appellant was appealing against the refusal of 19th  February  2015  as
    that was the decision attached to the notice of appeal  which,  itself,
    gives that as the date of decision in  question.   The  judge  properly
    analyses the situation in paragraphs 3 and 4  of  the  decision  noting
    that the second refusal decision pre-dates the one  relied  upon.   The
    judge was, therefore, entitled to proceed on the basis of  the  refusal
    which the appellant and his representatives had made the subject of the
    notice of appeal.  In that respect the judge gives cogent reasons  from
    paragraph 6 onwards before concluding that the appeal could not succeed
    under the Rules as the appellant clearly did not have a valid CAS.

13. As to the human rights claim under Article 8, the judge was entitled to
    rely on the evidence submitted prior to his disposal of the  matter  on
    15th October 2015, the appellant or his representatives having taken no
    steps to check on the progress of the appeal and to submit any  further
    documentation to support each aspect of it.  The notice  of  appeal  at
    section 8 simply makes  a  general  allegation  that  the  respondent's
    decision  infringes  the  appellant's  human  rights.   The  judge  was
    entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  the
    respondent's refusal was  a  disproportionate  exercise  of  legitimate
    immigration control.  The judge's conclusions in paragraph  10  of  the
    decision are adequately reasoned.  The judge was not obliged to  search
    for any compelling circumstances which might have led to  consideration
    of Article 8 issues outside the  Immigration  Rules  when  clearly  the
    evidence before him showed that there were none.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.







Signed                              Date 6th October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


