
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11742/2012
     IA/11750/2012
     IA/11752/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th  February 2016                       |On 17th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                              Mrs Manorma Patel
                             Mr Ketankumar Dave
                                    [M D]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Malik Law Chambers Solicitors (Bethnal
                    Green Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal has a very unfortunate history.   The  main  appellant  was
    given leave to enter this country as a student way  back  in  2011  but
    when she arrived she was unable to take up the  place  at  the  college
    because she was pregnant.  The other two appellants  were  her  husband
    and now child.  The college unfortunately lost its sponsorship  and  so
    in 2012 the Secretary of State curtailed her leave which had been until
    2014 and served her with an IS.151A but the notice stated that she  was
    entitled to appeal but only out of country.

2.   One is back of course to the law as it was  before  the  amendments  of
    the 2014 Act and Section 82(2)(e) then  provided  that  an  immigration
    decision included the variation of a person's leave to enter or  remain
    in the United Kingdom if when the variation took effect the person  had
    no leave to enter or remain and  Section  92(2)  which  allowed  an  in
    country right of appeal applied to 82(2)(e).  The view  apparently  was
    taken that a curtailment of leave was not  a  variation.   We  find  it
    difficult to understand how that view could conceivably have been taken
    because it clearly varied her leave and  resulted  in  there  being  no
    leave and accordingly in our view it is perfectly clear that there  was
    an in country right of appeal.  However, the appellant failed to  apply
    for leave to appeal in time and furthermore failed when the  First-tier
    Tribunal refused her leave to apply for further leave in  time.   There
    is a history of failure to apply in time and indeed it  was  that  that
    drove the First-tier Tribunal in a decision given way back in  2012  to
    dismiss the appeal but they did say that there was no in country  right
    and that was, as we have indicated, in our view clearly wrong.

3.   However, what happened after that is somewhat unfortunate.   We  should
    add that the original leave which was curtailed would have  expired  in
    2014.  We do not need, we think, to go through the full details of what
    transpired thereafter.  There  were  a  number  of  applications  which
    culminated, following a refusal of leave to appeal to the Tribunal,  in
    a Cart challenge judicial review brought in 2013 and an  indication  by
    Mrs Justice Carr that the case was arguable.  In fact it was decided by
    Mr Ockelton, the Vice President, that there should be refusal of  leave
    and the  application  should  not  be  admitted  but  that  involved  a
    variation of what I think had been an automatic decision without really
    considering the details before that leave should be granted.  That went
    to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal decided that Mr Ockelton
    had had no jurisdiction  to  vary  the  order.   It  then  went  on  to
    constitute itself as a Divisional Court and  made  an  order  that  the
    Tribunal should reconsider the appeal, the main point apparently  being
    whether there was an in country right of appeal.

4.   With great respect to the Court of Appeal, that order is one  which  is
    difficult to deal with now because we are of course not only  a  number
    of years on from the original decision but well over a year, nearly two
    years on from the date on which the original leave would  have  expired
    and the most that the appellant could have got out of the appeal was  a
    removal of the curtailment on the basis that it should  not  have  been
    issued.  There was a question as to whether there had been service.  It
    was the appellant's case that  she  had  not  received  notice  of  the
    curtailment decision but there can be no question on the material  that
    we have seen but that it was properly served in  as  much  as  she  has
    failed  to  provide  her  current  address  and  service  was  on   the
    representative who had been representing her but who apparently, it was
    said, failed to pass on notice of the  curtailment  but  none  of  this
    could in any way now result in  any  basis  for  this  Tribunal  to  do
    anything which was of real value.

5.   Suffice it to say that we are indeed satisfied for the reasons we  have
    indicated that there is  only  one  sensible  construction  of  Section
    82(2)(e) as it then provided which meant that there was an  in  country
    right of appeal.  The Court of Appeal seems  to  have  directed  us  to
    ignore any question of whether there should  be  leave  notwithstanding
    that the applications were made out of time.  So what we propose to  do
    is to allow this appeal to the extent that we quash the notice  because
    the notice was an invalid notice since it  did  not  properly  indicate
    what were the rights of appeal.

6.   Now the way ahead clearly, and this is something which, we  think,  was
    the only sensible outcome anyway because to spend more time  and  money
    in pursuing this appeal would have been completely pointless is for the
    appellants to make an immediate application to the Secretary  of  State
    if they wish to do so based upon the present situation.  It seems to us
    that that should be made as soon as possible and  we  think  that  they
    should within 21 days make such an application.  The Secretary of State
    will then consider it.  We would hope that it does not take as long  as
    the Secretary of State so often takes in reaching  decisions  in  these
    matters but there is nothing we can do in relation to that so the  only
    formal order the court makes is to allow the  appeal  for  the  reasons
    that we have given but we will  add  the  requirement,  or  rather  the
    indication, I do not think we can make it an absolute requirement, that
    any fresh application should be made within 21 days and certainly if it
    is not made we would expect the Secretary of State to make an immediate
    removal order but that is a matter for the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.

Note the indication in paragraph 5 of the judgment.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 2nd March 2016


Mr Justice Collins


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No request made.


[pic]



Signed                                  Date: 2nd March 2016


Mr Justice Collins

