
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11216/2014
                                                               IA/11217/2014
                                                               IA/11218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 December 2015                   |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PW
                                     IC
                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Brockesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondents:    Mr Adawa-Adams, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal (FTT) dated 5 June 2015 in which the respondents'  appeals
         were allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

      2. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         circumstances of the third respondent, T.  She is the  minor  child
         of the first and second respondents.

Background

      3. The FTT concluded that  expecting  the  Respondents  to  reside  in
         Jamaica would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8 of the ECHR
         on the basis that it would not be reasonable to expect T to  reside
         there.

      4. The SSHD appealed against this decision.  Permission was granted on
         the basis that it was considered arguable that  the  FTT  may  have
         made a material error of law in failing to consider  sections  117A
         and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
         amended by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 ('the 2002 Act').

      5. The matter now comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
         decision contains an error of law.

Hearing

      6. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied upon the SSHD's grounds of appeal.  She
         submitted that the FTT erroneously failed to pay proper  regard  to
         section 117B of the 2002 Act and failed to give sufficient  reasons
         for finding that it would not be reasonable to expect T  to  reside
         in Jamaica.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller acknowledged that as at the  date
         of the hearing before me T was a  'qualifying  child'  and  section
         117B(6) was potentially applicable to her if a decision was  to  be
         remade.  She therefore accepted that in order for the errors of law
         she identified to be material I needed to be satisfied that the FTT
         erred in law in its approach to the question of whether it would be
         reasonable to expect T to reside in Jamaica.

      7. Mr Adawa-Adam asked me to find that the FTT considered section 117B
         and was entitled to conclude  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
         expect T to reside in Jamiaca, for the reasons provided.

      8. At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law

Section 117B

      9. I wholly accept that the effect of section 117A(2)(a) is  that  the
         Tribunal must have regard to everything contained in section 117B -
         see Forman (Sections 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412.  The
         SSHD submits that the FTT failed to do this but it is submitted  on
         behalf of the respondents that this was adequately done.

     10. The FTT expressly directed itself to the 2002  Act.   Judge  Morgan
         said [16]:

             "I have had regard to Part 5A of section 19 of the Immigration
             Act 2014.  I have given  considerable  weight  to  the  public
             interest question.  Most  of  the  factors  within  117  weigh
             against the family..."

     11. I accept that the judge has not addressed each of the  six  matters
         set out in section 117B.  The real issue  is  whether  he  has  had
         regard to the relevant matters in  section  117B.   The  judge  was
         clearly aware of the first and second respondent's poor immigration
         history and the need to maintain effective immigration controls  as
         being in the public interest  -  see  [16]  and  [21-22].   He  has
         therefore adequately taken into account section 117B(1).

     12.  Although  the  judge  has  not  specifically   referred   to   the
         respondents' ability to speak  English  this  factor  favoured  the
         respondents and it therefore cannot be said  that  the  failure  to
         take into account section 117B(2) was a material error of law.  The
         respondents are not financially independent and this  is  a  factor
         that went against the family that the judge should have taken  into
         account.  The judge was however well aware that most of the factors
         within section 117B weighed  against  the  family,  and  must  have
         considered this matter to be one alongside the immigration history.
          I do not regard the judge's failure to expressly refer to  section
         117B(3) to be a material error of law.

     13. I now turn to sections 117(4) and (5).  Although the judge has  not
         referred to these it is clear  that  the  judge  gave  very  little
         weight to the private life of the  first  and  second  respondents.
         The judge has made it very clear that  "but  for  the  daughter  it
         would  be   self-evident   that   the   decision   to   remove   is
         proportionate..." [18].

     14. Section 117(6) was not  relevant  when  the  judge  considered  the
         matter because T was not a qualifying child.

     15. It follows from the above analysis that whilst the judge could have
         approached  sections  117A  and  117B  in  a   clearer   and   more
         comprehensive   manner,   he   has   adequately   addressed   those
         considerations relevant to this particular case.  As observed in AM
         (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) at [8-12] the statutory duty
         to consider the matters set out in section 117B is satisfied if the
         FTT's decision shows that it has had regard to such parts of it  as
         are relevant.  I am satisfied that this FTT has  demonstrated  that
         the relevant statutory provisions have been taken into account  and
         applied in substance, if not in form.

Reasonableness

     16. I now turn to the second submission focussed upon by Ms Brocklesby-
         Weller.  She argued that the FTT has not adequately reasoned why it
         would not be reasonable to expect T  to  live  in  Jamaica.   As  a
         starting point it is useful to note that Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  did
         not submit that the FTT misdirected itself  or  applied  the  wrong
         test.  She was right to  do  so.   The  judge  accurately  directed
         himself to the ultimate question in  a  case  such  as  this  where
         Article 8 is to be considered: is it reasonable to expect the child
         to follow her parents with no right to remain to their  country  of
         origin,  Jamaica?   This  self-direction  is  consistent  with  the
         approach recommended in EV (Philppines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874
         at [58].

     17. I accept that the judge has not set out detailed  reasons  for  his
         view that it would be unreasonable to expect T to reside in Jamaica
         but when the decision is read as a whole the reasoning is adequate.
          I do not accept the submission on behalf  of  the  SSHD  that  the
         judge has used T's education as a trump card.  The  judge  regarded
         the  facts  as  "exceptional".   Whilst  the  judge   was   clearly
         influenced by the fact that T  is  well-settled  in  the  education
         system, this was not the only or determinative factor.   The  judge
         also took into account the length of time T had been in the UK  and
         that this was during her  "critical,  formative  years".   He  also
         considered that she would face difficulty in adapting  to  life  in
         Jamaica.  I agree with the SSHD that the fact that T does not speak
         a dialect local to Jamaica is unlikely to present great  difficulty
         as English is spoken in Jamaica.  It is important to note that  the
         judge has done no more than accept that T does not speak a Jamaican
         dialect.  His finding that she would face difficulty in adapting to
         life in Jamaica appears to be predicated not upon that  factor  but
         the fact that  all  her  ties  to  date  and  her  early  childhood
         development has taken place in the UK [19].  T after all  was  born
         in the UK and has never lived in Jamaica, even though  her  parents
         are both Jamaican.

     18. Importantly the judge identified a further and  rather  exceptional
         factor "in the daughter's favour"  [20]:  the  fact  that  T's  two
         brothers were shot dead in Jamaica. The judge could have  explained
         this more clearly but when the decision is read as a  whole  it  is
         sufficiently clear that the judge regarded this  as  an  additional
         factor supporting his view that it would be unreasonable for  T  to
         live in Jamaica with her parents.  The judge was entitled to regard
         this as a  relevant  factor.   The  judge  accepted  that  T's  two
         brothers were shot dead in Jamaica.  This would inevitably lead  to
         feelings of insecurity and anxiety for the family in Jamaica,  with
         inevitable consequences upon T.  There was also evidence  available
         to the judge that T's only living brother and grandmother  were  in
         hiding in Jamaica.

     19. Finally, whilst the judge observed that the delay on  the  part  of
         the SSHD permitted the respondents and in particular T to establish
         lengthy residence in the UK [18], the judge has not used this as  a
         reason to support his overall conclusion.  The judge was well aware
         that the  respondents  could  and  should  have  made  a  voluntary
         departure as he clearly found their immigration  history  to  weigh
         against them.

Decision

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 December 2015

