
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11140/2013
     IA/12851/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th January 2014                            |On 23rd January 2014       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  AMPA SEAL
                               JIRAYU PANKAEN
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Seal
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Clarke
    made following  a hearing at Hatton Cross on 6th November 2013.

 2. The first Appellant is a citizen of  Thailand  born  on  16th  November
    1987.  Her son, the second Appellant, was born on 21st June 2005.

 3. She came to the UK on 25th October 2010 as the spouse of  Martin  Seal.
    In October 2012 she made an application for variation  of  her  limited
    leave to remain. She was refused on 26th March 2013 on the grounds that
    she had not provided an English language test certificate  in  speaking
    and listening from an English language test provider.

 4. The judge said that the  Appellant  had  not  submitted  the  necessary
    documents to satisfy paragraph 286. He  had  been  provided  with  very
    limited evidence as to the impact on the family for them to return  but
    he noted that the parties married in Thailand and her  sons  were  born
    there.  There were no insurmountable obstacles to  her  living  outside
    the UK and he had not been provided with evidence as to why the  family
    could not move to Thailand to make the application from  there.   There
    was no substantiated basis for the Appellant asserting that her  family
    life would be jeopardised and whilst it may be inconvenient  to  return
    and take the test and reapply that is all that it was.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  Permission was  granted  by
    Judge Landes on 6th December 2013.  Judge Landes stated that the  judge
    had arguably erred in not considering whether it  would  be  reasonable
    for the child to leave the UK  under paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM,  and
    it was also arguable that the judge had failed to take the child's best
    interests into account.

 6. On 30th December 2013 the Respondent served a reply acknowledging  that
    whilst there may be a possible error in the determination  it  was  not
    material because the judge made findings open to him that it would  not
    be disproportionate for family life to continue in Thailand and for the
    main Appellant to obtain the required qualification from there.

The Hearing

 7. Mr Seal explained that he lived with his wife and  stepson,  and  their
    British child who was born on 4th September 2009.   He  said  that  his
    wife had passed the reading and writing test and the speaking test  was
    booked for a couple of week's time. She was 100% deaf in  one  ear  and
    partially deaf in the other ear which had led to delays  in  her  being
    able to sit the test.

 8. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had erred in law in failing to  make
    any reference at all to the best interests  of  the  children  and,  in
    relation to the substantive decision, made no submissions save  to  say
    that he stood by the original refusal.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph EX1 because the
    second Appellant has not been in the UK for  seven  years  and  is  not
    British. The judge was correct to state that the  requirements  of  the
    Rules could not be met.

10. This is a case where the family is living together with as  a  unit  in
    the UK.  The father and the younger  child  are  British  and  the  two
    Appellants are Thai. In these circumstances  there  are  arguably  good
    grounds for granting them leave to remain outside  the  Rules.   It  is
    therefore necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
    there are compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules (Gulshan (Article 8 new Rules correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT
    00640).

11. The best interests of the children have to  be  considered  first  when
    deciding whether it is proportionate for the Appellant and her  son  to
    be removed.

12. The Appellants both enjoy family life in the UK with Mr  Seal  and  the
    younger child.  Removal would be an interference with  their  right  to
    enjoy family life but would be lawful and in pursuit  of  a  legitimate
    aim in that as at the date of the decision the Appellant did  not  meet
    all of the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

13. The  second  Appellant  is  now  8  years  old  and  attending  school.
    Returning to Thailand with his mother would be an interference with his
    education and, even more  importantly,  would  separate  him  from  his
    younger brother.  The younger brother is British  and  about  to  start
    full-time education.  As a 4 year old child he clearly needs to be with
    his mother. Returning to Thailand for  an  indeterminate  period  would
    interrupt the children's schooling. Their British father is employed in
    the UK, and needs to continue to work here  in  order  to  satisfy  the
    financial requirements of the Rules. It cannot be in the best interests
    of these children to be either apart from her or  from  him  or  to  be
    apart from each other

14. There are now no countervailing circumstances.   The  Appellant  has  a
    blameless immigration history.  There is no suggestion that she is  not
    in a genuine relationship with her husband.  As  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing she has passed the English language test in writing and reading
    and is about to sit the speaking test.  The difficulty in hearing  will
    have delayed her ability to reach the required standard.

Decision

15. The original judge erred in law. The decision  is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The Appellants' appeal  is  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

