

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/11150/2014
                                                               IA/11155/2014
                                                               IA/11158/2014
                                                               IA/11162/2014
                                                               IA/11168/2014
                                                               IA/11176/2014
                                                               IA/11179/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 26th February 2015                        |On: 20th April 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                         Noraldeen Abdalla Militain
                          Fawziya Milad M Ben Osman
                           Sara Noraldeen Militain
                               Zainab Militain
                              Abdalla Militain
                               Aseel Militain
                        Abdurahman Norladeen Militain
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Haq Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of  Libya.  They  are  respectively  a
    father, mother and their minor children.  They  have  permission[1]  to
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Osbourne)
    to dismiss their linked appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant them further leave to remain and to  remove  them  from
    the United Kingdom pursuant  to  s47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.




    Background


 2. The First Appellant had come to the UK in September 2006  in  order  to
    undertake  a  PhD.  He  was  given  leave  to  enter  as  a  student  -
    subsequently varied to Tier 4 (General) Migrant - and his wife and four
    eldest children granted leave as his dependents. Their fifth child  was
    born in the  UK  on  the  22nd  December  2009.   The  First  Appellant
    completed his PhD in 2011.   He had existing  leave  when  he  made  an
    application, on the 20th February 2012, for  further  leave  to  remain
    'outside of the rules'. The Appellants requested that in light  of  the
    war in Libya the Respondent exercise her discretion in their favour and
    grant them a  short  period  of  leave  to  remain.   The  applications
    highlighted that the eldest children of the family were about  to  take
    their GCSEs and raised other general "best interests" grounds.

 3. The Respondent refused the applications on the  11th  April  2013  with
    reference to the Rules. None of the family could qualify under Appendix
    FM. It is noted that the family had  requested  a  short  extension  of
    leave due to the instability in Libya but since the  applications  were
    made after the "Libyan Concession" was withdrawn they could not benefit
    from it: "furthermore it is now considered safe to return to Libya  and
    as you and your family can return  together  we  do  not  consider  the
    grounds that you have raised amount to exceptional circumstances as  to
    support a grant of limited leave to remain".

 4. The family appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On  the  25th  October
    2013 they attended what they  thought  would  be  a  hearing  of  their
    appeals. On  that  date  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  (HOPO)
    withdrew all  of  the  decisions.  It  was  the  understanding  of  the
    Appellant's representative that this was because  the  eldest  children
    were undertaking exams. It was her understanding that the HOPO would be
    making  a  positive  recommendation  to  the  team  dealing  with   the
    applications that discretionary leave to remain be granted.

 5. It wasn't. The Respondent issued fresh refusals on  the  17th  February
    2014 with full appeal rights.

    The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne on  the  11th
    June 2014.  The Judge heard live evidence from the Appellant's previous
    representative, Ms Nicola Dean. Ms Dean's recollection was  that  prior
    to the previous hearing she had been approached  by  the  HOPO  in  the
    waiting room who had indicated that she would be recommending that some
    form of leave be granted. Judge Osbourne had conflicting evidence  from
    the HOPO in question, who could not recall having had this conversation
    with Ms Deans. Certainly no such recommendation had  been  made.  Judge
    Osbourne  resolved  this  conflict  in  the  Respondent's  favour.   At
    paragraph 12 she found that whilst she had no reason to doubt Ms Dean's
    professional integrity she found her  to  have  been  mistaken  in  her
    recollection of the conversation.  That  dispensed  with  the  argument
    being advanced before her that this conversation had given rise to some
    legitimate expectation on the part of the Appellants that they would be
    granted discretionary leave.

 7. It had further been argued on the Appellants' behalf that  the  appeals
    should all be allowed as  'not  in  accordance  with  the  law'  -  and
    effectively remitted to the Respondent. The alleged error in law on the
    part of the Respondent was that the refusal letters failed to deal with
    the rights of the children in the context of  Article  8,  and  applied
    paragraph 322(1) of the Rules (mandatory refusal  for  a  variation  of
    leave for a purpose not covered by the Rules) when it should have  been
    obvious that these were applications  under  276ADE.  In  addition  the
    Respondent's refusal letters had got  it  wrong  in  stating  that  the
    family had been without leave since  February  2012.  Addressing  these
    arguments Judge Osbourne records that the  original  applications  were
    made 'outside of the rules' as they were requesting  six  months  extra
    leave to enable the family to make arrangements to return to Libya.  It
    was only when the material was lodged for the appeal was it clear  that
    these were human rights appeals. She was satisfied that she could  deal
    with any error in the refusal letters as part of  her  decision  making
    and declined to remit the cases back to the Secretary of State.


 8. The determination then proceeds to consider the arguments put on behalf
    of each Appellant in respect of paragraph 276ADE, relevant because "the
    immigration rules are now to be taken as a complete code with regard to
    Article 8"[41].  It was accepted on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    that four of the  children had been in  the  UK  for  more  than  seven
    years. As to whether it was reasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK
    the determination here records that oral evidence was given by Sara and
    Zainab, the eldest children who  are  both  taking  their  GCSEs.  Both
    appeared "happy, confident and relaxed" and demonstrated that they were
    doing well at school.  Sara planned  to  go  to  university  and  study
    architecture so that she could develop shelters for displaced people in
    warzones.  It was their teacher's evidence that it would be detrimental
    at this point to disrupt their education.  The family  were  originally
    from Siirte and the Tribunal accepted that the family home  would  have
    been  destroyed  in  the  war.   Against   that   background   it   was
    understandable that none of the children wished to  return  there.   At
    paragraph 39 the determination concludes "I am satisfied that it  would
    be a wrench for the children to leave the United Kingdom where they now
    have a wide circle of friends and are engaged in other activities apart
    from pursuing their education". As to that education the  determination
    refers to EM and Ors (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)  but
    notes that  attending  school  for  seven  years  does  not  provide  a
    "prescriptive right to remain here".


 9. The determination proceeds briskly through the first four Razgar  steps
    - none of this appears to  have  been  in  contention  -  and  assesses
    proportionality.  The factors taken into account are: that  the  family
    had initially only made an application for a short period of leave  and
    appeared to be contemplating return to Libya; the fact that they  would
    be returning to a destroyed home  and  instability  including  numerous
    human rights abuses;  although the children would be anxious about this
    they have a strong supportive family to rely upon;  an  undated  report
    indicated that there was a free education system  in  Libya;   although
    the system closed down during the war efforts were being made to get it
    back up and running; this is a family who  have  taken  the  children's
    Islamic education seriously, something that would not be  disadvantaged
    by return to an Islamic country.  At paragraphs 61-62 the Tribunal says
    this:


         "61. The test which I must  apply  is  twofold  -  firstly  I  must
         consider  whether  the   decision   to   remove   the   family   is
         'proportionate' in all the circumstances which involves a balancing
         exercise taking into account the matters which I have referred  to.
         Secondly I must consider whether the removal of the family unit  is
         'reasonable' in accordance with paragraph 276ADE (iv)  particularly
         with regard to the needs of the children.


         62. The authorities do not state that there  is  a  presumption  in
         favour of allowing a family to remain in the United  Kingdom  where
         children have been here and engaged  in  education  for  more  than
         seven years but it is certainly a factor which I  have  taken  into
         account. However, having also taken into account the  resources  of
         this close-knit family in both emotional and practical terms and my
         satisfaction that they have acted to preserve their Libyan identity
         I am not satisfied that it would  be  unreasonable  for  the  whole
         family to return as a unit or that the decision to remove  them  is
         disproportionate to all the circumstances of the case."

10. The appeals are thereby dismissed.


      Grounds of Appeal

11. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in the following
    material respects:


        i) In making irrational findings about the conversation between the
           HOPO and the solicitor. The solicitor had  given  live  evidence
           which had been subject to cross examination. In the  absence  of
           any reason to doubt her truthfulness or recollection  there  was
           no rational basis for preferring the HOPO's  version  of  events
           over hers.


       ii) The determination acknowledges that the Respondent got it  wrong
           when she stated that the family had remained without leave since
           February 2012. In those circumstances the decisions  had  to  be
           allowed as 'not in accordance with the law' pursuant  to  s86(3)
           of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      iii) The Tribunal has  erred  in  its  approach  to  Article  8.  For
           instance it has failed to make clear findings as  to  where  the
           children's best interests lie, has failed to consider the impact
           of removal on the elder ones  who  are  currently  taking  their
           GCSEs, and failed to take relevant evidence into  account  (that
           most of the schools in Siirte remain damaged).  The finding that
           their  education  would  not  be  disadvantaged  by  moving  was
           contrary to the unchallenged opinion of their teachers  that  it
           would be very much to their detriment. All of these factors went
           to whether or not it was reasonable that the children  left  the
           UK.


12. The Respondent opposed the appeal on all grounds.    It  was  submitted
    that all of the findings of  the  Tribunal  were  open  to  it  on  the
    evidence  presented.  The  determination   contains   a   comprehensive
    assessment of the factors relevant to proportionality.  The  disruption
    to the children's education has been addressed head-on  and  the  Judge
    has dealt with all of the points raised.




    Error of Law


13. Following the 'error of law' hearing on the 3rd November  2014  I  made
    the following findings.


14. There is absolutely nothing in the argument that the Appellants  had  a
    'legitimate expectation'.  Even if it could be  demonstrated  that  the
    Judge erred in her balancing of the evidence on this  point  (which  it
    has not been) the only expectation that the Appellants could reasonably
    have had was that  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  would  tell  a
    colleague that she thought they should get leave to remain. Even if  it
    could  be  demonstrated  (which  it  has  not   been)   that   such   a
    recommendation should have been made there is nothing to  say  that  it
    would have carried any weight with the decision making team. Even if it
    could be demonstrated (which it has not been) that  the  appeal  should
    have been allowed as 'not in accordance with the law'  what  would  the
    outcome  have  been?  That  this  individual  officer  would  make  her
    recommendation to the decision  making  team  who  would  then  produce
    exactly the same decision as the First-tier  Tribunal  had  before  it.
    It would gain this family nothing except a longer wait and then in  all
    probability having to return to court.

15. The submission that the appeals had to be allowed as 'not in accordance
    with the law' is similarly limited in the advantage to be gained by the
    Appellants. A decision which does not canvass all relevant factors  and
    apply all relevant rules can be said to be 'not in accordance with  the
    law' and be sent back to the Respondent. That  would  again  result  in
    nothing but delay and in all probability, a return to court.   In  this
    case, the First-tier Tribunal has given perfectly good reasons  why  it
    declined to take this course. Each of these  family  members  had  not,
    contrary to the submissions of Dr Mynott, made applications  to  remain
    indefinitely in the UK on human rights grounds. They had  asked  for  a
    short period of discretionary leave in order to sort out their affairs.
    That  is  completely  different.   The  Respondent   dealt   with   the
    applications that she received. That there may have been errors of fact
    in the refusal letters was unfortunate, but that does not mean that the
    decisions were 'not in accordance with the law'.   They  are,  like  so
    many other points raised  in  refusal  letters,  a  matter  of  factual
    dispute to be resolved by the Tribunal.

16. The real question in this appeal is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in the approach taken to Article 8, assessed in the case  of  the
    children against the background of paragraph  276ADE  and  s55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act.

17. Paragraph 276ADE was important because it should have been the starting
    point of the analysis. If the children could show  that  they  met  the
    requirements  of  276ADE(1)(iv),   it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Secretary of State  could  demonstrate  that  their  removal  would  be
    proportionate. All that the Secretary of State could point to in  those
    circumstances would be that they had not made  formal  applications;  a
    submission that would no doubt be answered with reference to  Chikwamba
    and the undesirability of delay in  matters  involving  children.   The
    first question  the  Tribunal  should  therefore  have  considered  was
    whether or not it was 'reasonable' to expect the four  eldest  children
    to leave the UK. As paragraph 61 demonstrates (see above), that is  not
    the way in which the appeal was approached. The Tribunal here sets  out
    proportionality and reasonableness  as  two  distinct  tests  but  then
    appears to conflate the two in its reasoning.  That is the first error.
    The second is that there have been no clear findings on whether or  not
    return to Libya would be contrary to the children's best interests.   A
    positive finding to that effect would not lead inexorably to a  finding
    that it would be unreasonable for them to leave, but it would  have  to
    be a primary consideration.


18. For those reasons I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside.
    The first two grounds of appeal are rejected and the cogent findings in
    the determination about these matters are preserved.


    The Re-Made Decision

19. The matter has ben re-made before me following a further hearing on the
    26th February 2015 at which I heard oral submissions on the up to  date
    evidence that had been provided in respect of the children.


20. These are Article 8 appeals.   I can move  swiftly  through  the  first
    four Razgar questions.  It is accepted in light of the family's lengthy
    residence in the UK that each individual  has  an  established  private
    life and that they share a family life with each other. I find that the
    decision to remove the family would  constitute  an  interference  with
    their private lives in  the  UK  of  sufficient  consequence  that  the
    Article is engaged.  The decision to  remove  persons  with  no  lawful
    leave to remain is  rationally  connected  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    protecting the economy and the decision is one that  the  Secretary  of
    State is in law entitled to take.

21. I begin my assessment of proportionality with assessing the position of
    the children: s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
     The case advanced by Dr Mynott is that the four  eldest  children  all
    now qualify for leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE.  In  those
    circumstances their removal cannot be said  to  be  proportionate.  The
    only substantive matter in issue under that provision is (1)(iv).  Each
    must show that he or she:
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
22. What does "reasonable" mean?


23. The genesis of this provision was the concession known as DP5/96.  That
    policy, and those which followed, created a  general,  but  rebuttable,
    presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"  proceed  in
    cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously to the age
    of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at  an  early
    age, 7 years or more of continuous residence had  been  accumulated[2].
    As the  policy  statement[3]  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent
    in the UK as a child will generally establish  a  sufficient  level  of
    integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that  removal
    would normally  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child"  [my
    emphasis].  The current guidance reaffirms that this  is  the  starting
    point for consideration of  the  rule.    The  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'   ("the  IDI")
    gives the following guidance:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
24. I have had regard to the Hansard record of the debate in the  House  of
    Lords on the introduction of section 117B (6) NIAA 2002 (as amended  by
    the Immigration Act 2014) in which Lord Wallace of Tankerness explained
    the government's thinking on the significance of the seven year mark:


         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[4].

25. All of this guidance recognises that after  a  period  of  seven  years
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests. Those  factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country  of  proposed  return.  The
    assessment of what is "reasonable" will call for the Tribunal to  weigh
    all of  these  matters  into  the  balance  and  to  see  whether  they
    constitute "strong reasons" - the language of  the  current  IDI  -  to
    proceed with removal notwithstanding the established Article  8  rights
    of the child in the UK. "Reasonable" in the context of 276ADE  is  then
    not to be equated with Razgar proportionality.  Although  both  involve
    consideration of the same set of facts, the  starting  point  is  quite
    different. An appeal can only be allowed with reference  to  Article  8
    'outside of the Rules'  where  there  are  some  particular  compelling
    circumstances not adequately reflected in those Rules:  see  Singh  and
    Khaled [2015] EWCA Civ 74.   By contrast it is the Respondent's  stated
    policy that "strong reasons" will be required  to  refuse  leave  to  a
    child who has accrued seven years continuous residence.


26. Against that legal framework I consider the facts that relate to  these
    children.

27. The three eldest children are  Sara  (born  1997),  Zainab  (1999)  and
    Abdallah (2000). They all spent three  years  in  the  UK,  with  valid
    leave, between 2000 and 2003. In 2003  the  whole  family  returned  to
    Libya for three years. In August 2006 they came back  to  the  UK  with
    leave to enter as Tier 4 dependents, accompanied by their sister  Aseel
    who was born in Libya in 2005. They  have  remained  here  ever  since.
    These children have therefore had a period of eight and  a  half  years
    continuous lawful residence since that last entry.

28. I find as fact that each child has  developed  an  established  private
    life and has integrated well into the UK, as envisaged by  Home  Office
    policy and Ministerial statement.   I agree with  Judge  Osbourne  that
    the children have made good progress at school and that they have "made
    the most of the  educational  and  social  opportunities  available  to
    them". They have  all  made  close  friends.  I  note  and  accept  the
    professional  opinion  of  their  teachers  that  disruption  to  their
    education at this point would be to their detriment[5]. I note that the
    third child, Abdalla, is now in year 10  and  has  started  his  GCSEs.
    Zainab is in her final year of GCSEs and Sara has started her A-levels.
     Judge Osbourne accepted evidence provided by  the  Respondent  to  the
    effect that there are functioning schools in some places in Libya. That
    may or may not remain the case. If it is I nevertheless  find  that  it
    would be contrary to these childrens' best interests  for  them  to  be
    removed from their current schools where they are settled,  prospering,
    and  in  the  case  of  the   eldest   three,   undertaking   important
    examinations.

29. I have given consideration  to  the  stated  opinion  of  the  children
    themselves that they have no desire to return to Libya. Sara and Zainab
    gave evidence before Judge Osbourne and expressed their concerns  about
    the unstable situation in Libya.  She accepted  that  they,  and  their
    younger siblings were very concerned and that it would  be  a  "wrench"
    for them to leave.   I nevertheless have also weighed the  findings  of
    Judge Osbourne that each  child  of  this  family  speaks  Arabic,  has
    supportive  parents  who  could  help  them  re-integrate  and  have  a
    familiarity with Libyan culture.

30. Happily none of the children have any significant  health  problems  so
    apart from the dangers inherent in relocating to a  country  where  the
    infrastructure has been severely damaged by ongoing conflict, there  is
    no particular concern about their health should they return to Libya.

31. I follow the finding of Judge Osbourne that the family home  in  Siirte
    has been destroyed and that the remaining family members in Libya  have
    been displaced. At  the  date  of  the  appeal  before  her  the  First
    Appellant's parents had been forced to flee their home and were  living
    in a one bedroomed apartment. At the date of the  re-making  before  me
    the situation had considerably  worsened.  "Islamic  State"  affiliated
    militias had taken control of  Siirte[6]   and  had  launched  offenses
    against the strongholds of the other two main parties, "Libya Dawn" and
    "Dignity"[7], in what is described in  the  material  before  me  as  a
    "three way civil war".  Those few family  members  remaining  in  Libya
    have therefore been internally displaced.  In  view  of  this  unstable
    situation I find it would be contrary to the best  interests  of  these
    children to be removed to Libya.


32. Asked to identify the "strong reasons" why the childrens' private lives
    should, after eight and a half years, be interfered with, Ms  Johnstone
    submitted that  they  could  continue  their  educations  in  Libya  or
    alternatively apply to come back as students themselves. They can speak
    Arabic and they will have a familiarity  with  the  culture  in  Libya.
    Thankfully none have any health concerns.  The  Appellants  acknowledge
    that they still have family  in  Libya,  since  the  First  Appellant's
    parents are there. Importantly their parents no longer have  any  leave
    to remain so the family would be returned  together  who  could  assist
    them in re-integrating. I have considered all of those factors. None in
    my view render it "reasonable" that these children be removed now, even
    when weighed cumulatively.  It also rather overlooks the fact that  the
    security situation in Libya is deteriorating daily, that the airport is
    being intermittently shut due to shelling (there have  been  no  forced
    removals for some time as a result). Armed militias, not answerable  to
    any central government,  are vying for control of territory and control
    checkpoints throughout the country. It is  a  moot  point  whether  the
    present situation falls short of a full-blown civil war but  I  do  not
    find it reasonable to send these children back to a  country  teetering
    on the brink of one.


33. Having considered all of those factors I conclude that the four  eldest
    children presently meet all of the requirements of 276ADE. It is  never
    in a child's best interests to delay resolution of  his  status  and  I
    find that it would be entirely  disproportionate  to  refuse  to  grant
    further leave to remain to Sara, Zainab, Abdalla and Aseel.   There  is
    nothing weighing on the Respondent's side of the scales since they meet
    the requirements of the Rules.

34. I now assess the position of their  parents.  They  do  not  themselves
    qualify for leave to remain under the Rules and  this  is  my  starting
    point for consideration of their Article 8 appeals.

35. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended by the Immigration Act  2014)  sets  out  the  public  interest
    considerations  that   I   must   have   regard   to   in   determining
    proportionality:

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

36. I have had regard  to  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  Although  their  leave
    has now expired this is a family who have never, for as much as a  day,
    been in the country unlawfully.


37. I have had regard to the fact that it is in the public interest, and in
    particular in the interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United
    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
    are able to speak English, because persons who can  speak  English  are
    less of a burden on taxpayers, and are better able  to  integrate  into
    society.  That parliament was quite right  to  so  legislate  is  amply
    illustrated by this family, all of whom speak English and all  of  whom
    have taken an active part in the academic and social life of the UK.

38. There is no evidence at all that the family have ever claimed benefits,
    or that they have otherwise been a drain on  the  resources  of  public
    funds. The First Appellant has paid private fees in his long  years  of
    study in the  UK,  and  thus  contributed  to  the  funding  of  higher
    education.

39. Sub-clause (4) does not apply since the family have always  had  leave.
    Sub-clause (5) does, since "precarious" means anything short of settled
    status.   That is the only part of the provision  that  diminishes  the
    weight to be attached to the  family's  side  of  the  scales.  I  note
    however that the terms of sub-clause (6) are such that this should not,
    in the case of Dr Militain and Ms Ben Osman, be weighed against them at
    all. That is because  they  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with their qualifying children: I have found that it would
    not be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.   The  terms  of  the
    statute are clear: in those circumstances the public interest does  not
    require their removal.   It  would  therefore  be  disproportionate  to
    remove Dr Militain and Ms Ben Osman.

40. That leaves Abdurrahman. The Respondent realistically concedes that  in
    view of his age it would be disproportionate to  return  him  to  Libya
    where the remaining family members have succeeded in  their  Article  8
    appeals.

41. I therefore find that the appeal of each Appellant must be  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.



    Decisions


42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.

43. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "The appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


      The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds."







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                      8th
                                 April 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard on
the 12th August 2014
[2] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[3] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[4] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014
[5] See for instance letters dated 19th May 2014 and 13th February 2015
from Jayne Ralphson, Head of Student Services at Whalley Range 11-18 High
School (in respect of Zainab), letter dated 15th February 2015 from Gillian
Winter, Principal of Connell Sixth Form (in respect of Sara)
[6] Country background material at pages 11, Appellant's bundle
[7] See for instance country background material at pages 16, 28
Appellant's bundle

