










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11062/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons                 |
|on 4 July 2016                       |on 29 July 2016                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Yousuf Molla
                         No anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Hasan, Kalam Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals against the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who allowed the claimant's appeal against the  decision
      refusing his application for further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant. His application was refused on 10  February
      2015.


   3. The secretary of state contended that a grant of leave  to  study  his
      proposed course would result in his having spent more than five  years
      in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student studying courses that  consist
      of degree level study or above. He  accordingly  failed  to  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 245ZX(h) of the Immigration  Rules.  He  had
      previously been granted leave to study  courses  at  degree  level  or
      above for four years and two months. His current  application  was  to
      study CTH BG Dip in Hospitality and Tourism Management until 26 August
      2015.


   4. It was contended that he had no right of appeal against the  decision.
      However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was a right of
      appeal. That was correct as his application pre-dated  the  amendments
      to the 2002 Act. His application was made on 13 August 2014.


   5. The Judge found that the success or failure of his appeal depended  on
      the interpretation  of  paragraph  245ZX(h)  which  provides  that  an
      applicant must spend not more than five years  "studying"  courses  at
      degree level or above.


   6. At [16] the Judge construed the word "studying" to mean  that  in  the
      period of time the claimant has been in the  UK,  he  has  engaged  in
      studies. The Rule could not have meant to penalise applicants such  as
      the claimant who was unable to complete his studies because  the  Home
      Office intervened by shutting down the college.


   7. On 27 May 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted the secretary
      of state permission to appeal against that decision.


   8. Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal. The total  period  of  leave
      that the claimant had been granted together with the period  of  leave
      he would have been granted to pursue the course for which he made  his
      recent application was more  than  five  years.   Further,  the  Judge
      wrongly construed the rule to mean  that  only  the  actual  "studying
      time" was to be taken into account.


   9. He relied on the Tribunal's decision in  Islam  (Para  245ZX  (ha):  5
      years' study) [2013] UKUT 00608 (IAC). At paragraph 11,  Mr  Ockleton,
      Vice President, stated that it had not been suggested  that  only  the
      appellant's time actually spent studying should be taken into account.
      The evidence in that case was that the appellant had  dropped  out  of
      his BSc course after two years.


  10. The Tribunal concluded that it is the period of the leave and not  the
      actual study which is the measure for calculating the period spent  in
      the UK imposed by paragraph 245XZ(ha).


  11. Mr Hasan submitted that the Judge correctly construed the Rules as the
      claimant could not have been "studying" at some of the relevant times.
      He submitted that it is the time granted for the purpose  of  studying
      that is relevant.


  12. He noted that the appellant entered the UK on 2 August  2009.  He  was
      granted leave to enter which included an extra three months, on top of
      the two years' course. When he in fact entered he had 26 months' leave
      to remain. Those extra two months "were not study time". That resulted
      in his being over the limit permitted by the  Rule.  Accordingly,  the
      time actually spent studying should be the basis  of  calculating  the
      period under the rule. The result is that he would only  be  here  for
      five years.


  13. In reply, Mr Duffy submitted that the flaw in  the  argument  is  that
      most courses are in reality for a period of  about  nine  months.  The
      remaining period is  usually  "for  holidays".  That  however  is  not
      relevant. There will inevitably be periods when there is no  studying.
      He would nevertheless remain as a Tier 4 student even though he is not
      studying.


     Assessment


  14. The claimant had previously been granted leave  to  study  courses  at
      degree level for four years and two months.  His  current  application
      will be to study a course until 26 August 2015. That would  result  in
      his having spent more than five years as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


  15. In Islam, supra, the Tribunal held that it is the period of leave  and
      not the actual study which is the measure for calculating  the  period
      spent in the UK  which  is  imposed  by  paragraph  245ZX(ha).  It  is
      unfortunate that the Tribunal's decision in Islam was not drawn to the
      learned Judge's attention at the time.


  16. I find that the decision of the secretary of state involved the making
      of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set it aside.


  17. In re-making the decision, I find for the reasons referred  to  above,
      that a grant of leave to study his proposed course would result in his
      having spent more than five years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
      student studying courses that consist of degree level study or  above.
      I accordingly find that the decision of the secretary of state was  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.  Having set the decision set aside  I  remake
      it and substitute a fresh decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date  28/7/2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

