
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11795/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                          krinaben atulkumar patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Imperium Group
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of India born on 13th  January  1987.
    She first arrived in the UK on 22nd October 2009  when  she  was  given
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (Student)  Migrant  until  10th  June  2012.
    That leave was subsequently extended until 6th  March  2014.   On  11th
    March 2014 the Appellant applied for further leave  to  remain  in  the
    same capacity.  That application was not decided until 12th March  2015
    when it was refused for the reasons given in the Respondent's letter of
    that date.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was decided  without
    a hearing by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp (the Judge) on  26th
    June 2015.  She decided to allow the appeal for the  reasons  given  in
    her Decision dated 16th July 2015.   The  Respondent  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 10th November  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The application for leave to remain was refused because  the  Appellant
    failed to score sufficient points under paragraphs 245ZX(c) and (d)  of
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395.  This was because
    the Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  provided  by  the
    Appellant was not valid as the Tier 4 Sponsor no longer held a  Tier  4
    Sponsor Licence by the time the Appellant's  application  was  decided.
    In December 2014 the Appellant had been allowed 60 days to obtain a new
    Sponsor but had not provided a new CAS.

 4. The Judge allowed the appeal solely because she decided that in all the
    circumstances the  Respondent  had  failed  to  exercise  properly  her
    discretion under paragraph 322(9) of HC 395.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law.
    The provisions of paragraph 322(9) of HC 395 had no application to  the
    decision under appeal, and had not been applied  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in refusing the application.

 6. In response, Mr Sharma acknowledged that paragraph  322(9)  of  HC  395
    should not have been applied by the Judge, but I should decide to refer
    the original application of the Appellant to  the  Secretary  of  State
    again for the reasons set out by the Judge in paragraphs 28 and  29  of
    her Decision.  The Judge had been misled by a  reference  to  paragraph
    322(9) of HC 395 in a letter from the Respondent to the Appellant dated
    31st July 2014 appearing at page 36 of the Appellant's Bundle.

 7. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge so that  it  should
    be set aside.  It has never been in dispute in  this  appeal  that  the
    Appellant failed to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(c)  and
    (d) of HC 395.  The Judge allowed the appeal only on the basis that  in
    her conclusion, the Secretary of State wrongly exercised the discretion
    given to her by paragraph 322(9) of HC 395.   However,  that  paragraph
    has no application to an appeal of this nature, and was  not  a  reason
    given by the Respondent for refusing the original application for leave
    to remain.

 8. I then proceeded to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In
    this respect I heard further submissions from the representatives.   Mr
    Whitwell asked me to dismiss the appeal which in his  submission  could
    not succeed as the Appellant had failed to submit a valid  CAS  at  the
    relevant time.

 9. In response, Mr Sharma again accepted that the appeal could not succeed
    under the Immigration Rules owing  to  the  absence  of  a  valid  CAS.
    However, he referred to the history of the original application as  set
    out in the Judge's Decision and the Respondent's failure to respond  to
    correspondence from the Appellant.  The Appellant had  been  prejudiced
    by the various delays.  The Secretary  of  State  should  therefore  be
    asked to reconsider  the  original  application  as  the  principle  of
    unfairness applied.

Decision and Reasons

10. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing  it.   It  has  never
    been in dispute in this appeal that when the original  application  for
    leave to remain was decided, the Appellant had not  submitted  a  valid
    CAS in that by then the Sponsor did not hold a Tier 4 Sponsor  Licence.
    Therefore  the  Appellant  failed  to  score  sufficient  points  under
    paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d) of HC 395.  The issue of unfairness  is  not
    relevant because there is no decision to remove the Appellant,  but  in
    any event notwithstanding the history of delays by the Respondent,  the
    Appellant was notified that her Sponsor no longer  held  the  requisite
    Licence and she was given the usual period of 60 days to  rectify  that
    situation.  This the Appellant failed  to  do.   She  therefore  cannot
    complain of any unfairness.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it, there can be no fee award in favour  of  the  Appellant,  and
the decision of the Judge in this respect is remade accordingly.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
