

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11051/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2014                               |On 12 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                              MS AKUA GYENFUAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Kansal, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr. I Jarvis, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 7 March 1982.  She was
    granted permission to appeal the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Molloy dismissing her appeal under the 2006 EEA
    Regulations and Article 8 of the ECHR.
2.   The judge said that he had insufficient material before him to enable
    him to make a fully informed and competent decision on the issue before
    him.

3.   The appellant had originally requested a paper hearing.  On 4 July
    2013, FtTJ Thornton issued directions to the parties stating inter alia
    that he was not satisfied that this appeal could be justly determined
    without a hearing given the complexity of the issue of Ghanaian
    Customary Marriage by proxy.  As a consequence of those directions the
    appellant's appeal was listed for hearing on 8 January 2014.  The
    appellant was directed in the Notice of Hearing to submit documents she
    intended to rely on at the hearing no later than 5 days before the
    hearing.

4.   On 16 December 2013 the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal
    stating that the appellant had not made arrangements for an oral
    hearing and would be obliged if they could submit the bundle for a
    paper hearing.  They duly submitted a bundle of documents on 2 January
    2014, which was received in Taylor House on 3 January 2014.

5.   On 23 December 2013 the Tribunal wrote to the parties informing them
    that the hearing on 8 January 2014 had been de-listed at the request of
    the appellant and that the appeal would be determined on the papers as
    soon as possible.

6.   On 23 December 2013 FtTJ Molloy determined the appeal on the papers.
    He did not have before him the appellant's bundle of documents as it
    was sent on 2 January 2014.  Hence his finding that he had insufficient
    material before him to enable him to make a fully informed and
    competent decision on the issue before him.

7.   In the absence of consideration of the documents submitted on behalf
    of the appellant, the judge's decision dismissing the appellant's
    appeal cannot stand.  The appellant's appeal is remitted for re-
    determination by a different First-tier Judge.




Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



DIRECTIONS

The appellant has again opted for a determination on the papers.
Any further documents the appellant intends to rely on should reach the
First-tier Tribunal within 7 working days of receipt of this decision.
