
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2014              |On 21 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                          MR DIVINE MUFFUH AZUKIBOH
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Saifolahi, Counsel for CASA UK
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born  on  19  August  1985.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 15 February  2014
    refusing his application for a residence card as  confirmation  of  his
    right to reside in the UK as the spouse of an EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.  His appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Steer on 9 May 2014.  The appeal was  allowed  under  the
    EEA Regulations 2006 in a determination promulgated on 21 May 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes
    on 26 June 2014.  The judge found that the appellant's  proxy  marriage
    was legal but the permission states that he erred in not  applying  the
    case of Kareem [2014] UKUT 24.  The grounds state that  the  judge  did
    not consider the validity of the marriage in the  EEA  national's  home
    state and so he erred in his approach to the issues involved.

 3. On 19 August 2014 the appellant appeared before me  and  I  found  that
    there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination.  Based on the said case of Kareem and the case of TA and
    Others (Ghana) [2014] UKUT  00316  (IAC)  I  found  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and the sponsor is not valid but I found that the
    appellant is the partner of an EEA national.  The First-tier Judge  did
    not make a decision on whether the appellant and his partner are  in  a
    durable relationship.  "Durable relationship" has to be  decided  on  a
    case by case basis.

 4. I directed a second stage hearing on the issue of the durability of the
    relationship.   I adjourned the second stage hearing until  27  October
    2014 and this is the adjourned hearing.

 5. There were no preliminary issues.

 6. The appellant took the stand and asked  that  his  statement  dated  20
    October 2014 be used as evidence for the hearing.

 7. The Presenting Officer questioned the appellant asking him when he  and
    Hanna Ako Baiye, a Dutch citizen started living together as  a  couple.
    He said that that was at the end of September 2013  so  they  have  not
    been living together as a couple for 2 years.

 8.  The  Presenting  Officer  asked  the  appellant  what  his   partner's
    nationality is and he said she has Dutch  nationality.   She  does  not
    have a British passport.  Her place  of  residence  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is a Lloyds Bank form in  the  appellant's  bundle  and
    under the heading "Country of Residence and Nationality" it  is  stated
    that her first nationality is  Dutch  and  her  second  nationality  is
    British.  The appellant said that that is not the case,  she  does  not
    have a British passport.

 9. The Presenting Officer asked the appellant  where  he  was  living  and
    where his partner was living in September 2013  before  they  moved  in
    together and he said she was living with her mother and he  was  living
    in Brixton and they had been looking for somewhere to stay  after  they
    had undergone their customary marriage.

10. The appellant was asked if his leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    expired on 31 October 2011.   He  said  it  did  and  that  he  was  an
    overstayer when he applied for his residence card.  He was  then  asked
    when he and his partner met and after that how long it was before  they
    got married.  He said they met in April 2013 and got married in  August
    2013.  He was asked if they have ever honeymooned or holidayed together
    and he said they have been outside London to see friends and family and
    have spent a lot of time together but they have not been  any  holidays
    together.  He was asked where they were at Christmas and he said he was
    at his sister's in Leicester but his partner had had to work.  He  said
    she is a support worker and has to live in with her clients when she is
    working.  He said his partner is pregnant.

11. It was put to him that his partner has been to a second trimester  scan
    and he was asked who his midwife is.  He  said  the  scan  was  at  the
    hospital which is Grays and St Thomas Hospital and the midwife was  not
    there.

12. The Presenting Officer asked the  appellant  if  his  wife  is  on  the
    tenancy agreement for their present address at 3 Broster Gardens, South
    Norwood, London.  He said there is no tenancy agreement.   There  is  a
    private landlord but no paperwork.

13. The Presenting Officer asked him  if  he  and  his  wife  had  a  civil
    marriage in the United Kingdom  but  he  said  they  had  not  as  they
    consider themselves married.  He was asked about the documents on  file
    from the Worldwide Marriage Encounter (England and Wales).  He said  he
    and his partner went to a marriage encounter weekend with that body and
    it is for couples who have just got married and you are taught  how  to
    live together happily as a couple.

14. The Presenting Officer asked the  appellant  why  he  has  not  married
    civilly in the United Kingdom and he said his passport is with the Home
    Office and he was asked if they have any plans to marry civilly in  the
    UK or as he and his partner are Christians  if  they  plan  to  have  a
    Christian marriage.  The appellant said they want to do this  but  they
    may have the Christian marriage in  Cameroon  and  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

15. He asked the appellant if he can drive and he said he cannot.

16. There was no re-examination.

17. A second witness took the stand being Hanna Ako Baiye, date of birth  1
    October 1990.  She asked that her statement be used as evidence for the
    hearing.

18. Counsel asked her why the letters from St Thomas Hospital  London  from
    her GP show her address as her mother's address.   She  said  when  she
    found out she was pregnant she could not change GPs  because  the  Home
    Office had her passport.  She said she liked the GP she had  used  when
    she was with her mother and trusted him  so  she  just  kept  the  same
    address.

19. The Presenting Officer questioned the witness asking her if she now has
    her passport from the Home Office and she said she has.  She was  asked
    about her GP and she said she trusts the GP she  had  when  she  stayed
    with her mother so she has not changed him.  She said she only sees the
    one doctor when he goes to her GP clinic.

20. The witness was asked when she started living with  the  appellant  and
    she said that was in September  2013  shortly  after  they  married  in
    August 2013.  She said she could not stay with him at his  address  and
    they had to find somewhere to stay so they started  looking  after  the
    marriage.  She was asked why she could not move into  his  address  and
    she said that the person who owned the  property  said  there  was  not
    enough room for her.

21. The witness said she is on maternity leave but she used to  work  as  a
    carer.  She said she graduated in July 2012 and then started working in
    November/December 2012 after all  her  checks  had  been  done  by  her
    employer.

22. It was put to her that a customary marriage is not recognised as  being
    legal under EU law so has she any plans to enter into a civil  ceremony
    in the UK with the appellant. She said they have  considered  this  but
    they have not done anything about it  because  they  want  to  see  the
    result of this appeal.

23. She was asked if they have ever gone on holiday together and  she  said
    they go out a lot and visit family and friends but they have not been a
    proper holiday.  She was asked about last Christmas and  she  said  she
    had been working but the appellant went to his sister's.

24. A third witness took the stand being Clara Beiye whose  nationality  is
    Dutch.  She is the mother of the second witness and  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for 14 years.  She asked that her statement, which is on
    file, be used as evidence for the hearing.

25. There is another statement on file by Phyliss Navti who is  the  sister
    of the appellant.  Unfortunately she did  not  arrive  at  the  hearing
    centre on time but I am going to take account of her  statement,  which
    is on file when making my decision.

26. The Presenting Officer made his  submissions  relying  on  the  refusal
    letter of 15 February 2014.

27. I  was  referred  to  the  original  First-tier  determination  and  he
    submitted  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  determination  regarding
    durability of the relationship.  The First Tier hearing  was  based  on
    the proxy marriage.

28. I was referred to pages 2 and 3 of the refusal letter which  refers  to
    durability of the relationship and the respondent's position  on  this.
    He submitted that at that time there were 2 separate addresses for  the
    appellant and his partner and because of this  and  the  other  matters
    referred to therein,  it  was  found  that  the  relationship  was  not
    durable.  He submitted however that this is an EEA  appeal  and  I  can
    consider all the evidence before me up to today's date.   He  submitted
    that matters have moved on since the date of the refusal letter.

29. I was referred to the appellant's partner's pregnancy and he  submitted
    that if I accept the oral evidence of the  witnesses  then  the  appeal
    should  be  allowed,  but  I  have  to  take  into  account   all   the
    circumstances of this case.

30. He submitted that the couple married very shortly after they  met.   He
    submitted that when the application was made there was an  issue  about
    cohabitation but the documentary evidence shows that the  situation  is
    different now.  I was referred to the fact that the GP letter  and  the
    hospital letter have a different address from the matrimonial home  and
    that this may have a bearing on my decision.   The  appellant  and  his
    partner have never holidayed  together  and  have  never  had  a  civil
    marriage ceremony in the United Kingdom.  He submitted however, that if
    I accept that the appellant is the father of his partner's child and if
    I find the witnesses to be credible then a  residence  card  should  be
    issued to the appellant.

31. Counsel for the appellant made  her  submissions  submitting  that  the
    original decision has not aged well and that new evidence has now  been
    produced.  She asked me to consider the oral and  documentary  evidence
    in the round.  She asked me to find that the appellant and his  partner
    are in a durable relationship.  She submitted that  the  issue  is  not
    whether they have been living together for 2  years.  I  was  asked  to
    consider in particular, the pregnancy.  The second and third  witnesses
    both state that the appellant is the father  of  the  second  witness's
    child and I was referred to the additional documents now  supplied.   I
    was referred to the document headed "My Birth Plan" in the  appellant's
    bundle in which the second witness  states  that  she  would  like  her
    partner, the appellant, to be with the baby when she is  being  checked
    after delivery.  She also refers to him in the  Guy  &  St  Thomas  NHS
    document headed "patient details" as  her  husband.  Counsel  submitted
    that even though the  marriage  has  not  been  recognised,  the  proxy
    marriage has not been challenged and it is clear from the evidence that
    the couple is in a durable relationship.   They  have  entered  into  a
    cultural proxy marriage.

32. I was referred to the photographs in the bundle  which  show  that  the
    appellant has now been adopted into his partner's family.  It is  clear
    that he socialises with them and I was referred to  the  cards  to  the
    appellant and his partner congratulating them on the  impending  birth.
    I was also asked to give weight to the marriage encounter weekend  that
    they attended.  She submitted that  all  of  these  things  demonstrate
    commitment and durability.

33. Counsel submitted that the appellant and his partner both stay  at  the
    same address and that a good explanation has been given for why the  GP
    and the hospital have her mother's address.  I was  asked  to  consider
    all the evidence in the round and  find  that  the  appellant  and  her
    partner intend staying together permanently as a couple.   With  regard
    to a civil marriage she submitted that this is not  important  to  them
    as, as far as they are concerned, they are married.

34. She submitted that the evidence is consistent and the only issue I have
    to consider is whether the appellant can be deemed to  be  an  extended
    family member of an EEA national under the Regulations.  She  submitted
    that if I find that is the case a residence card should  be  issued  to
    the appellant.

35. Counsel also pointed out to me that the appellant has named his partner
    on his life insurance policy.  She submitted that when the  application
    was made it was on a different basis from now and  although  durability
    is an issue in the refusal letter, what the  judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered was whether the marriage was valid but the decision
    now will be on a very different basis and  the  evidence  all  supports
    durability.  I was asked to take account of all of the evidence.

36. The appellant's partner is due to give birth on 26 November 2014.

Determination

37. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    the balance of probabilities.

38. I have considered all the evidence on file, the oral evidence given  at
    the hearing and the submissions of both parties.  I am able to consider
    all the evidence up to date of this hearing as this is an EEA case.

39. As submitted to me, the situation now is very different to what it  was
    on 15 February 2014, the date of the refusal letter.  In May 2014,  the
    date of the First-tier hearing,  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  The marriage of the appellant and his  partner  is  not
    valid.  The First-tier Judge did not consider  the  durability  of  the
    relationship although it was mentioned in the refusal letter.

40. There is evidence that the appellant's partner  is  pregnant.   I  have
    noted the documents in the appellant's bundle, in  particular  the  NHS
    documents in which the appellant's partner  names  the  father  of  the
    unborn child as the appellant and asks for him to be present after  the
    birth.  I have considered the cards and photographs in the  appellant's
    bundle and the evidence of all the witnesses.

41.  Although  the  GP  documents  and  the  NHS  documents  refer  to  the
    appellant's partner living at a different address, a  good  reason  has
    been given for this and I found all the witnesses to be credible.

42. I therefore believe that although the marriage has been found not to be
    valid the appellant and his partner consider themselves to be  married.
    Their evidence is consistent and I find  that  the  relationship  is  a
    durable and subsisting one.

43. The appellant's situation has moved on since the application was  made.
    Although the appellant and his partner have not stayed with each  other
    for 2 years, I believe that they intend living together  in  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship and that the documentation provided shows this.



44. I therefore find that this appellant is an extended  family  member  as
    defined in Regulation 8 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.


                                  DECISION

45. I allow the appeal and direct the respondent  to  issue  the  appellant
    with a residence card as confirmation of his right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom.



Signed        Date 21 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Murray




