
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA115522015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 June 2016                           |On 8 June 2016                      |
|Decision given orally at the hearing     |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Muhammad Adeel
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Farani. Javid.
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Boardman, who in a determination promulgated on  16
    November 2015 allowed the appeal of Mr Muhammad Adeel on  human  rights
    grounds.  Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me  I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent  as  she  was
    the respondent in the First-tier and  similarly  I  will  refer  to  Mr
    Muhammad Adeel as the appellant.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  who  came  to  Britain  as  a
    student in February 2011.  He had leave  to  remain  in  that  capacity
    until 13 October 2014.  While he  still  had  leave  to  remain,  on  9
    October 2014, he made an application for leave to remain on private and
    family life.  He had been married on 16 April 2014 and the marriage was
    a central part of the application that was made.  It  is,  however,  of
    note that no  marriage  application  with  the  appropriate  supporting
    evidence was made.

3.   The judge did consider whether or not  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He found  that  he  could  not.
    Moreover, the judge found in terms that there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant's wife  living  with  him  in  Pakistan  nor
    indeed were there any insurmountable obstacles  which  would  stop  the
    appellant making an application for leave to enter from abroad.

4.   However, having found that the appeal  could  not  succeed  within  the
    marriage Rules the judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He set out a  number  of  relevant
    factors.  He placed weight on the private life built up  here  but  did
    not seem to take into account the fact  that  the  appellant's  private
    life built up here was built up at a time while his leave to remain was
    precarious.  Indeed, of course when  he  had  entered  Britain  he  had
    entered on the basis that he would be returning to his own  country  at
    the end of his studies.  There was nothing to indicate  that  he  would
    have had any intention or  any  right  to  remain  for  any  indefinite
    period.

5.   The judge, as I said, took into account a number of factors but  it  is
    argued by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  his  consideration  of  the
    proportionality aspects of the rights of the appellant under Article  8
    were not properly considered,  particularly  taking  into  account  the
    findings of the judge that the appellant not only could  not  meet  the
    Rules but also that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  his
    returning and continuing married life in Pakistan.

6.   The reality is that the judge in reaching his  conclusion  ignored  not
    only the provisions of Section 117 of the 2014 Act but also  the  terms
    of the Rules and the terms of Section EX.1 of Appendix FM.  He also, in
    my view, ignored relevant case law including the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, which makes it clear  that
    a near miss does not entitle someone to leave to remain under Article 8
    and furthermore that it is important to place particular weight on  the
    necessity of relevant immigration control which  itself  requires  that
    the rules are met.

7.   The terms of the  judgment  in  SS  (Congo)  state  that  a  system  of
    immigration control should to be workable, predictable, consistent  and
    fair as between one applicant and another.  That is not the case  where
    one is entitled to leave to remain on the basis of  marriage  when  the
    marriage Rules are not met  and  where  there  are  no  exceptional  or
    compelling factors that mean that it would  be  particularly  difficult
    for the individual to either make an application from abroad or  indeed
    for the parties  to  the  marriage  to  live  in  the  country  of  the
    applicant. Particularly given that the Judge found that there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's  family  life  continuing
    abroad and did not indicate that he  considered  that  there  were  any
    exceptional or compelling factors which would mean  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the  immigration  rules  I
    consider that there were clear  and  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the judge.

8.   Particularly having found that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
    the judge erred in, somehow ignoring that  finding  and  deciding  that
    leave to remain should be granted.  I therefore set aside his decision.

9.   The appeal will now be remitted to the First-tier  to  make  a  further
    decision and my decision is that the appeal is allowed  to  the  extent
    that it is remitted to the First-tier to be heard afresh safe that  the
    findings of the Judge in paragraphs 1 through 29 of  the  determination
    are preserved.


Notice of Decision
The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
decision of the Judge in the First-tier is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier.

Directions
The appeal is to be heard at Taylor House, time estimate 2 hours.


Signed:
         7 June 2016


Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGeachy

