
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/11549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th May 2015                     |On 10th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                          CHARLOTTE NTUNAH ANTHONY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Counsel, instructed by Jusmount & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant had applied for a derivative residence card under the EEA
    Regulations as the carer of a British national child.  The  application
    was refused and the Appellant's appeal dismissed for the reasons  given
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated on  the
    26th of June 2014. It was accepted that the Appellant was the carer  of
    her child and that the child was a British national but the Judge found
    that it had not been shown that the child would be unable to reside  in
    the UK without her.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of the 3rd of July 2014. It was argued that the Judge  had  not
    had regard to the accepted evidence that the  child's  father  was  not
    providing maintenance and had  no  contact  with  the  child  and  that
    irrelevant matters had been considered. It was argued that the evidence
    showed that the child would not be able to reside in the UK without the
    Appellant and the decision was  perverse.  Permission  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on the 6th of  November  2014  on  the
    basis that the Judge had arguably placed too high a standard  of  proof
    on the Appellant.

 3. The Secretary of State's rule 24 response noted the assertion  made  in
    respect of the standard of proof  and  that  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision the Judge had accepted the Appellant's evidence. However,  the
    Judge had found that the steps that the Appellant had  taken  were  not
    sufficient and the Secretary of State's position is that this was  open
    to the Judge and the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement.

 4. The submissions made at the Upper Tribunal hearing are set out  in  the
    Record of Proceedings and are referred  to  where  relevant  below.  In
    summary both parties maintained the positions that are set out  in  the
    grounds of application and the Secretary of State's rule 24 response.

 5. The fact that an Appellant is the main  or  sole  carer  of  a  British
    national child is not by itself enough  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations. It is noted in  the  Refusal
    Letter that unwillingness to provide care is not by  itself  sufficient
    and it would have to be shown why the child's father could  not  assume
    responsibility. To succeed an Appellant has to show that the child will
    not be able to live in the UK or another EEA state, a lack  of  contact
    with a former partner does not, by itself, answer that question and may
    lead to a finding that the burden of proof has not been discharged.

 6. That is clearly where the Judge focussed his attention when considering
    the evidence. In paragraph  16  he  observed  "The  question  for  this
    Tribunal is whether the appellant has done sufficient to prove, on  the
    balance of probabilities, that her child would be unable to  reside  in
    the UK or another EEA state if she were required to  leave.  I  caution
    myself against expecting too much by way of  evidence  or  imposing  an
    improperly high standard of proof..." It is clear from  that  paragraph
    that he had in mind the correct standard of proof and was aware of  the
    pitfalls that may arise.

 7. Paragraph 17 sets out the Judge's approach and  having  considered  the
    contents I find that the reasons given for finding that  the  Appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof were sufficient and do not  show
    that he had disregarded the self  directions  given  in  the  preceding
    paragraph.

 8. The Judge was entitled to have regard to  the  geography  of  the  area
    where the Appellant and the child's father lived and the  proximity  of
    the different locations. Her claim about the advice received  from  the
    Local Authority was rejected  and  this  was  in  the  context  of  the
    authority having had contact with the father and his mother. The  basic
    fact that he had no contact and paid no maintenance did not answer  the
    question about whether the child would have to leave the UK and he  was
    entitled to find that the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  did  not  show
    sufficient+ had been done to track him down or that  he  would  not  be
    able to care for their child or would not do so.

 9. I find that the Judge correctly identified the issues involved, applied
    the correct burden and standard of proof and made  findings  that  were
    justified on the evidence presented. The decision contains no error  of
    law and so it stands as the disposal of the appeal in this case.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes (IAC)

Dated: 9th June 2015
