
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11563/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated           |
|Oral determination given following    |On 29 May 2015                      |
|hearing                               |                                    |
|On 11 May 2015                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                               mrs Farhat Asad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Qureshi, Sponsor (Appellant's Husband)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by Mrs Farhat Asad, who is  the  wife  of  Mr
    Qureshi whose appeal succeeded in front of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Murray following a hearing at Columbus House, Newport on  10  September
    2014.

 2. The history behind this application  can  be  summarised  briefly.   Mr
    Qureshi is a Pakistan national who was born on 29 March 1959 and he has
    been in this country lawfully since sometime  in  2004.   There  is  no
    suggestion that his presence in this country has  been  anything  other
    than lawful or that he has behaved other  than  impeccably  during  his
    stay in this country.  Mr Qureshi married this  appellant  on  4  April
    2012 and she  was  granted  leave  to  come  to  this  country  as  his
    dependant.  Her presence in this country has also always  been  lawful.
    Just before Mr Qureshi had completed ten  years'  lawful  residence  in
    this country he was advised to make an application for indefinite leave
    to remain on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  lawful  residence.   It  was
    presumably anticipated that by the time that application was considered
    by the respondent he would have acquired ten years'  lawful  residence,
    and this appellant sought leave to remain as his dependant.

 3. Possibly contrary to the expectations of Mr Qureshi and his  wife,  the
    appellant, the respondent considered  the  application  before  he  had
    acquired  ten  years'  lawful  residence  and  the  applications   were
    consequently refused.  Mr Qureshi (and the appellant) appealed  against
    this decision (and accordingly their presence in this country  remained
    lawful pending determination of their appeals) and by the time  of  the
    hearing before Judge Murray the ten year period had passed  and  so  Mr
    Qureshi at that time was entitled to remain under  the  Rules.   It  is
    settled law, and the respondent did not seek to contest this, that time
    continues to run for the purpose of whether or  not  an  applicant  has
    acquired ten years' lawful residence while an appeal is pending and his
    or her presence  continues  to  be  lawful  under  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  Accordingly Judge Murray  allowed  Mr  Qureshi's
    appeal.  However, it appears that the appellant just assumed  that  her
    appeal would stand or fall with that of her  husband  and  no  separate
    arguments were made in relation to her application  to  be  allowed  to
    remain as a dependant of her husband.  Judge Murray noted at  paragraph
    16 that she had  "heard  no  separate  arguments  in  relation  to  her
    application which was as a dependant of the first appellant  [that  was
    Mr Qureshi]".  The judge noted that the appellant  had  not  put  in  a
    witness statement and she found that "in the absence of any evidence or
    arguments that she satisfies the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    I find that she does not do so".  The judge also noted that she had not
    heard any arguments in relation to Article 8.

 4. The appellant has appealed against  this  decision  and  was  initially
    refused permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark  Davies,
    who, when giving reasons for his decision, stated as follows:

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge)  who,  in  a  determination
             promulgated on 24 September  2014  dismissed  the  appellant's
             appeal against the decision to refuse her leave to  remain  as
             the dependant of her husband whose appeal succeeded  and  upon
             whom she claimed to be dependent.

         2.   The judge made a clear finding based on the evidence that  the
             appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
             Rules.

         3.   No submissions were made to the judge on the basis of  Article
             8.

         4.   No evidence was put before the  judge  to  indicate  that  the
             appellant was not able to  return  to  Pakistan  and  make  an
             application for entry clearance from there.

         5.   The grounds are simply a disagreement with the  findings  made
             by the judge.

         6.   The judge considered all the evidence  and  made  findings  on
             that evidence applying the  correct  burden  and  standard  of
             proof.

         7.   The grounds and the determination do not disclose an  arguable
             error of law."

 5. The appellant renewed her application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and  permission  was  eventually  granted  by  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge on 19 February 2015, but notwithstanding that the  judge
    granted permission he noted as follows:

         "I find the handwritten Record of Proceedings illegible.   However,
         it  looks  as  if  all   concerned,   including   the   appellants'
         representative, assumed that if one appeal succeeded then so  would
         the other, and nothing at all was said separately about this  case.
         The different outcome seems to have come as a surprise  on  receipt
         of the determination by Judge L Murray.

         A straightforward answer is that it was up to the appellant to  put
         her case and she failed to do so, as Judge Mark Davies thought when
         refusing permission.  It may also be that she has no case, or  that
         her redress, if  any,  is  by  way  of  some  further  application.
         However, I grant permission just in case there has been  procedural
         unfairness because there was something useful to be said if she had
         been alert to the possibility of different outcomes."

 6. The Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission also advised within his
    reasons that the appellant "might be well-advised to seek legal  advice
    again" because "if she did not know previously  that  success  for  her
    husband did not automatically mean success for her,  she  must  realise
    that now."

 7. Before me and notwithstanding the advice given within  the  reasons  of
    the Upper Tribunal Judge, the appellant  was  not  represented,  but  I
    allowed her husband, Mr Qureshi, to speak on her behalf.  It  is  right
    that I set out the change in circumstances  which  has  occurred  since
    Judge Murray reached her decision.  While both  parties  were  in  this
    country lawfully, after the appeal had  been  determined,  they  had  a
    daughter who was born on 11 October 2014.  Subsequently on  5  February
    2015 Mr Qureshi was granted indefinite leave to remain.  I am  told  he
    is in the process of  seeking  naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen.
    Because the child was born before ILR was granted to her father, she is
    not  automatically  a  British  citizen  which  she  would  have   been
    otherwise, but because the appellant is currently still in this country
    lawfully and will be until such time as her appeal rights are exhausted
    she will be able to make a further application to remain  in  light  of
    her changed circumstances should she choose to do so.

 8.  Certainly  it  would  be  difficult  to  argue  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances now are not different from what they  were  both  at  the
    time her original application was made along with her husband and  also
    when her appeal was heard.  The changes are obvious.  First her husband
    has now been granted ILR and secondly they have a very young child.  No
    doubt the respondent will give careful and anxious consideration to any
    application which might follow from this determination but it  will  be
    important for the appellant to ensure that  this  application  is  made
    properly in accordance with the Rules so that to the  extent  that  she
    does have a right to make such an application in country she  does  not
    lose it by failing to do so properly.

 9. However, none of this strictly bears upon the issue  which  I  have  to
    determine which is whether or not there was any error of law  in  Judge
    Murray's determination.  In my judgment, notwithstanding that one might
    have considerable sympathy for the position of the  appellant  and  her
    husband, the judge could not really on the evidence which had been  put
    before her and the arguments which had been advanced have come  to  any
    other decision.  As at the time of the appeal before  her  Mr  Qureshi,
    the appellant's husband, did not have ILR.  The most that could be said
    was that it could have been anticipated that he would very  shortly  be
    granted ILR as indeed he was.  In order for her application to  succeed
    under the Rules she would have needed to  apply  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled migrant which at this time her husband was not.  Even if he had
    been, and this might have been relevant were her appeal  to  have  been
    argued  under  Article  8,  she  would  have  had  to  show  that   the
    requirements under the Rules were satisfied.  These  include  that  she
    has the appropriate English language qualification and also that  there
    is sufficient income as required now within the Rules.  I do  not  know
    even today whether or not the English language requirement is satisfied
    although I have been told that Mr Qureshi's income is now sufficient to
    satisfy the current financial requirements within the Rules.  The judge
    was undoubtedly right in my judgement to find that in  the  absence  of
    evidence she could not find either that the appellant was  entitled  to
    succeed under the Rules (which clearly as at the date of  decision  she
    was not) or even that she could succeed under Article 8.  There may now
    be an argument which could be mounted under Article 8 given the  change
    in circumstances as set out above but no  such  argument  was  advanced
    before the judge and in order for such an  argument  to  have  had  any
    chance of success then further information would have  had  to  be  put
    before the court which it was not.

10. There having been no error of law in Judge Murray's determination  this
    appeal cannot succeed although, as I have noted,  that  does  not  mean
    that the appellant should not now make a further application  which  if
    she does will doubtless be considered properly by the respondent.

Decision

There being no error of law in Judge Murray's determination this  appeal  is
dismissed.



Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 26 May 2015
