
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/11516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2016                             |On 18 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                ISSIFU SHAIBU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T. D. H. Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa, promulgated on 7 September 2015, in  which
    she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
    to refuse to grant a residence card as confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the "Regulations").


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It  is  arguable  as  asserted  the  FtTJ  erred  in   exceeding   the
    respondent's case by admitting a new issue, it first  being  raised  in
    closing submissions.  Namely, by the respondent, whether the  appellant
    had been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   The  FtTJ  notes  he
    considered whether to adjourn but did not, noting that the  appellant's
    representative did not seek  any  adjournment.   It  is  arguable  that
    caused such unfairness that this amounted to a procedural error."


 3.  The  Appellant  and  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  oral
    submissions from both representatives, following which  I  reserved  my
    decision.


Error of law


 4. The judge also dismissed the Appellant's appeal on the basis  that  she
    found that the Appellant's marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    Grounds three to five address this issue.  Therefore in order for  this
    appeal to succeed, the Appellant must show that any  error  of  law  in
    considering the exercise  of  Treaty  rights  was  material,  and  must
    therefore show that there was also an error of law in her consideration
    of the issue of marriage of convenience.


 5. The judge addressed this issue in paragraphs [21] to [50].   She  found
    many discrepancies in the evidence of the Appellant  and  Sponsor.   In
    paragraph [35] she did not accept that  they  had  been  cohabiting  as
    claimed.  She did not accept the explanation given in relation  to  the
    issue of the wardrobes, [36] to [38].  In paragraph [39] she found that
    there were contradictions in the evidence for why the Sponsor  was  not
    at the matrimonial address on the day of the visit.  In paragraph  [40]
    she rejected the explanation given for the problems  with  the  phones,
    and the fact  that  the  Appellant's  girlfriend,  and  mother  of  his
    children, Mavis, did not know the phone number  for  the  Sponsor.   In
    paragraph [41] she addressed the issue  of  the  lack  of  photographic
    evidence, and in paragraph [42] found that there were discrepancies  in
    the evidence for when these photographs had been taken.   In  paragraph
    [43]  she  addressed  further  discrepancies   in   relation   to   the
    photographs.


 6. Much was made of the issue of the wardrobes at  the  hearing.   It  was
    submitted that this issue occupied "a lot" of the decision.  However, I
    find that this is not the case.  I find that the judge  does  not  rely
    only on the evidence regarding the wardrobes to find that the Appellant
    is in a marriage of convenience.  The judge addresses the issue of  the
    wardrobes, but this is partly because it was the Appellant who produced
    photographs of the wardrobes at the hearing in an  attempt  to  explain
    the issue raised in the reasons for refusal letter.   The  Respondent's
    representative did not provide a copy of the record of the visit by the
    immigration officers, but there was no dispute that the visit occurred.
       I  was  referred  to  the  case  of  Miah  (interviewer's  comments:
    disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00515  (IAC).   However,  this  case
    refers to the provision of the records of marriage interviews,  and  no
    such interview  took  place  in  this  case.   The  decision  was  made
    following the visit of the immigration officers without  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor being called for an interview.


 7. On page 1 of the notice of decision the Respondent records the visit of
    the immigration officers.  The only person present was  Mavis,  who  is
    recorded as having identified herself as  the  Appellant's  girlfriend.
    The fact of Mavis being the Appellant's girlfriend and  mother  of  his
    children has not been disputed.  The letter refers to a small  wardrobe
    which Mavis, the Appellant's girlfriend, said that  the  Sponsor  used.
    Given that the Appellant then provided photographs  in  an  attempt  to
    explain this, I  do  not  find  there  is  any  error  in  the  judge's
    consideration of this issue.  But it is by no means the only issue that
    the judge addresses.  I find that there is  no  error  of  law  in  her
    consideration of this issue.  I do not find that she has  placed  undue
    weight on the reported visit of the immigration officers.  It  was  not
    disputed that this took place.   She  has  considered  the  Appellant's
    explanations and has found these not to be credible.


 8. In relation to  the  evidence  of  cohabitation,  the  judge  finds  at
    paragraph [35] that the Appellant and Sponsor have not been  cohabiting
    as claimed.  She gives reasons in paragraph [35].   In  particular  she
    refers to the application form, which  was  signed  and  dated  by  the
    Appellant on 28 August 2014, in which the Sponsor's address is given as
    an address in London.  It was accepted by Mr. Hodson that the judge was
    entitled to take this into account.   The  judge  then  considered  the
    documentary evidence provided in paragraph [45], but  she  found  "that
    these are evidence which have been "managed" and does not displace  the
    above findings".


 9. Given the judge's findings in paragraph  [35],  her  finding  that  the
    Sponsor was not telling the truth about where she had been living,  and
    her other findings in relation to the credibility of the Appellant  and
    Sponsor and the evidence before her, I find that there is no  error  in
    the judge finding that the documentary evidence which purported to show
    that they had been living together was "managed" in order to show this.
     She was entitled  to  find  that  it  did  not  displace  her  earlier
    findings.  It is possible for bills to be sent to an individual  at  an
    address at which he or she does  not  reside,  and  given  her  earlier
    findings, it was open  to  the  judge  not  to  place  weight  on  this
    evidence.


10. In relation to the judge's treatment of  the  social  services  report,
    this is set out in paragraphs [48] and [49].  The judge noted that  the
    report stated that both the Sponsor and Mavis are involved in the  care
    of the children, and that the  children  referred  to  the  Sponsor  as
    "Aunty Mary".  However, in paragraph [49] she states:


    "Mr Bates submitted that reliance should not be placed  on  the  social
    services report on the basis that all three parties concerned were well
    aware of the difficulty to resolve the  immigration  matters  and  that
    they have the incentive to  paint  a  certain  picture  to  the  social
    services.  I concur."

11. I find that there is no error of law in the judge's  failure  to  place
    more  reliance  on  the  social  services  report.   This  report   was
    commissioned following the immigration  officers'  visit.   The  reason
    that social services  visited  was  to  consider  the  welfare  of  the
    children, not to examine the status of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant, his girlfriend  and  the  Sponsor.   The  fact  that  social
    services had no concerns about the welfare of  the  children  does  not
    indicate that their father's marriage to the Sponsor, who is not  their
    mother, is not a marriage of convenience.  The fact that  the  children
    are found by social services to have a positive relationship  with  the
    Sponsor does not indicate that her marriage to their father is genuine.
     The finding by social services that the children were not at risk  has
    no bearing on the status of the Appellant's and Sponsor's marriage.


12. I find that the judge made adequate findings to support her  conclusion
    that the Appellant and Sponsor's marriage was one of convenience.   She
    set out her reasons and they are clear.  It is important to  note  that
    it had not been disputed  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the mother of his  children,  Mavis,  with
    whom he lives, and who has no immigration status in the United Kingdom.
     I find that there is no error of law in the consideration of the issue
    of the marriage of convenience.


13. In relation to grounds one and two, given that I have found that  there
    is no error of law  in  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  issue  of
    marriage of convenience, this cannot be  material.   I  find  that  the
    notice of decision did not raise the issue of the  exercise  of  Treaty
    rights and, had the judge found that the marriage was not a marriage of
    convenience, she should have remitted the decision  to  the  Respondent
    for consideration of whether or  not  to  issue  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom  rather  than
    consider the issue of exercise of Treaty rights.   However,  she  found
    that the  Appellant's  marriage  to  the  Sponsor  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  It may have been preferable to have considered this issue
    first as, in that case, whether or not evidence had  been  provided  to
    meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation  15(1)(b)   would   have   been
    immaterial.  However, given that I have found that there is no error of
    law in the  judge's  finding  that  the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience, this error in considering the exercise  of  Treaty  rights
    cannot be material.


Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of a material error of  law  and  I
do not set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 14 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
