
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11786/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 May 2015                             |On 11 May 2015                    |
|Prepared 5 May 2015                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              OYEKUNLE OYEKALE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, born on  16  March  1977,  appeals
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    K S H Miller, who, in a determination promulgated on  20  October  2014
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  made
    on 4 March 2014 to refuse his application for leave to  remain  and  to
    make a decision that he should  be  removed  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The appellant was born in Ghana. His mother is Ghanaian and his  father
    is Nigerian.  He attended school in  Ghana  and  then  studied  at  the
    University of Ghana, from which he graduated with a first-class honours
    degree in 2004.

3.   He stated that after university he decided to travel to Nigeria to  try
    to establish a proper relationship  with  his  father  who  was  living
    there. He was unable to do so.  In 2007  he  returned  to  Nigeria  and
    started working at the British Council, receiving a full-time  post  in
    2009.  That job ended in 2010 and he then  obtained  a  scholarship  to
    study at the University of Southampton. In February 2012 he was granted
    limited leave to remain until 14 February  2014  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled Post-Study Migrant.

4.   The reasons for the refusal were set out in  a  letter  dated  4  March
    2014.  It was pointed  out  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Rules 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules in that he had
    not lived in Britain continuously for twenty  years.  Moreover  at  the
    time of his application he had been aged 36 and was not under  the  age
    of 18 or aged between 18 and  25  and  therefore  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) and (v).  It was noted that  he  had
    stated in his application form that he had family members living in his
    home country and it was not accepted that he had  lost  ties  with  his
    home country, and therefore it was not considered that  he  could  meet
    the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(vi).   Moreover  it  was  considered
    that there were no exceptional circumstances which would mean  that  he
    should be granted leave to remain under the provisions of Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

5.   Judge Miller heard evidence from the  appellant  and  took  account  of
    relevant case law including Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) and Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim)  [2004]
    UKUT 00085 (IAC). He noted the claimant did not know where his  parents
    were and that he had left Ghana in 2007 and that he stated that he  had
    two sisters and two brothers but did not have contact nor did  he  have
    contact with his uncles.

6.   He had claimed that when he had gone to Abuja  in  2007  he  had  lived
    with "a good Samaritan" and that he had worked at the  British  Council
    as a UK education project assistant before  moving  on  to  work  as  a
    learning development coordinator.

7.   In paragraph 17 onwards of the determination  the  judge  set  out  his
    conclusions.  He noted the  short  time  the  appellant  had  lived  in
    Britain and accepted that he was well regarded  here  but  pointed  out
    that he had no family here and had spent all but the  last  four  years
    living in West Africa where he had numerous family members.  The  judge
    went on to say:-

         "I do not accept that the  fact  that  he  grew  up  in  Ghana  and
         accordingly has a 'dual nationality' prevents him from  being  able
         to integrate into Nigerian society.  His  own  sister  lives  there
         and, in his evidence before me, he stated that he  lived  in  Abuja
         where he worked for the  British  Council  from  2007  until  2010.
         There is no evidence before me whatsoever to  show  that  Ghanaians
         experience difficulty in living in Nigeria,  and  his  own  history
         belies his assertion that it was a problem."

8.   He went on to say that he found the appellant less than candid in  some
    evidence that he gave and pointed to the  appellant's  vagueness  about
    his contact with  his own father.

9.   He concluded that the appellant was not entitled to  leave  to  remain.



10.   The  grounds  of  appeal  stated  that  the  judge  had  not  properly
    considered  the  Article  8  rights  of  the  appellant.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Landes  referred
    to the decision in Ogundimu and stated that it was  arguable  that  the
    judge had erred in law by failing to give proper consideration  to  the
    evidence about the absence of ties to Nigeria or in his  interpretation
    of the term "ties".  On that point he  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    stating that he was granted  permission  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    interpretation of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

11.   At  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  before   me   the   appellant   was
    unrepresented.  He asserted that he had no  ties  in  Nigeria  and  had
    lived all his life away from that country and that  that  his  mother's
    father did not live in Nigeria.  He referred to the life which  he  had
    built up here over the last four years.

12.  In reply, Mr Clarke referred to the determination of  the  Tribunal  in
    Bossadi (Paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042  (IAC).
    He emphasised that in that determination the Tribunal had made it clear
    that if ties could be renewed it could not be said  that  an  appellant
    had no ties with their own country.  He referred to the fact  that  the
    appellant had only arrived in Britain in 2010 having spent the previous
    three years in Nigeria where he had been able to find work  and  indeed
    had been provided with accommodation.   He  referred  to  the  lack  of
    clarity in the appellant's evidence relating to his relationships  with
    his relatives and pointed to the  relevance  of  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the importance of  the
    public interest in maintaining immigration control.  He stated that  it
    was clear that the appellant did not meet the terms of the  Immigration
    Rules and it was appropriate that he should be removed.

13.  The appellant in reply stated that Mr Clarke was wrong to  allege  that
    he had dual nationality but stated that in any event he had  difficulty
    in establishing himself in Nigeria and when he had arrived there he had
    had to live without accommodation for three days.

14.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the judge. Clearly the appellant has only lived in Britain for  four
    years and entered as a student. As such he was aware that  he  was  not
    entitled to remain indefinitely.   Moreover  the  reality  is  that  it
    cannot be said that he has no ties with the country of his nationality.
    He lived and worked there for three years before coming to Britain as a
    student, leaving Nigeria as recently as 2010.   When  he  last  entered
    Nigeria he was able to find steady work and there is no reason  why  he
    should not be able to do so in the future.  Moreover, it cannot be said
    that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a   disproportionate
    interference with his rights to private life, given  that  although  he
    has worked here and has made friends in the community and may well have
    undertaken charitable work here, there is no reason why he would not be
    able to develop private  life  with  friends  and  charitable  work  in
    Nigeria.

15.  I therefore conclude that the determination  of  the  judge  dismissing
    this appeal both under the Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



