

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11672/2014

                                                         IA/11673/2014

                                                         IA/10144/2014

                                                         IA/11675/2014

                                                         IA/11674/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 19th November 2015                           |On 30th December 2015      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    mr hussain karamat - first respondent
                   mrs fameeda karamat - second respondent
                    miss maria karamat - third respondent
                   mr zeeshan karamat - fourth respondent
                   miss haleema karamat - fifth respondent
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs U Sood, of Counsel instructed by Trent Centre
                    for Human Rights

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) which in a  decision  promulgated
    on 17th November 2014 allowed the appeals of  the  Respondents  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal of 20th January  2014  to  grant  them
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK and giving  directions  for  their
    removal under Section 10 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  allowed  the  Respondents'  appeals  by
    reference to their Article 8 ECHR rights. It  found  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to be disproportionate.

 3. For the sake of clarity, I shall throughout this decision refer to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to the Respondents  as  "the
    Appellants"; this reflects their respective positions before the FtT.

Background

 4. By way of background, the first and second Appellants are  husband  and
    wife. The  remaining  Appellants  are  their  children.  They  are  all
    citizens of Pakistan born respectively 1st January  1961,  1st  January
    1971, 29th July 1992, 25th June 1996 and 5th February 1999. It will  be
    seen from those dates of birth  that  the  first  four  Appellants  are
    adults and since these are in-country appeals, they fall to be  treated
    as such. The fifth Appellant is a minor and because of that,  her  case
    encompasses different considerations.

 5. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2006 with valid entry
    as a Work  Permit  Holder.  His  wife  and  children  entered  on  21st
    September 2007 with valid leave as his dependents.

 6. Shortly after the entry of his dependents Mr Karamat's leave to  remain
    was curtailed. In fact the  curtailment  notice  took  effect  on  29th
    September 2007 which is only a week or thereabouts after his dependents
    arrived.

 7. Suffice to say that following that curtailment of his leave, neither Mr
    Karamat nor his dependents left the United Kingdom. They have  remained
    here since. The three children entered education on arrival.

 8. Mr Karamat then made various applications to remain here; none of those
    applications were granted. The latest one made on 4th April 2013  forms
    the basis of the refusal made by the Respondent on 20th January 2014.

 9. It is clear therefore that all Appellant's are in  the  United  Kingdom
    without permission and their status is precarious to say the least.

10. The present applications made by the Appellants for indefinite leave to
    remain were refused because the Respondent considered that they did not
    meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In reaching her decision the  Respondent  took  into
    account that the family are  all  nationals  of  Pakistan.  They  would
    return there as a family unit. There were no exceptional  circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules under Article
    8 ECHR and they had remained here without leave.

11. Their appeals came before FtT Judge Shimmin who heard evidence from all
    Appellants. He also accepted a concession made on their behalf by their
    representative, that none of them could meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He accepted  that  concession  and  made  a  finding
    reflecting the same [20] but then went on to allow  the  appeals  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

12. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal.  Permission
    was granted by the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:

         "On the  17th  November  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
         allowed the appeals against the refusal of the applications for ILR
         and direction for the removal of this family from the  UK  pursuant
         to section 10 Immigration Act 1971 on  the  basis  they  were  over
         stayers. The Judge assessed the merits of the claim by reference to
         Article 8 ECHR and found the decision not to be proportionate.

         Mr Karamat Hussain (DOB 1-01-1961) applied for  ILR.  He  named  in
         that application Fameeda Kuser (01-01-71) Zeeshan  Karamat  (25-06-
         96)  and  Haleema  Karmat  (sic)  (05-02-99)  as  dependants.   The
         dependant's (sic) applications were refused in line  in  accordance
         with paragraph 322(1) of the Rules. The application was  considered
         and refused by reference to the Immigration Rules  on  both  family
         and private life grounds. It was found as part of  that  assessment
         that the family could return to Pakistan as  a  unit  and  continue
         their life there. The application for Maria Karamat was  considered
         and refused by reference to the Rules. Maria was born  on  29-07-92
         and is therefore an adult. No member of this family  has  leave  to
         remain and are nationals of Pakistan.

         Before the Judge it was conceded that the decisions under the Rules
         were correct and could not be appealed. In paragraph 48  the  judge
         states that as the appellants do not come within the Rules  he  was
         required to consider the claim by reference to  Razgar.  The  Judge
         proceeds thereafter to allow the appeal claiming  the  decision  is
         not proportionate and not in the best interests of the children  by
         reference to matters that were arguably considered  when  assessing
         the requirements of the Rules, which were found not to  enable  the
         applicants to succeed as accepted by their own representative.

         ...in a non deport case there  is  no  need  to  undertake  a  full
         assessment under Article 8 ECHR unless there are  article  (sic)  8
         issues raised that  have  not  been  adequately  addressed  by  the
         consideration under the Rules. In  this  case  the  judge  arguably
         erred in failing to address his mind to such an  approach.  It  was
         accepted that family life was not in  issue  as  the  family  could
         return together. The private life failed  as  the  requirements  of
         276ADE could not be met and the reality of returning  as  a  family
         was considered in relation to EX.1 and it found not  to  warrant  a
         grant of leave.

         The judge considered section 117 but this requires a full balancing
         assessment to be undertaken which  is  arguably  missing  from  the
         determination.

         The grounds are arguable."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide  initially  whether  the  FtT
    decision discloses an error of law requiring the  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

13. I heard submissions from both representatives; Mrs Pettersen on  behalf
    of the Respondent and  Mrs  Sood  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.  Mrs
    Pettersen relied in the main on the grounds seeking  permission  which,
    she said, fully sets out the material flaws in the FtT's decision.  She
    highlighted the following:

      . The FtT makes a material error of fact because it  deals  with  the
        third and fourth Appellants as minors when in fact at the  time  of
        the hearing before it both were adults and therefore they remain in
        the UK as adults without leave.

      . A failure on the part of the FtT to explain why the current appeals
        justify consideration outside the Rules, such as to allow the Judge
        to consider an Article 8 assessment.

      . Even  if  there  were  sufficient  reasons  to  justify  the  Judge
        venturing into an Article 8 ECHR assessment, he has not carried out
        a proper balancing exercise under Article 8 by reference to Section
        117b of the Rules.  He is obliged to do  so.  The  decision  should
        therefore be set aside and remade dismissing all appeals.

14. Mrs Sood relied upon her Rule 24 Response. This included a copy of  the
    skeleton argument which had been  put  before  the  FtT.  Her  Rule  24
    Response appeared to take issue with and criticise  the  UT  Judge  who
    granted permission. The criticism appears to relate back to preliminary
    points which were taken before the FtT, in  that  the  third  Appellant
    Maria Karamat, had had her status revoked.

15. Point 5 of her Rule 24 Response states that it is of note that the  UTJ
    had also not realised  that  the  "seven  year  rule"  applied  to  the
    Appellants who had all come to the UK in 2007 as minors.

16. She also submitted that  the  Respondent  throughout  in  her  decision
    making, had failed to properly analyse the  Educational  Psychologist's
    Report which covered the children's education and  career  pathways  to
    Article 8.   She  criticised  the  FtT  and  the  UT  permission  grant
    likewise.

17. Mrs Pettersen sought permission to respond.  In her  further  response,
    she said that essentially the issue before came down to whether or  not
    it would be reasonable to expect the fifth Appellant, who is  the  only
    minor left before me, to leave the  UK  (along  with  her  family)  and
    whether the Judge erred in his approach on the need to undertake a full
    assessment under Article 8 ECHR.

Is There an Error of Law?

18. I am satisfied that the decision of Judge Shimmin must be set aside for
    legal error and the decision remade and  I  set  out  my  findings  and
    reasons for this conclusion below.

19. As I understood it,  the  Respondent's  challenge  to  Judge  Shimmin's
    decision is two fold. First the Judge misdirected  himself  in  law  in
    failing to follow the correct legal  approach  in  the  proportionality
    assessment. Secondly there was insufficient reasoning to show that  the
    Judge had considered Section 117 as he must do by  undertaking  a  full
    balancing exercise and showing that the factors contained  in  117  (1)
    the "maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest" was addressed by him beyond his merely saying so at  [45].  I
    find those challenges are made out. Therefore the  FtT  has  materially
    erred to the extent that the decision must be set aside and remade.

Remaking the Decision

20. Both representatives were of the view that should I find  an  error  of
    law in the FtTs decision, I would  be  in  a  position  to  remake  the
    decision myself; because there was no further evidence  to  put  before
    me. The only other point Mrs Sood addressed me upon  was  to  emphasise
    that I should have regard to the two Educational Psychologists  Reports
    dated 2012 and 2014.  She submitted  that  on  the  strength  of  those
    reports the appeals should be allowed.

Consideration

21. The evidence before me in these appeals amounts  to  this.  Mr  Karamat
    says that because his family came to the UK in 2007, there  is  nowhere
    now for them to return to in Pakistan.  He left his eldest son  in  the
    "family home". He claims, his (Mr Karamat's) brother has now taken over
    that house and  become  "the  owner"  of  the  property.  He  says  his
    daughters cannot return to Pakistan because  they  have  had  extensive
    education here and are now liberal thinking.  It would be difficult for
    them to adjust to life in  Pakistan  and  they  would  be  viewed  with
    suspicion because of their Western outlook.

22. He says in addition he would have to arrange a marriage for  his  elder
    daughter Maria. Both Zeeshan his son and Haleema his youngest  daughter
    wish to continue in higher education; the family could not afford to do
    this in Pakistan.

23. The children have made lots of friends here, Maria works voluntarily in
    the local community. In addition the children speak English  and  would
    not be able to communicate fluently in Urdu.

24. The Educational Psychologist's Report  comes  to  the  conclusion  that
    after many continuous years of living in the  UK  it  would  be  highly
    detrimental to the education of the two younger children in  particular
    (Zeeshan and Haleema) as well as their health, physical  and  emotional
    wellbeing to return to Pakistan.  It  does  however  temper  that  with
    saying whilst it is certainly in the best interests of the children  to
    remain with their parents it is not in their best interests  to  return
    them to Pakistan where they would struggle to  integrate  educationally
    and adjust to life there.

25. An update report from Miss S Noray dated July 2014 outlines that so far
    as Haleema is concerned, she is part-way through her GCSEs and this  is
    a crucial time in her education. That report does go on to say  Zeeshan
    and Haleema would not be able to pursue a higher level of education due
    to lack of financial resources. It outlines that Mr  Karamat  does  not
    work in the UK and that the family are dependent upon charity.  It  did
    not specify the source of charity.

26. Not surprisingly Haleema wishes to remain in the United Kingdom, partly
    with the aim  of  pursuing  higher  education.  Zeeshan  likewise.  The
    reports made no reference to who  would  fund  their  higher  education
    here.

27. So far as the evidence is concerned, Mr Karamat came to  the  UK  as  a
    Chef. By his own evidence he says that he left a life and career behind
    in Pakistan. He sold his share in the family  home.  He  says  that  he
    cannot go back to Pakistan because he  has  no  permanent  home  there.
    However the plain fact is he has been in the United Kingdom since  2007
    without leave. As a chef, it is hard to  see  what  prevents  him  from
    returning to Pakistan and using that skill to obtain employment  there.
    It is what he id in the past.

28. Much was made of the children's inability to speak and/or write Urdu. I
    do not find this to be either credible nor  in  any  event  a  form  of
    obstacle preventing the family from  returning.  I  note  that  neither
    parent has shown that they have skills in the  English  language  since
    neither has passed the ELTS Test. It is clear from the evidence  before
    me that the children communicate with their parents and to do  so  they
    must communicate with them mainly in Urdu. In any  event  I  note  that
    Zeeshan has passed GCSE Urdu. Added to this, although it could be  said
    that they were young when they left Pakistan, Maria left aged 15 years,
    Zeeshan aged 11 years  and  Haleema  9  years  old.  I  do  not  accept
    therefore that they did not acquire some Urdu  language  skills  whilst
    living in Pakistan. I am satisfied that they have  retained  sufficient
    skills to show that communication there will  not  be  an  obstacle  to
    them.

29. Section 117B sets out the  public  interest  considerations  which  are
    applicable in all cases where an Article 8 assessment is carried out:


              "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in
all cases
         (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.

         (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    United Kingdom."


30. Paragraph 117D provides interpretation. It is now settled law that  the
    best interests of a child are the primary consideration and are  to  be
    considered first. It is also trite law that a period of seven years  is
    taken as a threshold point  when  longevity  of  residence  may  render
    removal of a child disproportionate. However this  principle  has  been
    tempered by  both  the  contents  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    developing jurisprudence, which imposes a "reasonableness test".

31. Therefore it cannot be said that seven years  continuous  residence  of
    itself, is sufficient to outweigh other factors involved in the  public
    interest consideration.

32. So far as Haleema is concerned she is now 16 years  of  age.  As  often
    happens in these cases time has moved on since the  matter  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. She has now completed her GCSEs and  therefore
    is not at a critical stage of any education. She has expressed  a  wish
    to the Educational Psychologist that she would like to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. That is hardly surprising.  She  wishes  to  go  on  to
    higher education -  however  that  would  of  necessity  be  at  public
    expense.

33. What therefore of countervailing factors? Haleema's  parents  have  now
    been in the United Kingdom  for  a  considerable  period  of  time.  Mr
    Karamat entered in 2006, lawfully as a Work Permit Holder and sent  for
    his family to join him. However very soon after his family  joined  him
    his leave was curtailed and he was informed that he  should  now  leave
    the United Kingdom together with his family. He did not do so.  Instead
    he made several further applications all of  which  were  refused,  but
    still he and his family did not make arrangements to leave.  They  have
    therefore been here without leave for several years.

34. It is hard to see how  this  family  maintains  itself  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Educational Psychologist says that they live  on  charity.
    That may be so. But the upshot  is  that  Mr  Karamat  is  not  working
    because he has no right to do so. There is no credible evidence that if
    allowed  to  stay  Mr  Karamat  would  be  able  to  secure  employment
    sufficient to meet the Rules.  From the evidence before me  it  appears
    that neither Mr nor Mrs Karamat speak English to the standard  required
    under the Rules. Whilst I accept that there is no claim for benefits by
    this family, nevertheless they are able to enjoy the  benefits  of  the
    NHS and more particularly the British education system, to  which  they
    are not contributing.

35. Whilst this  Tribunal  will  always  hesitate  to  interfere  with  the
    reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal, in these appeals I find  the  FtT
    has placed too much emphasis upon the fact that the  third  fourth  and
    fifth Appellants have been educated  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  draw
    strength for this from the guidance given in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 where the Court of Appeal considered  the  fact  that  the
    education which the children had enjoyed in the United Kingdom as  that
    which  they  might  experience  in  their   home   country   was   "not
    determinative".  Lewison LJ noted:

         "...I cannot see that the desirability of being educated at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents. Just as  we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

36. The same principles apply in the present cases. As in EV it may well be
    said that the FtT considered, as  did  the  Educational  Psychologists,
    that it would be in the best interests of Haleema and her two  siblings
    to remain here and continue their education in the UK. However  such  a
    consideration, in circumstances where family  life  with  siblings  and
    parents continue abroad,  will  rarely  outweigh  the  public  interest
    concerned with the maintenance of immigration control.

37. There will of course  be  disruption  to  the  family's  life  but  the
    evidence in these appeals falls far short of that  required  to  enable
    the  Appellants  to  say  that  such  a  course  of  action  would   be
    unreasonable, where the children's parents whom they will accompany  to
    live in Pakistan as a family, have no immigration status.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  17th
November 2014 is set aside. I  remake  the  decision.  The  appeals  of  the
Appellants are dismissed under the Immigration Rules. The appeals  are  also
dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR)

No anonymity direction is made

Signature
                                                                    Dated



Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


