

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 11134-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   28.11.2013|
|on    28.11.2013                              |sent out:        5.12.2013   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                              Brij Mohan SHARMA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Alex Burrett (counsel instructed by Charles Simmons)
For the respondent: Miss Emilie Martin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mark Blundell), sitting at Hatton Cross on 9 August, to
     a tier 4 (general) student migrant appeal by a citizen of India,  born
    21 July 1987. The appellant's previous application for leave to  remain
    had  been  rejected,  on  the  basis  that  he  had  not  included  the
    photographs required by the Rules; but the judge found that he had done
    so, and, following Basnet (validity of application - respondent)  Nepal
    [2012] UKUT 113 (IAC), was entitled  to  have  a  further  application,
    refused on its merits on 20 February 2013, considered on the basis that
    he had an established presence in this country.  Since  the  presenting
    officer did not suggest that the appellant was not entitled to  further
    leave to remain, provided his previous  application  for  it  had  been
    validly made, the judge allowed his appeal.



 2. The judge's decision was challenged on the basis  that  Basnet   was  a
    case  of  alleged  non-payment  of  fees;  but   this   one   concerned
    photographs: furthermore, the appellant's fee had been refunded to him,
    so no fee had been paid. Miss Martin however was unable to suggest  any
    difference in principle between this case and Basnet;  nor  can  I  see
    any. She did not take any point on the refund, which in my view  was  a
    unilateral act on the part of the Home Office which could  not  deprive
    the appellant of a right of appeal, if he had one in the first place.

 3. Miss Martin went on to refer to Miah &  others  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261,
    disposing of what used to be called the 'near-miss' argument. I do  not
    however need to say any more about that decision,  or  to  the  further
    treatment of it in Patel & ors [2013] UKSC 72,  to  which  Miss  Martin
    also referred me. The reason is that in my  judgment  this  was  not  a
    'near-miss' case at all: the appellant claimed fully to  have  complied
    with all the requirements of the Rules, and  the  judge  found  in  his
    favour on that.

 4. Returning to Basnet, the principle is clear: the appellate  authorities
    have jurisdiction to decide whether an  application  has  been  validly
    made, and to allow an appeal where it has  been  rejected  as  invalid.
    There might have been some room for argument as to the  effect  on  the
    current application  of  regarding  the  previous  one  as  valid;  but
    sensibly, neither the presenting officer  before  the  judge  nor  Miss
    Martin took any point on that.

 5. In my view the judge was right to assume jurisdiction  to  resolve  the
    simple question of fact as to whether the  appellant  had  put  in  the
    necessary photographs with his application or  not,  and  there  is  no
    criticism either of the way he did so, or of the consequences  he  drew
    from it.

Home Office appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



