
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11242/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              Mr nadeem shaukat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J L Blair, counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond, promulgated on 22 April 2016. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on 15 September 2016.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  October  2004  with
    leave to enter as a student valid until 31 December  2006.  That  leave
    was sequentially extended in the same capacity until 10 August 2010. On
    9 August 2009 the appellant  unsuccessfully  sought  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4  migrant.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    allowed, following which he  was  granted  leave  to  remain  until  22
    December  2011.  That  leave  was  extended  until  12  July  2013  but
    subsequently revoked to expire on 22  January  2013  as  the  sponsor's
    licence was revoked. On 11 December 2012, the appellant sought  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 migrant. That application was refused on 26
    February 2013. His appeal against that decision  was  unsuccessful  and
    his appeal rights exhausted on 12 May 2014.

 4. On 20 May the appellant unsuccessfully sought permission to  apply  for
    judicial review. On 21 July 2014, the appellant  made  a  human  rights
    application, which was refused with no right of appeal  on  10  October
    2014. On 20 October 2014, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of long residence. It is  the
    refusal of this application which is the subject of this appeal.

 5. The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  under  paragraphs
    276B(i)(a) and (v) because the appellant had not had at least 10 years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom and  because  he  had
    overstayed in excess of 28 days after his leave expired on 12 May  2014
    and prior to making the application on 21 July 2014 as well as the fact
    that his  total  period  of  overstaying  amounted  to  161  days.  The
    respondent decided not to exercise discretion in his  favour  regarding
    the gap in his lawful residence.  The application was  also  considered
    under Appendix FM to the Rules on the basis of the appellant's  private
    life, however he was considered not to meet any of the  requirement  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  Rules  and  there  were  said  to  be  no
    exceptional circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  11  September  2015,
    only the  appellant  and  his  friend  Qasir  Akhbar  Malik  gave  oral
    evidence. The judge found that the appellant could not meet the 10-year
    residence requirement and that the respondent was right not to exercise
    discretion in his favour regarding the period of overstaying in  excess
    of 28 days. The judge considered the appellant's  claimed  relationship
    with a married mother of two but found that he was unable to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules relating to partners. He also  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds outside the Rules.




The grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal were  in  the  form  of  a  statement
    signed by the appellant. In essence,  he  disagreed  with  the  judge's
    findings regarding his lack of progress in his studies and rejection of
    his claimed relationship. He highlighted the delay between the  hearing
    and the decision and reasons being  promulgated  and  argued  that  the
    judge had misunderstood some of his evidence.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on a different  basis  to  the  issues
    raised by the  appellant,  namely  that  the  proceedings  were  unfair
    because of the absence of evidence  from  the  respondent  and  a  Home
    Office presenting officer.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response was received on 11 October 2016.  The
    respondent  opposed  the  appeal  and  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge appropriately directed himself by addressing  the  claim
    under the Rules; the claim that the appellant's previous solicitors had
    been negligent as well as  Article  8,  by  giving  cogent  reasons  by
    reference to the documentary evidence before the Tribunal.

The hearing

10. Ms Blair relied on her skeleton argument submitted immediately prior to
    the hearing. She confirmed that the appellant drafted his  own  grounds
    and that the judge granting permission had drawn out  one  point  which
    was arguable, relating to the evidential void  as  to  the  appellant's
    education history.  She  argued  that  the  respondent  had  raised  no
    credibility issues in relation to the application for discretion to  be
    exercised the appellant's favour over the 5-month gap in his residence.



11. Ms Blair submitted that the appellant could not  have  known  that  the
    judge would take an adverse view of his studies and she  asserted  that
    the appellant's original certificates were with  the  Home  Office.  At
    [28], the judge referred to the "meagre" bundle  from  the  respondent.
    The basis of the appellant's request for discretion was an error  by  a
    previous representative. She argued that the judge acted  in  a  manner
    which was procedurally unfair, in that he ought to have  adjourned  the
    appeal for the Home Office to be represented. Ms Blair advised me  that
    it was her understanding that the issues of (as she put it)  dishonesty
    raised by the judge were never put  to  the  appellant.  On  this,  she
    conceded that there was no note nor record  of  the  hearing  from  the
    appellant's representative at the First-tier and that it was  difficult
    to ascertain this from the judge's decision.

12. Ms Blair relied on Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  000702,  arguing  that  the
    judge failed to take into consideration a previous favourable decision.
    She conceded that this decision was not before the judge  and  she  was
    unable to state what the issue in the previous appeal was and  why  the
    appellant had succeeded. Ms Blair also conceded that the appellant  had
    lost a previous appeal. She emphasised that credibility was not  raised
    in the notice of decision and it was not open to the judge take it into
    issue. This indicated a lack of  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  Article  8
    findings. The judge made a series of assumptions and  justice  was  not
    seen to be done.

13. Mr Avery reminded me that the appellant did not meet the long residence
    Rules and he also had to make out a case as to  why  discretion  should
    have been exercised differently. The appellant had not shown  that  the
    Secretary of State erred in not using her discretion in his  favour  or
    that there were compelling reasons for granting leave to remain outside
    the Rules. He argued that it was a misreading of the  decision  to  say
    that the judge blamed the respondent for the gaps in the  evidence.  At
    [27], the judge said that the appellant should have provided it. If the
    appellant wished to  rely  on  a  previous  decision,  he  should  have
    produced it and not the respondent.

14. The judge's adverse findings did not solely relate to  the  appellant's
    education but encompassed other aspects of his case as well.  Mr  Avery
    asked me to note that the appellant was represented at the hearing  and
    if there had been an issue about a lack of  evidence  or  other  issues
    arising from the appellant's evidence, an adjournment could  have  been
    sought. The appellant's representative on the day ought  to  have  been
    alive to the issues presented by the evidence  and  addressed  them  in
    submissions. In his grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  admitted  the
    potential for misrepresentation as to the evidence in relation to ACCA.
    The judge made proper findings regarding the  appellant's  relationship
    to his witness, absence of evidence of where funds  emanated  from  and
    inconsistences regarding the appellant's claimed partner. He  asked  me
    to note that no objection had been made to the judge's handling of  the
    appeal on the day, there had been no request  for  an  adjournment  and
    even at the error of law hearing, there  was  no  further  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claims of unfairness.

15. In reply, Ms Blair maintained that the  appellant's  certificates  were
    with the respondent; that the appellant's representative was not  aware
    what was in issue  at  the  end  of  the  hearing  and  in  asking  for
    additional documents to be sent following the hearing,  the  judge  had
    not asked for  educational  certificates.  It  was  irrelevant  whether
    another  judge  would  come  to  a  different  decision  owing  to  the
    unfairness.

16. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision as to whether or  not
    there was a material error of law.

Decision on error of law

17. It is obvious from a proper reading of the judge's decision that it was
    the evidential void in the documents submitted by the  appellant  which
    was referred to at [27] of the decision. It was the  appellant's  case,
    as set out in his witness statement, that he would have sought  further
    leave to remain as a student before his section 3C leave expired had he
    known that the judicial review application did not further  extend  his
    leave. He also stated that he hoped that he would  not  be  denied  the
    chance to finish  his  present  studies.  The  judge  did  not  err  in
    considering the case put forward by the appellant. Furthermore,  it  is
    apparent from [23-26] that the judge raised his concerns as to the lack
    of progress or achievement during  the  many  years  during  which  the
    appellant had been residing in the United Kingdom, mainly as a student.
    The appellant was not prevented from responding to the issues raised by
    the judge in relation to his education.

18. On the contrary, as a result of appellant explaining that he was taking
    various ACCA papers but did not have any evidence of this with him, the
    judge gave him a further 7 days to submit it and proceeded to  consider
    the evidence which was  sent  after  the  hearing  [26].  In  the  same
    paragraph, the judge writes that it was unclear what a "CBE" was; there
    was a question mark as to what the "ABE"  qualifications  were  and  he
    also noted  that  no  performance  objectives  were  completed  and  in
    relation to time "0 out of 36 months completed."  It  is  in  the  next
    paragraph that the judge refers to the evidential void in this  appeal.
    He did not err in doing so, given that evidence sent by  the  appellant
    after the appeal left many questions unanswered. The judge's  reference
    to the meagre respondent's bundle was more of an aside and at  [29]  he
    returned to the  theme  of  the  failure  of  the  appellant's  current
    representatives,  in  obtaining  his  full  file  from   the   previous
    representative or to seek an intervention from the Law Society in order
    to do so.

19.  The  point  made  by  Ms  Blair  regarding  the  appellant's  original
    certificates is not supported by  any  evidence.  The  judge  does  not
    appear to dispute the claim that the appellant was awarded a series  of
    unremarkable diplomas during the first 9 years of his residence in  the
    United Kingdom. Indeed, at [23] he comments on a number of certificates
    submitted by the appellant, commenting  that  this  was  "possibly  the
    least that could have been expected after night on 9 years of  studying
    in the UK." As  Mr  Avery  submitted,  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    complaint by counsel at the hearing as to procedural unfairness.  There
    are no notes of the hearing from counsel  on  the  day,  no  subsequent
    witness statement and the  appellant's  solicitors  made  no  complaint
    about the hearing when they took advantage  of  the  judge's  offer  to
    consider a  substantial  quantity  of  additional  material  after  the
    hearing. While it is true to say that the refusal letter did not  raise
    credibility, the judge cannot be criticised for his assessment  of  the
    evidence before him regarding the appellant's education,  the  bulk  of
    which related to the appellant's claim for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds outside the Rules.

20. Ms Blair focused on the evidential void remarked upon by the  judge  in
    relation to the appellant's education in the United Kingdom.  Yet  this
    was far from the only issue in the appeal. The judge set  out  detailed
    criticisms of the evidence, both documentary and oral, of the  witness,
    Mr Malik. I am satisfied that these  issues  were  also  drawn  to  the
    attention of  the  appellant's  representative  because  a  significant
    amount of material was sent to the judge following  the  hearing  which
    related to Mr Malik's business.

21. The judge also noted a large number of inconsistencies in  relation  to
    the appellant's claimed relationship with a Ms  Kalsoom,  who  did  not
    attend the hearing. There is no criticism made  in  relation  to  these
    findings.  Similarly, there are no criticisms of the  judge's  findings
    in relation to the appellant's claim to have been disinherited  by  his
    family.

22. This was not a case where the judge reached findings on adverse matters
    without  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  respond  or   his
    representative to make submissions.

23. The judge's decision and reasons expressly refers to questions  put  by
    the judge to the appellant. While the representatives' submissions  are
    not set out in the decision, there is no requirement of the judge to do
    so. In any event, there is no evidence to support the  submission  that
    there was no opportunity to respond to  matters  raised  by  the  judge
    during the course of the hearing. Ultimately,  the  appellant  put  the
    subject of his past and future education into  evidence  along  with  a
    number of other matters. In these circumstances, it  matters  not  that
    the respondent took no issue with his education history. The judge made
    no error in assiduously assessing that evidence.  In fact, at [56], the
    judge, after discussion of the appellant's criticism  of  his  previous
    solicitors, his studies and the substantial income he  had  accumulated
    in the United Kingdom, made a  global,  favourable  finding  that  "the
    appellant was honest and credible in this context." The judge's mention
    of dishonesty  is  solely  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding why he required additional time in the United  Kingdom.  This
    evidence was that his ACCA would be  finished  within  a  year  of  the
    hearing, that his  witness  needed  his  help  and  that  he  had  been
    disinherited. I find that the appellant had the opportunity to  respond
    to all these matters both during and after the hearing,  if  necessary.
    Indeed, the additional documentary evidence submitted by the  appellant
    after the hearing seriously undermined at  least  two  aspects  of  his
    claim.

24. Ms Blair's written submissions argue that the appellant would not  have
    been prepared to talk about his educational background at  the  hearing
    as this matter was no in issue. On this,  I  find  that  the  appellant
    ought to have been in a strong position to tell the judge what  he  had
    achieved in the United Kingdom following such a protracted period as  a
    student. In fact, the appellant was able  to  respond  to  the  judge's
    enquiries and  submit  further  evidence  post-hearing.  I,  therefore,
    consider there to be no force in this submission. The issue as  to  the
    whereabouts of the original certificates is in fact  a  non-issue.  The
    judge did not dispute that the appellant had been  awarded  them,  only
    that they were of little real value, concluding at [54], "The appellant
    was allowed entry to study, and  it  is  not  possible  to  see,  quite
    simply, that he has put this to good use for some 9 years plus."

25. There is no challenge to the judge's finding at [56] that the appellant
    had not achieved  10  years'  lawful  residence  at  the  time  of  the
    application and thus it was not possible to see how discretion could be
    exercised. This was indeed the case. In reality, there was  no  gap  in
    the appellant's residence, just a failure to reach  the  10-year  point
    because  his  appeal  rights  were  exhausted  5  months   before   the
    application  was  made.  Accordingly,  the  judge's  multiple   adverse
    findings were more relevant in relation to the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim outside the Rules. After a lengthy and careful assessment of  all
    the evidence, the judge concluded that none of the requirements of  the
    Rules were met, that there were no exceptional circumstances  and  that
    the decision to remove him was proportionate, considering section  117B
    of  the  2002  Act,  as  amended.  The  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's  academic  non-achievement  formed  only   part   of   that
    assessment. The judge's findings were entirely open to him.

26. Permission was not granted in relation to the delay point and  I  heard
    no submissions in relation to this, albeit there is a  brief  reference
    to it in Ms Blair's skeleton. I will say that the length and detail  of
    the decision  in  question,  including  many  references  to  the  oral
    evidence gives no indication  that  the  length  of  time  between  the
    hearing and promulgation of the decision led to any error on  the  part
    of the judge.

27. The decision of Judge Raymond is upheld.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed   Date 4 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

