
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11839/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2013                                |5 June 2013                  |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ASGHAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

1.    This appeal comes before me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal by First Tribunal Judge Landes on 15 April 2013.

2.    The appellant is a Pakistani citizen  born  on  9  December  1970.  He
    seeks an extension as a Tier 4 Migrant. His appeal was dismissed on the
    papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald by way of a determination
    promulgated on 16 August 2012.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  judge  should
    arguably have remitted the appeal to the Secretary of State given  that
    following Ahmadi [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC) her decision under section  47
    was  unlawful.   The  judge  commented  that  the  other  grounds  were
    "extremely thin" but did not rule out argument on them.

4.    Essentially, the case is that the  appellant's  college  notified  the
    respondent on 8 November 2011 that he had not commenced studying  there
    and, having confirmed that the appellant had made no other  application
    for leave to remain, the Secretary of State decided on 3  May  2012  to
    curtail his leave. The appellant maintained that  the  college  made  a
    mistake and produced two letters dated 9  and  25  February  2012  (the
    second being addressed to the UKBA)  to  say  that  the  appellant  was
    attending college and that a mistake had been made.

5.    The judge was not happy with the reliability of the letters  and  gave
    his reasons for this at  paragraphs  12-15.  He  dismissed  the  appeal
    accordingly.

6.    The appellant argues that the judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    letters, that he had not explained why it was  important  to  have  the
    originals and that, as the appeal was lodged  on  16  May  2012  before
    (sic) the commencement of section 19 of the Borders Act 2007, the  UKBA
    was in a position to have sight of the letters. It is also argued  that
    the judge failed to consider Article 8 and should have found  that  the
    section 47 removal was unlawful. The appellant  also  argues  that  the
    judge did not address his Article 8 claim.

Error of law hearing

7.    At the commencement of the hearing, Ms Daykin sought  leave  to  amend
    the grounds of the application which after hearing from Mrs Vidyadharan
    and noting her objections I allowed her to  do.  Ms  Daykin  relied  on
    Thakur (PBS decision - common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
    00151 (IAC) and Naved (Student - fairness - notice  of  points)  [2012]
    UKUT 14 (IAC) and argued that the issue of unfairness had  been  raised
    as part of the appellant's original grounds  of  appeal  and  that  the
    judge had referred to them at paragraph 7  of  his  determination.  She
    submitted that according to fairness principles, the Secretary of State
    should have alerted the appellant to the problem over his  alleged  non
    attendance before curtailing his leave. She had not  done  so  and  the
    judge had failed to resolve this issue. She conceded that  the  grounds
    on the section 19 point were  unintelligible  but  suggested  that  the
    author might have meant that the evidence predated the decision and  so
    should have been considered. She also relied on the unlawfulness of the
    decision under sections 47. She asked that the decision be set aside.

8.    Mrs Vidyadharan conceded that the decision  to  remove  the  appellant
    under section 47 had been  unlawful.  She  argued,  however,  that  the
    substantive matters had been properly addressed. The  judgments  relied
    upon by the  appellant  did  not  deal  with  the  situation  where  an
    appellant had not attended college. She pointed out that the  appellant
    could have adduced other evidence to show that he  had  been  attending
    college such as coursework, a letter  from  a  teacher  or  examination
    results but had not done so. The judge  had  given  ample  reasons  for
    raising concerns about the letters and for rejecting the credibility of
    the evidence. There had been no explanation as to how  the  'error'  by
    the college had occurred and no explanation from the  appellant  as  to
    how he obtained the letters from the  college.  The  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

9.    Ms Daykin replied. She maintained that the issue was that of  fairness
    and of the obligation on the respondent to alert  the  appellant  to  a
    circumstance which he was not aware  of.  Given  the  contents  of  the
    college letters, the appellant  had  not  considered  it  necessary  to
    adduce further documentary evidence.

10.   At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which  I
    now give.

Findings and conclusions

11.   I have considered with care the submissions  made,  the  evidence  and
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination. The Secretary  of  State
    made a  combined  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  and  to  issue
    directions for the appellant's removal under section 47.  Although  the
    immigration decision is not in the papers before me, a letter of 3  May
    2012 suggests that the decisions were taken  simultaneously.  Following
    Ahmadi (op cit) this was unlawful and Mrs Vidyadharan accepts  this  is
    so. However, the decision to  remove  does  not  render  the  variation
    decision invalid. What it means is that the decision  to  give  removal
    directions was not properly made. The judge erred in failing to address
    this point (although it was not raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to
    him); what he should have done was to allow the appeal to that  limited
    extent. His failure to do so was an error of law.

12.   I now deal with the substantive appeal. The thrust  of  the  arguments
    made by Counsel concerned fairness, or the lack of it, on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State. It is argued that she should have contacted the
    appellant about the college notification prior to curtailing his leave.
    The argument is based on the two letters from Oxbridge College of 9 and
    24 February 2012 adduced by the appellant in support of his appeal  and
    on the reliability of those letters without which the appellant has  no
    case.

13.   The judge considered the  two  letters  at  paragraphs  12-16  of  the
    determination. He was not happy with their reliability, found that  the
    respondent had been right to curtail  the  appellant's  leave  for  non
    attendance and dismissed the appeal. It is argued that  the  judge  did
    not resolve the issue of whether the respondent should  have  contacted
    him prior to curtailing his leave. This  was  a  point  argued  in  the
    grounds of appeal as the judge noted (paragraph 7). In paragraph  9  he
    expressly considered the argument and the letters  adduced  to  see  if
    they would have  made  any  difference  to  the  respondent's  decision
    (paragraph 8). If the judge made any errors of law in his consideration
    of the two letters, then the appellant's argument about fairness  would
    have some mileage. However, if the letters were correctly found  to  be
    unreliable then the fact  that  the  respondent  did  not  contact  the
    appellant before curtailing his leave would be of no significance as he
    would not have succeeded in his attempts to remain here in any case.

 14.  I have been given the originals of the two  letters  dated  9  and  25
    February 2012. The first is a To Whom it May  Concern  letter  and  the
    second is addressed to the UKBA, Tier  4  Sheffield,  with  no  further
    address or postcode. The respondent  has  never  received  copies.  The
    appellant maintains he was given these letters by the college after  he
    received the refusal letter. It is not explained how he could have  the
    originals if at least one purports to have been sent to the UKBA; there
    is nothing on the letters to confirm they are certified copies  of  the
    originals rather than the originals themselves. It is also  unexplained
    why the college should have prepared these letters  and  kept  them  on
    file until the appellant allegedly approached them in May 2012 or  how,
    having notified the UKBA of the appellant's failure to attend  college,
    they suddenly realised, some months later, that they had made an error.



15.   The appellant claimed to have been attending  Oxbridge  College  based
    in the East End of London whilst he was living in Wembley. He was  said
    to be studying a 24 month PGDIT course which, according to the  CAS  of
    31 May 2011, commenced on 14 June 2011 and was due to end  on  14  June
    2013. I compare that letter with the two February letters.  Neither  of
    those two letters bears the second college endorsement that can be seen
    on the CAS. More significantly, the letter of  9  February  2012  gives
    wholly different commencement  and  completion  dates  to  the  CAS,  a
    different duration of the course (4 months as opposed to two years) and
    a different number of hours' attendance required each week. The  letter
    of 25 February 2012 appears to have  been  prepared  on  the  date  the
    appellant would have completed his course (if the  completion  date  on
    the 9 February letter is accepted) yet maintains that the appellant  is
    continuing his studies. These  matters  only  serve  to  reinforce  the
    judge's finding that the letters were unreliable.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that either of these letters had ever been forwarded  to  the
    UKBA and plainly he was right in his assumption given that neither  may
    be found on the respondent's file.  There  are  anomalies  between  the
    letters and the CAS and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    'mistake'  apparently  acknowledged  by  the  college  had   not   been
    explained. He also noted the long delay between the notification to the
    Secretary of State and the issue of the letter, without any explanation
    for what triggered same. Given the difficulties of these letters, their
    consideration by the respondent, had she alerted the appellant and seen
    these prior to the decision, would have made no difference at all. I do
    not therefore find that the judge erred in his approach to the evidence
    and I do not agree that he failed to resolve the matters raised by  the
    appellant in his original grounds of appeal.

16.   Whilst I accept that Article 8 was raised in the  appellant's  grounds
    of appeal, it was not pursued by Counsel in submissions before  me.  In
    any event, I note that the claim was limited to a private life  by  way
    of  studies.  No  other  details  are  provided  and  no  evidence  was
    submitted. It is difficult to see what findings the  judge  could  have
    made on a claim that was not pursued in any meaningful  way.  Moreover,
    as the judge found that the appellant had not been studying, there  was
    no basis on which a private life based on studies could have succeeded.



Decision

17.   The First-tier Tribunal did not make any errors of law with regard  to
    the substantive matters and the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules stands. However, I remake  the  decision  to  the
    extent that the appeal  is  allowed  on  the  limited  basis  that  the
    decision to remove the appellant under section 47 was unlawful.


Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
4 June 2013




