
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12850/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd November 2016                         |On 19th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Ms M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors (Merton High Street)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Ms M as the appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State challenges the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gurung-Thapa made on 13th June  2016  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal, together with her two dependent children born on 6th  September
    2000 and 28th May 2011 respectively, both under the  Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR)  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  27th  September
    1980 and after a series of failed EEA  applications  and  human  rights
    applications submitted further representations on  11th  February  2015
    and 16th February 2015 requesting that her case be considered on  human
    rights grounds.  That application for leave to remain on  human  rights
    grounds was considered by the Secretary of State and  refused  on  12th
    March 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State founded her challenge  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal on three grounds, namely:

Ground (i)

At paragraph 30 of the determination the Tribunal  found  that  because  the
    appellant was a single mother of two with no support  for  basic  needs
    and she would face very serious hardship on return to Nigeria.   Whilst
    it was recognised that the appellant may well face difficulties it  was
    submitted that there was simply no evidence to show that the  level  of
    these difficulties would be sufficiently high to meet the threshold  of
    very serious hardship.  The appellant is a Nigerian citizen as are  her
    children and she had never had settled status in the UK  but  continued
    to live in the UK and make unsuccessful claims.   Despite  or  possibly
    because of this she had brought one child into the UK and  given  birth
    to another in  the  UK  one  function  of  which  was  to  enhance  her
    immigration claims.

Ground (ii)

It was also submitted that the assessment under the Rules required a  global
    view and the Tribunal did not consider  what  treatment  the  appellant
    would receive in Nigeria  in  comparison  with  other  Nigerian  single
    parents with no support in Nigeria.  The appellant produced no evidence
    to show that there were no employment prospects for  the  appellant  in
    Nigeria or  there  was  no  welfare  support  structure  charitable  or
    otherwise or no means of remittances from the UK.  The Tribunal's brief
    consideration under the Rules was incomplete and unsustainable.

Ground (iii)

The third ground was that the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its  assessment  of
    Article 8 in setting forward  at  paragraphs  57  and  58.   There  was
    absolutely no regard to Section 117B and it was submitted  that  if  it
    had  that  it  would  have  made  a  very   different   proportionality
    assessment.  Both children are Nigerian,  neither  had  any  legitimate
    immigration status, neither had any entitlement to be in the UK.   Both
    of them are accessing different parts of the welfare state and  it  may
    be in their best interests to remain in the UK but this assessment  was
    only one aspect of the proportionality assessment and  the  conclusions
    set out at paragraph 60 of the determination simply failed  to  address
    Section 117B.

 4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on the basis
    that as the appellant had spent the first twenty years of her  life  in
    Nigeria and there was an absence of evidence as  to  the  circumstances
    she would encounter in Nigeria the first ground was arguable.   It  was
    noted that in fact Section 117B had been taken into  account.   It  was
    suggested that  subSections  (1)  and  (3)  to  (5)  told  against  the
    appellant and subSection 117B(2) was neutral.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Nath vigorously challenged the decision and
    requested that I read the refusal letter made by the Secretary of State
    carefully to place this application  in  context.   The  appellant  had
    produced no  evidence  of  employment  prospects  and  no  evidence  of
    charitable support.  There was no indication  of  how  she  would  fare
    compared with other single parents and the judge had made  findings  at
    paragraph 30 without basis.

 6. Mr Nath produced AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  and  argued
    that this case had not been considered.  The family would transfer as a
    family unit to Nigeria and the appellant's children could merely access
    the education and welfare state in Nigeria.  There was no detail to the
    assessment given by the judge.  None of the family members had status.

 7. Mr Harris submitted that the judge had found  the  appellant  credible.
    My attention was drawn to paragraph 14 where Mr Harris  submitted  that
    this raised the question  of  a  possible  trafficking  situation.   Mr
    Harris also submitted that the respondent had not attended the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and reminded me  that  it  was  an
    adversarial system  and  the  consequences  for  non-attendance  and  a
    failure to argue the case and a failure  to  submit  relevant  evidence
    should not result in the respondent raising disagreements  at  a  later
    date.  The appellant had put forward her case and the judge  had  found
    it easier to accept that case in the  absence  of  challenge  from  the
    respondent.

 8. The  judge  looked  very  carefully  at  paragraph  276ADE(6)  and  the
    assessment was detailed.  The judge concluded that there was a lack  of
    ties and the appellant faced destitution should she return with her two
    dependent children.  It was open to the judge to accept the case on the
    evidence which was before her.  From paragraph  24  onwards  the  judge
    engaged fully with the appellant's case that she had no ties and  as  a
    single mother without support would face exploitation.

 9. The judge had carefully considered the position  of  the  Secretary  of
    State by citing the Immigration Directorate Instructions  and  she  had
    specifically addressed the test  raised  in  those  instructions  which
    related to serious hardship.

10. The judge made reference to serious hardship and this was the  approach
    she adopted in her considerations recorded at  paragraphs  29  and  30.
    The respondent may not agree with what the judge's  findings  were  but
    that does not mean that  they  were  in  error.   The  context  of  her
    vulnerability and the risk should have been taken into account.

11. I was reminded that this was an 'old-style' appeal.

12. Nonetheless the judge had proceeded on the basis of Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  The assertion that the judge failed to take into account of
    Section 117B was flawed.  After delving into the best interests of  the
    children the judge specifically refers at paragraphs 45, 47 and  48  in
    relation to Part 5A.  She specifically engages at paragraph 50 with the
    linguistic issues and  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  not  self-
    sufficient financially.

13. The judge placed emphasis on the best interests  of  the  children  and
    found that these did in fact outweigh  the  factors  to  be  considered
    under Section 117B in Part 5.  It was not  necessarily  the  education,
    language or health that persuaded the  judge  to  grant  this  but  the
    disruption to the lives of the children.  She noted that  the  children
    had not been here for seven years but  they  had  been  present  during
    their important formative years.

14. I asked Mr Harris to address me in  relation  to  ground  (ii)  and  Mr
    Harris reminded me that  the  assessment  was  fact-sensitive  and  the
    appellant had given her own evidence which had  been  accepted  by  the
    judge and there was no requirement  of  to  provide  specific  evidence
    under the Rules in reference to paragraph 276ADE(iv) and the  appellant
    had given her own evidence of  her  personal  circumstances  which  the
    judge had accepted.

15. In response Mr Nath asked me  to  consider  the  lengthy  and  detailed
    reasons for refusal letter which is where the judge needed to  set  out
    the reasoning.  That letter had addressed the  facilities  in  Nigeria.
    The burden was on the appellant  to  show  that  she  had  reached  the
    threshold and she must show the facilities which were not available  in
    Nigeria.

16. There was a requirement to provide documentation and the judge had made
    findings in respect of her being a single parent but had not  addressed
    the evidence in the reasons for refusal letter, had  not  set  out  the
    facilities in Lagos and had failed to look at  relevant  parts  of  the
    evidence.

Conclusions

17. On a reading of the determination as a whole it is clear that the judge
    has set out the relevant facts and had those in mind  when  making  the
    decision.  The judge has also directed herself correctly in  law.   The
    judge set out the background to the appellant's case from paragraphs 12
    to 18:

         "12. The appellant asserts that she lived in Nigeria in Ogun  state
             with her mother.  Her father died when she was  aged  3.   She
             had a sibling but he died before she was  born.   She  is  the
             only child.  She helped  her  mother  to  sell  things  namely
             bottled water.  Her maternal aunt died before her mother died.

         13.  She worked as a housegirl in Lagos after her mother fell  ill.
             She used to visit home every year.  She met EAM's father where
             she used to work.  He was a driver.  The appellant stated that
             he was from a different tribe in that he was  a  Muslim  while
             she is a Christian.  In her statement  she  asserts  that  his
             family wanted to kill her because  they  did  not  approve  of
             their relationship.  He died when she was expecting EAM.   His
             family blamed her for his death.  Some of his  family  members
             also lived in Lagos.

         14.  The appellant asserts the people she worked for helped her  to
             come to the UK.  They found and paid for the agent.  She  told
             her employers the problem she had.   She  left  EAM  with  her
             mother.  She came through the airport in December  2000.   The
             agent took her to a house where  she  did  housework  for  the
             owners of the house.  She believes the husband was African but
             did not which country he  was  from  but  the  wife  was  from
             Nigeria.  She stayed there from 2000 to  2007.   She  was  not
             allowed to go out and used the police to threaten  her.   They
             said they will kill her.  They did not pay her but  they  used
             to give her money so she could send  to  her  mother  to  look
             after her son.  The family told her that they  were  going  to
             travel abroad and told her to leave the house.  She  therefore
             slept  in  churches  and  congregation  members'  homes.   She
             continued to live like this until  she  met  GOA's  father  in
             2009.

         15.  The appellant asserts her mother passed away in 2007  and  EAM
             was looked after by his father's  friend  named  Lukman.   EAM
             arrived in the UK in March 2010 with the  help  of  an  agent.
             The appellant stated that she has  heard  from  Lukman's  wife
             that he died in 2014 and that he was poisoned.

         16.  The appellant asserts that GOA was born in the UK.  She is not
             aware of his father's immigration status but believed  he  had
             submitted an application.  He is also a Nigerian.  His name is
             Adeola Adotun Adeeso.  She met him in 2009  in  London.   They
             did not live together as a couple.  He was not happy with  the
             pregnancy and they began  having  problems.   They  eventually
             separated.  She begged him to  accept  GOA  as  his  son.   He
             agreed to attend the registry office with her to register GOA.
              She has not seen him since that time.

         17.  The appellant  asserts  that  in  2009  she  was  taken  to  a
             solicitor by her friend.  The solicitor said  that  they  will
             make an application for her but she was not aware what type of
             application was submitted.  Since 2014 she  and  her  children
             have been supported by the social services.

         18.  The appellant asserts that she  has  no  social,  cultural  or
             family ties to Nigeria.  Her children are well settled in  the
             UK.  EAM attends school and is in Year 10  and  preparing  for
             his GCSEs.  He is a very bright student and has adapted to the
             British culture and is happy here.  He is at a  crucial  stage
             of his education and the removal would have a great impact  on
             his life and education.  She has informed EAM that they  might
             have to go back to Nigeria.  Since he found  out  he  has  not
             been feeling well.  He speaks about his school and his career.
              He helps her to do her homework as she is studying  for  ESOL
             level 3 which she started at college in 2015."

18. Mr Harris suggested to me that there was an indication  of  trafficking
    which had not been addressed but this was not a  finding  made  by  the
    judge and not a point which was under  challenge  from  the  appellant.
    The only challenge for my  consideration  was  that  that  was  in  the
    grounds of application by the Secretary of State.

19. With regard to grounds (i) and (ii) there is no requirement to  provide
    specific  evidence  under  the  Rules  with  reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(iv) when identifying very significant obstacles.  The judge  had
    taken into account the evidence as told by the  appellant  and  clearly
    set out the evidence because she made a finding that the appellant  was
    credible and that she accepted the evidence given.  This  is  important
    because there was no challenge by the Secretary of State in the grounds
    of application to the findings of the judge in relation to credibility.
     As Mr Harris noted, the assessment under the Immigration Rules and  as
    to whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to  her  return  to
    Nigeria and which the judge specifically  identified  at  paragraph  24
    would depend on the judge's assessment of the appellant's evidence  and
    would be fact-sensitive.  As noted, there is no  indication  under  the
    Rules that there should be a comparator by way of another single parent
    returning to Nigeria.  The focus is on the individual and her children.



20. The judge gave specific reasons for  finding  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness, not just accepting at face  value  her  evidence  but
    because the background was accepted.  The judge noted that:

         "24. The appellant asserts that she  meets  the  requirement  under
             paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  in  that  there   would   be   very
             significant obstacles to her integration in Nigeria because no
             support will be available from friends or family.  She has  no
             family or friends in Nigeria and her  mother  passed  away  in
             2007.  She also asserts  that  she  will  be  unable  to  find
             employment to support herself  and  her  sons.   As  a  single
             mother without  family  support  she  will  be  vulnerable  to
             exploitation.  As a single mother with no  family  support  it
             would  be  unduly  harsh  and  this  would  amount   to   very
             significant obstacles to her integration in Nigeria."

21. The appellant would be returning with one very young child who presents
    with medical difficulties suggestive of epilepsy and although it is not
    the medical difficulties themselves which are relevant it is clear that
    he is a child who needs care and attention and this was  identified  at
    paragraph 56 in the form of the  Consultant  Community  Paediatrician's
    report.  It was the cumulative assessment by  the  judge  of  the  best
    interests of the children which would include the  integration  by  the
    older son within the education system and the  health  difficulties  of
    GOA together with the vulnerability of the appellant which is described
    at paragraph 14 that led the judge to make a finding that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles to her integration in Nigeria.

22. Of particular importance is that  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she
    would have no family or friends in Nigeria.  This was relevant  to  the
    judge's assessment in paragraph 24 and as to whether she would be  able
    to find employment.  The judge found her a single mother who  would  be
    responsible for caring for her children;  without  family  support  the
    judge concluded that she would  be  vulnerable  to  exploitation  which
    would contribute to the very significant obstacles to  her  integration
    in Nigeria.

23. The Home Office made a  reference  to  the  healthcare  facilities  and
    education facilities within the reasons for  refusal  letter,  and  the
    decision letter specifically made a reference to the Country of  Origin
    Information  request  dated  6th  May  2014  regarding   shelters   and
    accommodation in Nigeria.  I have considered the documentation referred
    to by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter and it is clear that
    there is education available in Nigeria but only up to the age  of  15.
    It is also clear that there is  healthcare  and  that  the  appellant's
    children's health difficulties do not reach the level  required  for  a
    breach of  Article  3.   A  comparison  of  education  or  health  care
    facilities does not assist the appellant and with regard healthcare,  a
    principle which must extend to education, and MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA
    Civ 279 had this to say:
             "17. The essential principle is that the ECHR does not impose
             any obligation on the contracting states to provide those
             liable to deportation with medical treatment lacking in their
             'home countries'. This principle applies even where the
             consequence will be that the deportee's life will be
             significantly shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N v Home
             Secretary [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR
             885 (paragraph 44)).
             18. Although that principle was expressed in those cases in
             relation to Article 3, it is a principle which must apply to
             Article 8. It makes no sense to refuse to recognise a 'medical
             care' obligation in relation to Article 3, but to acknowledge
             it in relation to Article 8."

24.  The judge made a further observation at paragraph 30 as follows:

         "30. I accept that the appellant has no family, friends  or  social
             networks in Nigeria.   There  is  no  evidence  before  me  to
             suggest that there are organisations in Nigeria which  may  be
             able to assist the appellant with integration.  The  appellant
             is a single mother of two minor children with no  support  for
             their basic needs in terms of accommodation, food and  medical
             assistance.  I find that this entails  very  serious  hardship
             for the appellant in establishing a private life  in  Nigeria.
             For this reason I find that the appellant has established that
             there would be very significant obstacles to  her  integration
             in Nigeria pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)."

25. Mr Nath submitted that it was for the appellant to produce evidence  in
    relation to support and accommodation on return.  I note that the judge
    accepted the appellant's evidence that she would be without  a  support
    network and when on close inspection of the evidence  produced  by  the
    Home Office, it appears that the transit shelters were not majorly  for
    single  parents  but  for  victims  of  domestic  violence,  abuse  and
    trafficking.

26. There was no finding made by the judge in  respect  of  trafficking  or
    that the appellant was trafficked albeit  that  it  is  clear  from  an
    overall reading of the decision that the judge found the appellant  may
    be open to exploitation on  return.   On  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Secretary of State and that was  before  the  Tribunal,  there  was  no
    specific shelter for single  parents  in  the  circumstances  that  the
    appellant finds herself and that the judge accepted.   Had  there  been
    such evidence it may well be that the Secretary  of  State  would  have
    produced it.  It was asserted that the appellant should  have  produced
    documentation to the effect that she could not access accommodation but
    it is clear that she would be trying to prove a negative.  It was  open
    to the judge to make a  rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the  evidence
    produced to her and she clearly accepted the evidence of the  appellant
    with regard to the very serious hardship that she would meet on  return
    to  Nigeria.   I  repeat  that  it  is  clear  from  the  face  of  the
    determination that it is not one particular aspect that meant that  the
    appellant would meet the sufficiently high level or threshold  of  very
    serious hardship or one particular aspect of her case but a  cumulative
    assessment under the Rules.

27. The judge went on to make a finding outside the  Immigration  Rules  if
    she was wrong in respect of her assessment within the Immigration Rules
    and noted that the family  life  was  between  the  appellant  and  her
    children and there  would  be  no  interference  as  such;   the  judge
    directed herself appropriately with respect to the test under  Huang  v
    SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  With respect to  Mr  Nath's  assertion  that  the
    judge had not considered AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  and
    the appellant's unlawful immigration status, the judge set out and  was
    clear about the appellant's immigration history and very clear that she
    was in the UK unlawfully.  The judge cited AM at paragraph 48.  I  will
    return to this issue below when specifically addressing ground (iii).

28. The judge was equally clear when she made an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children that they had not lived in  the  UK  for  the
    requisite seven years.  That does not, however, preclude the judge from
    making a finding under paragraph 276ADE(vi) in favour of all  three  of
    the appellants.  The judge, as pointed out by Mr  Harris,  despite  the
    absence of the Secretary of State at the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did take into account the position of the  Secretary  of
    State in relation to the Immigration Rules  as  per  SS  Congo  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ  317   and  also  quoted  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0b at paragraph 27.

29. The judge applied Azimi-Moayed  (decisions  affecting  children  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197  (IAC)   as  to  the  starting  point  for  an
    assessment of the best interests of the children but also at  [43]-[44]
    made specific references to EV Philippines [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874   and
    specifically paragraph 58, which states as follows:

         "43. I note in EV (Philippines) Lewison LJ said at paragraph 58:

                  'In my judgment, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
                  interests of the children must be made on the  basis  that
                  the facts are as they are  in  the  real  world.   If  one
                  parent has no right to remain, but the other parent  does,
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted.  If neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,
                  then that is the background against which  the  assessment
                  is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be:  is  it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the  parent  with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?'

         44.  He concluded at paragraph 60:

                  'In our case none of the  family  is  a  British  citizen.
                  None has the right to remain  in  this  country.   If  the
                  mother is removed, the father has no independent right  to
                  remain.  If the parents are removed, then it  is  entirely
                  reasonable to expect the children to go with them.  As the
                  immigration judge found it  is  obviously  in  their  best
                  interests to remain with their parents.  Although  it  is,
                  of course a question of fact for the  tribunal,  I  cannot
                  see that the desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
                  expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children
                  of remaining  with  their  parents.   Just  as  we  cannot
                  provide medical treatment for  the  world,  so  we  cannot
                  educate the world.'"

30. The judge, aware of EV Philippines, at [54] drew  the  picture  of  the
    older child's schooling not least that EAM had been here for just  over
    six years,  (clearly  brought  here  as  a  minor),  was  in  secondary
    education and that he had little  or  no  ties  with  Nigeria  and  was
    currently in Year 10 of his GCSE year.  The majority of  his  schooling
    had been in the UK and he was at an advanced 'or critical stage' of his
    educational career.  This was a factor that the judge would be  obliged
    to  take  into  account  but  it  is  not  apparent  that   the   judge
    overemphasised this point.

31. There can be no doubt that the judge,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in
    ground (iii), took  into  account  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act and this can be found at  paragraphs  45  to
    49.

32. Not only  did  the  judge  make  the  relevant  and  appropriate  legal
    directions but  also  applied  the  relevant  law  to  the  facts.   At
    paragraph 50 the judge found that the appellant spoke English but found
    it was a neutral  factor  but  also  noted  that  she  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully and that she was not financially independent.  The Secretary
    of State asserts that she had not produced evidence to  show  that  she
    could not receive remittances from the UK and as the  appellant  is  on
    benefits I find this a somewhat surprising contention.

33. The judge had set out the relevant immigration history of the appellant
    identifying that she claimed to have entered the UK  on  15th  December
    2000 with the assistance of an agent and the judge  clearly  identified
    that she had remained in the UK unlawfully since that time.  The  judge
    also set out that EAM, the son, was brought to  the  UK  by  an  agent.
    Subsequent from paragraphs 3 to 10 the judge recorded all of the failed
    applications made by the appellant to remain on human  rights  grounds.
    I do not find that the judge was not aware of  the  immigration  status
    and background of the applicant and failed  to  factor  this  into  the
    balancing exercise.

34. The judge made the assessment of the children and their best  interests
    and took into account their educational  interests  and  their  medical
    interests, finding that  the  removal  of  particularly  EAM  would  be
    disruptive academically, socially and emotionally given  the  level  of
    his integration and the establishment of his private  life  outside  of
    the family unit.  This was the finding at paragraph 58.   It  is  clear
    that EAM is now 15 and has spent the last six  years  of  his  life  at
    secondary school and  the  judge  found  that  he  had  spent  his  key
    formative years here.  It is not the case that the judge  has  made  an
    assessment on the basis that the best interests of the children were  a
    trump card but their best interests is a key consideration.

35.  I  find  the  Judge's  decision  to  be  comprehensive,  thorough  and
    realistic.  It was open to the judge to make an assessment as she  did.
    It is clear at paragraph 35 that she stated  that  the  factors  to  be
    taken into account included the length of the appellant's stay  in  the
    UK, the nationalities of the various persons concerned, the appellant's
    family  situation,  the  ages  of  any  children  concerned   and   the
    seriousness of the difficulties the family was likely to  encounter  in
    the country to which the family would be removed.  The judge noted that
    the children should not suffer as a result of the  behaviour  of  their
    parent but identified that in certain cases the  cumulative  effect  of
    the other factors might  still  outweigh  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  A child's interests are a primary consideration but they are
    not paramount in the final analysis.

36. The judge legally  directed  herself  appropriately  and  made  a  full
    analysis of the relevant factors with  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    merely disagrees.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thapa-
Gurung shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date Signed 15th December 2016

Helen Rimington

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

