
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2016                   |On 29 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               CHRISTOPHER [T]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr M Muirhead, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Griffith, promulgated on 10 February 2016, in which
    he  dismissed  his  appeal  under  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") against  the  decision
    of the respondent made on 16 March 2015 to remove him from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who entered the United Kingdom in
    2002 with leave to enter as a visitor. He was later  granted  leave  to
    remain as a student until 30 September 2003, but has  overstayed  since
    then. During that time, he formed a relationship with Ms S  F,  also  a
    Jamaican national, but who has Discretionary Leave  to  Remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3.  There are three children of the relationship: the two youngest are the
    children of the appellant and Ms F; the older, who has been  registered
    as a British Citizen, is the appellant's step daughter.

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the Refusal Letter dated  12  March
    2015. In summary she considered that  owing  to  his  convictions,  the
    appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements  under  Appendix
    FM, relevant both to the appellant's claim  to  be  entitled  to  leave
    under the partner and/or parent route, or under paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. Further, the respondent concluded that  in  any  event,  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM under the partner  route
    as Ms F had only Discretionary Leave to Remain;  it  was  not  accepted
    either that the appellant was living as part of a family  unit  or  had
    much input into his step-daughter's life.

 6. The judge heard evidence from the appellant, Ms F and the stepdaughter.
    She found that:

      i) the appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules [63] and that the main thrust of the  appeal  was
         the respondent's approach to her duties under  section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Action 2007; and, she was  not
         satisfied that the respondent had done so [68];

     ii) the appellant's relationship with Ms F was somewhat  fractured  and
         was not being relied upon [69]

    iii) the appellant enjoys family life  with  his  stepdaughter  and  his
         natural  daughter  [70],  has  played  and   plays   a   reasonably
         significant role in the upbringing of the children, even if he  had
         not lived continuously with their mother [72];

     iv) While it was in the children's best interests to be brought  up  by
         two parents, if possible, that was  not  a  trump  card  [73],  and
         having had regard to the cumulative effect of other considerations,
         including the public  interest  the,  appellant's  criminal  record
         weighs significantly against him [74], albeit that he was not being
         deported as a foreign criminal [75], and  little  weight  could  be
         attached to his private life in light of section 117B of  the  2002
         Act;

      v) That section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act was not engaged as there  was
         no question of the older child being required to leave  the  United
         Kingdom;

     vi) Removal was proportionated, given that the best  interests  of  the
         children  were  outweighed   by   the   weighty   public   interest
         considerations [77];

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) In her application of section 117B of the 2002 Act, in  not  taking
         into account the fact that the appellant had skills and, if granted
         leave, would seek employment and would be unlikely to be  a  burden
         on the taxpayer, a burden that would increase if he were to  leave,
         given that his partner is a single mother of three children;

     ii) In failing, given that there was  no  risk  of  the  appellant  re-
         offending, and following Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, properly to assess
         the best interests of the children by treating the public  interest
         as inherently more significant  that  the  best  interests  of  the
         children, rather than considering the cumulative factors;

    iii) In failing adequately to assess the impact on the children  of  the
         appellant's removal to Jamaica;

 8. On 8 September 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  gave  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

 9. There is little merit in the submission that the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to the possibility of the appellant being  able  to  work.  At
    best, if he were able to work, that would be a neutral factor, as noted
    most recently in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA 803 at [62] - [65].  There
    is, a consider, insufficient indication in the decision that the judge,
    contrary to what is averred, did not treat the best  interests  of  the
    children as a primary consideration; the observation  that  their  best
    interests did  not  trump  the  public  interest  is  not  an  improper
    position.

10. Further, it is not arguable that in this case, any of the children  are
    being required to leave the United Kingdom. They can remain  here  with
    their mother, and the oldest is a British Citizen.

11. I do not consider the argument that the judge did not take into account
    the best interests of the children is tenable. She accepted  [73]  that
    the best interests of the children were, if possible, to be brought  up
    by bother parents and  that  on  the  facts  of  this  case,  the  best
    interests of the children would be for the situation to  remain  as  it
    is.

12. It was open to the judge to conclude that,  cumulatively,  removal  was
    proportionate. There is no proper indication that any relevant  factors
    were omitted from  the  balancing  exercise  carried  out.  It  is  not
    submitted that section 117B (6) is engaged here. The judge was  clearly
    entitled to attach weight  to  the  appellant's  past  offending  which
    involved a custodial sentence of over 12 months' duration. Although  he
    would now appear to be a foreign criminal for the purposes  of  section
    117D of the 2002 Act, that point has not been taken by the  respondent.
    If the judge erred in not taking that point, that error was clearly not
    to the appellant's detriment.

13. In essence, this appeal is simply about weight attached by the judge to
    various factors. Weight is primarily a factor for the judge;  there  is
    here no indication that improper weight  was  attached  to  the  public
    interest. It is sufficiently clear from the judge's  recording  of  the
    relevant evidence and submissions in her  determination  that  she  was
    aware of the impact on the children of separation [42],  [62]  and  she
    stated [7] that this was taken into consideration. It  is  sufficiently
    clear from what is recorded at [72] that she did so and that this was a
    factor weighed in the proportionality exercises.  Over  and  above  the
    usual effect on a child of the removal of a parent,  no  other  factors
    are identified in the grounds nor did Mr Muirhead seek to  persuade  me
    that such factors apply.

14. Viewing the decision as a whole, I consider  that  the  judge  properly
    concluded that, on the facts of this case, the appellant's removal  was
    proportionate,  a  conclusion  which  is  sustainable  and   adequately
    reasoned.  The appellant has thus not shown that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.

15. I discharge the anonymity order as it is not in the public interest  to
    maintain it.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I discharge the anonymity order made below


Signed   Date:  29 November 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

