
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12108/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23rd September 2016                    |On 8th December 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                        MR CELESTINE ETOEDIA NDIFREKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. V Ajigbolamu, of Adel Jibs & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Porter promulgated on 10th February 2016, in which he  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  9th
       March 2015 to refuse to vary leave to remain in the UK.


Background


    2. The appellant is a  national  of  Nigeria.   He  entered  the  United
       Kingdom on 4th  October  2013  with  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4
       (General) student, valid until 2nd February 2015.   On  30th  January
       2015, the appellant applied for an extension of his limited leave  to
       enter, to maintain funds in his bank account for a period of 28 days,
       pending a further application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
       (General)  student  to  study  the  ACCA  (Association  of  Chartered
       Certified Accountants) course. That application was  refused  on  9th
       March 2015.  The respondent considered the appellant's claim that she
       should exercise  her  discretion  in  favour  of  the  appellant  but
       considered that it was open to the appellant to return to Nigeria and
       pursue his studies or employment there. Alternatively, if  he  wished
       to undertake studies in the UK, the respondent considered it open  to
       the appellant to make an application for entry clearance under Tier 4
       of the Points Based System.  The respondent also  considered  whether
       the appellant's  application  raises  any  exceptional  circumstances
       which consistent with the right to respect  for  private  and  family
       life contained in Article 8, might warrant a grant of leave to remain
       in the UK outside the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.    The
       respondent concluded that the  appellant  had  not  raised  any  such
       exceptional circumstances, and decided  that  a  grant  of  leave  to
       remain outside the rules was not appropriate.


    3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In his grounds of
       appeal, the appellant contended that  the  respondent  erred  in  her
       decision to refuse to grant the appellant further leave to remain  to
       continue living with his wife and her daughter.  I pause to  note  at
       this stage, that the appellant was not married, and neither does  his
       partner have a daughter, although she does have a son.


    4. At the hearing of the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter,
       the Home Office Presenting Officer raised a preliminary matter.  That
       was, the appellant had made his  application  to  the  respondent  on
       different grounds to those that the appellant  was  seeking  to  rely
       upon in his appeal.  Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was
       seeking leave to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds as  a  partner
       of a British Citizen.  Procedurally, the Judge records  at  paragraph
       [8] of his decision:


             "8.  On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that it  was
             clear from the papers that the Appellant did not  qualify  for
             leave to remain under or outside the Rules in relation to  his
             original application. Indeed his previous solicitors had  told
             him that there was no point in pursuing his  original  appeal.
             However, the Appellant now wished to proceed with  the  appeal
             outside the Rules, pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). The Appellant was  given  a
             further opportunity to consult with his representative and  it
             was confirmed that he did wish to  continue  with  the  appeal
             today on the basis now indicated and did not wish  to  make  a
             fresh application."


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge sets out the background to  the  appeal
       at paragraphs [1] to [8] of her decision.  The Judge  heard  evidence
       from the appellant and his partner, Ms Mafoh and at  paragraphs  [11]
       to [14] of her decision, the Judge refers to that evidence.


    6. Having recorded the evidence and the submissions made  on  behalf  of
       the parties, the Judge sets out her decision at  paragraphs  [18]  to
       [28] of the decision.  Although it was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant that the appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements  of
       Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules relating to
       family and private life, the Judge noted at  paragraph  [21]  of  her
       decision that she should considerer whether the Rules are  satisfied,
       before looking further.  At paragraph [22] of her decision the  Judge
       that found that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements set out
       in Appendix FM of the rules as the appellant has as not made a  valid
       application for limited or indefinite leave to remain as a parent  or
       partner, and in any event, the definition of 'partner' in GEN.1.2  is
       not satisfied.  At paragraph [23] of her decision,  the  Judge  found
       that the only possible subsection of paragraph 276ADE(1)  that  could
       apply to the appellant is 276ADE(1) (vi).  However  for  the  reasons
       set out in that paragraph, the Judge found that the appellant has not
       demonstrated that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  re-
       integration into the country to where the appellant would have to  go
       if required to leave the United Kingdom.


    7. The Judge found at paragraph [24] of her decision that the  appellant
       cannot meet the requirements of the relevant immigration rules and at
       paragraphs [25] to [28] she  considered  the  appellant's  Article  8
       claim, outside the immigration rules.


    8. Importantly for present purposes, at paragraph [26] of  her  decision
       the Judge accepted that the appellant has been  living  at  the  same
       address as his partner's son, aged 15, since October 2015.  The Judge
       did not accept, as was submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant,  that
       removal of the appellant from the UK would lead to  untold  emotional
       damage and trauma to his partner's son or damage to any "family unit'
       already established.   The Judge did not accept that within the short
       time that the appellant has been living in  the  same  house  as  his
       partner and her son, the appellant has taken on the role of a  father
       to the child in any significant or lasting way.


    9. Finally, the Judge noted at  paragraph  [27]  of  her  decision  that
       certain arrangements had been put in place  for  a  wedding  to  take
       place in the UK on 14th May  2016.   However  having  considered  all
       matters, the Judge found at paragraph [28] of her decision that there
       are no compelling circumstances to require  the  grant  of  leave  to
       remain.  She did not accept that the decision to remove the appellant
       gives rise to hardship far beyond matters of "mere" hardship,  "mere"
       obstacles or "mere" inconvenience.  She found  that  the  appellant's
       rights to a family life under Article 8  are  not  compromised  by  a
       requirement that he returns to Nigeria,  for  the  parties  to  marry
       there, and for the Appellant then to  make  a  fresh  application  to
       enter the United Kingdom as  the  spouse  of  Ms.  Mafoh,  if  he  so
       chooses. The Judge concluded that there  would  be  no  unjustifiably
       harsh consequences to the appellant if his application to remain were
       refused, and she  found  that  the  refusal  is  proportionate  under
       Article 8.


The grounds of appeal


   10. The appellant advances a single ground of appeal.  That is, the Judge
       failed and/or neglected to  give  considerable  weight  to  the  best
       interests of the child. It is said that the Judge erred by failing to
       be persuaded with the argument advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant
       that removal of the appellant from the UK, having established a  very
       strong father-child relationship with his partner's son,  will  cause
       serious emotional trauma, not only to the appellant and his  partner,
       but most importantly to the  child.   The  appellant  refers  to  the
       decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)-VSSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4
       that the best interests of the child "...must rank  higher  than  any
       other...".


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Foudy
       on 20th July 2016.  The matter comes before me  to  consider  whether
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter involved the  making
       of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


   12. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Ajigbolamu again  accepted
       that the appellant cannot meet the requirements set out  in  Appendix
       FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.


   13. Mr Ajigbolamu submitted that  in  reaching  her  decision  the  Judge
       failed to give sufficient weight to the evidence that was before  her
       concerning the relationship between the appellant and  his  partner's
       son.  Mr Ajigbolamu referred me to the appellant's witness  statement
       dated 5th January 2016 and in particular, paragraphs [12], [14], [18]
       and [20] of that statement.  He  also  referred  me  to  the  witness
       statement of the appellant's partner, Anna Mafoh of  the  same  date,
       and in particular, paragraphs [2], [6], [8] and [12].  Mr  Ajigbolamu
       accepts that the relationship between the appellant and his partner's
       son, is of no more than approximately 14  months'  duration,  but  he
       submits that the Judge should have attached  considerable  weight  to
       that relationship. The child  is  a  British  citizen  and  his  best
       interests must be given primary  importance.   He  submits  that  the
       Judge failed to do so in reaching her decision.


   14.  The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 26th August  2016.
       The respondent opposes the appeal and submits that at on the facts of
       the case, the appellant had only been living with his partner and her
       15 years old son, for 3 months prior to the date  of  hearing  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent submits that outside of  the
       grounds of appeal and the witness statements of the appellant and his
       partner, there is no evidence of  any  'emotional  trauma'  that  the
       child would suffer as a result of the decision.


   15. Mr Clarke submits that a careful reading of the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge makes it clear that there is no error of  law  in
       the approach adopted by the Judge. He submits that it was open to the
       Judge to reach the findings that she did. He submits that there  were
       bare and vague assertions set out in the witness  statements  of  the
       appellant and his partner, and that  all  the  evidence  was  plainly
       considered by the Judge when reaching her decision at paragraph [26].
       Mr Clark submits  that  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  are  not
       challenged and that in the circumstances, it was open to the Judge to
       dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out in the decision.


Discussion


   16. In SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court  of  Appeal  made
       quite clear  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  the  main  point  of
       assessment under  Article  8  and  it  is  only  where  they  do  not
       sufficiently  cover  the  particular  circumstances  relating  to  an
       individual applicant, that one might turn to consider  whether  there
       are any circumstances that would justify  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Immigration Rules.  In this case it has  throughout  been
       conceded that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  He does not  meet  the  private  or  family  life
       requirements  contained  in  paragraph   276ADE   and   Appendix   FM
       respectively. What the Court of Appeal made clear in SS  (Congo)  was
       that  it  would  only  be  in  compelling   circumstances   that   an
       infringement of Article 8 would be found if  an  appellant,  did  not
       otherwise meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


   17.  Leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules  is  reserved  for  the  most
       exceptional cases and should not be used as a means to circumvent the
       requirements under the rules which are in themselves  in  general,  a
       complete code. The rules make  adequate  and  proper  provision  for
       partners and parents that wish to enter or remain in the UK.


   18. Having found that the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  the
       immigration rules, the Judge went on to consider the  appeal  outside
       the immigration  rules.   It  is  uncontroversial  that  s55  of  the
       Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the respondent
       to make arrangements for ensuring that her functions in  relation  to
       immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged  having  regard  to
       the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are  in
       the UK.


   19. I have carefully considered the evidence that was before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge and the extracts from the witness  statements  of
       the appellant and his partner that are relied upon by Mr. Ajigbolamu.
       The evidence of the appellant is that he met his partner in  November
       2014, and that his partner  already  had  a  child  from  a  previous
       relationship.  The appellant confirmed that he lives with his partner
       and her son, and he describes that he has a  "wonderful  relationship
       with the boy to  whom  he  now  plays  the  role  of  father.".   The
       appellant believes that in view of his relationship  with  Ms.  Mafoh
       and her son, and other relationships that  he  has  established  with
       other people in the church, he has established a private life in  the
       UK and a strong family life.  He states that his removal from the  UK
       at this stage of his relationship with Ms. Mafoh and  her  son,  will
       cause serious emotional trauma not only to the two of them, but  also
       to him.  Ms.  Mafoh  confirms  in  her  witness  statement  that  the
       appellant moved in with her  and  her  son,  in  October  2015.   She
       confirms that the appellant and her son have a wonderful relationship
       and that the appellant now serves as a father figure to her son.   In
       her statement, she states that the appellant's removal  from  the  UK
       will not only cause her untold emotional damage, but  will  adversely
       affect her son with whom the appellant has bonded.


   20. I reject the submission by Mr Ajigbolamu that  the  Judge  failed  to
       have any proper regard to the best interests  of  the  child,  or  to
       treat the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration  in
       reaching  her  decision.   The  Judge  plainly  had   in   mind   the
       relationship that the appellant has established  with  his  partner's
       son.  The fact that the Judge was not  persuaded  with  the  argument
       advanced on behalf of the appellant that  removal  of  the  appellant
       from the UK, will cause serious emotional trauma to the child, is not
       to say that the Judge did not take account of the best  interests  of
       the child as a primary consideration.  In fact, there was no evidence
       beyond the vague assertions made by the  appellant  and  his  partner
       that removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  UK  will  cause  serious
       emotional trauma to the child, before the Judge.


   21. In my judgement, the Judge had proper regard to the evidence  of  the
       appellant and his partner in reaching her  conclusions  at  paragraph
       [26] of her decision.  The Judge accepted that the appellant has been
       living at the same address as his partner and her son,  who  is  aged
       15, since October 2015.  The Judge did not accept, as  was  submitted
       on the appellant's behalf, that removal of  the  appellant  from  the
       country would lead to untold emotional damage and trauma to the child
       or damage to any "family unit" already established.   In  particular,
       the Judge did  not  accept  that  within  the  short  time  that  the
       appellant has been living in the same house  as  the  child,  he  has
       taken on the role of a father to the  child  in  any  significant  or
       lasting way such that the best interests of the child are not capable
       of being outweighed by other countervailing factors.


   22. The obligation to consider the best interests of any  children  as  a
       primary consideration in determining whether an immigration  decision
       breaches Article 8 is set out in the leading decision of the  Supreme
       Court in ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4.  Whilst  recognising
       that  the  "best  interests"  of  a  child   must   be   a   "primary
       consideration", the Supreme Court acknowledged that, in carrying  out
       the  proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8,  other  (public)
       interests of  sufficient  strength  could  outweigh  a  child's  best
       interests. Baroness Hale of Richmond said at [26]:


           "...the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be   a   primary
           consideration... This does not mean (as it  would  do  in  other
           context)  that  identifying  those  best  interests  would  lead
           inexplicably to a decision in conformity with  those  interests.
           Provided that the Tribunal did not treat any other consideration
           as inherently more significant that the best  interests  of  the
           child,  it  could  conclude  that  the  strength  of  the  other
           considerations outweighed them."


   23. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge, who also had proper regard
       to the public interest considerations set out in s117B  of  the  2002
       Act, to find that on the facts, there would be no unjustifiably harsh
       consequences to the appellant  if  his  application  to  remain  were
       refused, and that the refusal is proportionate under Article 8.


Notice of Decision


   24. The appeal is dismissed.


   25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia         07th December 2016


FEE AWARD


As the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia         07th December 2016
