
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/12208/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 October 2016                        |On 19 October 2016                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     F B
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by UNQ Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18  March  1985.   On  3
    August 2013 she was  granted  limited  leave  to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student expiring on 31 January 2015.  In time, on 26  January
    2015 she applied for further leave to remain  on  the  basis  that  her
    removal would place the State in breach of its obligations  to  respect
    her private life protected by Article 8  of  the  European  Convention.
    She is single.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 11 March 2015 the Respondent  refused  the  application  by  way  of
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules  and  found
    that there were no particular circumstances justifying a  consideration
    of the application under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

The Original Grounds for Appeal

 3. On 26 March 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are formulaic and refer  to  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return to Pakistan and living  on  her  own  as  a  single
    woman.  There was no claim based on  any  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. The appeal was set for hearing on 25 February 2016 at Taylor House.  On
    18  February  the  Appellant's  previous  representatives,  London  Law
    Associates  informed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  they  had   been
    instructed and enclosed a letter from the Appellant's GP as grounds for
    an adjournment.  This letter stated: -

          ... this ...  lady  is  ...  suffering  from  moderate  to  severe
         endogenous depression and anxiety.  She is awaiting an  appointment
         for  cognitive  behavioural  therapy.   She  is  currently   taking
         fluoxetine 20 milligrams daily.  ... her symptoms are affecting her
         cognitive function, her sleep, her appetite  and  interfering  with
         her activities of daily living.  As a result ... she is  not  in  a
         fit state of mind to provide evidence ... .  ...  once  she  starts
         cognitive behavioural therapy prognosis is excellent.

 5. On 22 February the Tribunal by telephone and by a letter of  that  date
    advised the Appellant's representatives the adjournment application had
    been refused.  The next day, the Tribunal gave notice transferring  the
    hearing venue from Taylor House to Hendon Magistrates.

 6. By a letter dated 24 February sent by fax UNQ Immigration informed  the
    Tribunal that they were now instructed and noted that  the  adjournment
    request made by her previous  representatives  had  been  refused.   It
    included the following: -

         We are not in receipt of the refusal letter but would like for  the
         courts to reconsider the matter at hand.   A  medical  professional
         has provided the summary of our client's mental state  and  not  an
         opinion being forward by the client herself or from a legal expert.
          We therefore humbly request for the Honourable  Immigration  Judge
         to consider our client's current condition and make a  decision  in
         accordance to the evidence provided herewith.   We  hope  that  the
         matter can now be adjourned and a new hearing date provided for the
         future.

    The Tribunal did not respond to the renewed request for an  adjournment
    made by UNQ Immigration. The renewed request was sent and received less
    than one clear day before the hearing and so the  representatives  were
    required to appear to make the adjournment application at  the  hearing
    on 25 February: see Practice Direction 9.

 7. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson who  was
    aware of the chronology of the adjournment applications  which  he  set
    out at paragraphs 12 following of his decision and recorded  there  was
    no appearance by or for the Appellant and no further communication  had
    been received from UNQ Immigration or London  Law  Associates.  He  was
    satisfied it was just to proceed in the absence of the Appellant or any
    representative  for  her.  He  considered  the   Appellant's   original
    application for entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student and  went
    on to dismiss the appeal under both the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 both within and outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. On 3 August 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Colyer  refused  the
    Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  which  was  based
    essentially on the ground that an  adjournment  should  not  have  been
    refused.

 9. The application was renewed on the same grounds to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and on 9 September 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted  permission
    to extend time for the application for permission to appeal and granted
    permission on the following grounds.   He  granted  permission  on  the
    ground that: -

         The GP letter submitted with the application for an adjournment one
         week before the hearing unequivocally states that  the  Appellant's
         mental health was such that at present she could not properly  give
         evidence at the hearing.  It is arguable that, in the light of  the
         GP letter, it was unfair not to adjourn the hearing at least for  a
         finite period in order to allow the  Appellant's  prognosis  to  be
         clarified and to give her an opportunity to be in a  fit  state  to
         give evidence.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. On 15 September 2016 the Upper Tribunal sent  notice  that  the  appeal
    would be heard at Field House on 6 October 2016.

11. There was no appearance by or for the Appellant.  On 19  September  UNQ
    Immigration had sent an email to the Tribunal stating that: -

         We have consulted with our client and she has informed us that  she
         would like to change this from oral to paper.

    The Tribunal did not make any response to that  application  and  there
    was no appearance by or for the Appellant before me.   I  was  informed
    there was no message left with Field House reception and at my  request
    the Tribunal Clerk telephoned UNQ Immigration at about 10.30  a.m.  and
    12 p.m.  She informed me that on both  occasions  the  response  was  a
    telephone  answering  machine.   She  also  advised  me  that  she  had
    telephoned the Appellant who had said that she was  not  aware  of  the
    hearing and confirmed that the address was the same address as that  on
    the file and to which notice of the  hearing  had  been  issued  on  15
    September 2016.  On 26 September the Upper Tribunal sent an  e-mail  to
    UNQ Immigration advising that all Upper Tribunal hearings are oral  and
    that the appeal would remain in the list so that the  Respondent  could
    make oral submissions.  The e-mail went on to advise that  it  was  "at
    your discretion as to whether the  Appellant  or  their  representative
    attends the hearing".

12. In all the circumstances I was satisfied that notice of the date,  time
    and place set for the hearing had been  properly  given  in  accordance
    with the Procedure Rules and that it was just to proceed in the absence
    of the Appellant or any representative for her.

13. There were no additional documents filed for the  Appellant  subsequent
    to the GP's letter in support of the original  adjournment  application
    to which reference has been  made.   I  referred  Mr  Staunton  to  the
    chronology of events in relation to the adjournment  application  prior
    to the hearing before Judge Monson and the Respondent's response of  22
    September pursuant to Procedure Rule 24.  This refers to the  late  and
    scanty evidence in support of the application for  the  adjournment  of
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the lack of any evidence to support
    the Appellant's claim about what her situation would be  on  return  to
    Pakistan and submits that having regard  to  the  overriding  objective
    referred to in Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not contain any error of law.

Consideration and Conclusion

14. The Appellant has submitted no evidence to support her claim to  be  at
    risk  on  return  to  Pakistan  or  that  she  would  face  insuperable
    obstacles. She has supplied neither evidence of her private life in the
    United Kingdom nor evidence to show that her return to  Pakistan  would
    be such a grave interference with her private life that it would  place
    the State in breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention.

15. Neither the Appellant nor her representatives have given any reason  to
    the Tribunal for failing to file such evidence  or  failing  to  appear
    before either the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

16. I am unable to say whether the Appellant has genuinely not pursued  her
    appeal with any vigour or has been ill-served by  her  representatives.
    I can decide the matter  only  on  the  evidence  before  me.   On  two
    separate occasions the Appellant  or  her  representatives  have  under
    notice failed to comply with the requirements of the relevant Procedure
    Rules and Practice Directions.  There is no evidence  in  the  file  to
    support the  Appellant's  various  claims.   In  this  context  I  have
    considered the decision of  Judge  Monson  and  am  satisfied  that  it
    contains no error of law and contains no material error of law  and  so
    it shall stand.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Anonymity

17. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal find none is warranted.





SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  19.  x.
2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




