
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/12701/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 6 August 2014             |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                     MISS SHANIKA DILRUKSHI LIYANAGE DON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  28
    September 1983 against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal who in a
    determination promulgated on 30 May 2014 and decided upon  the  papers,
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 5 March 2014 to curtail her leave as a Tier 4 Student.
     The basis of the refusal as set out in the  letter  of  refusal  of  5
    March 2014 was this: that she had been granted leave to enter as a Tier
    4 (General) Student until 1 February  2015  in  order  to  undertake  a
    course of study at Bell's College but the Home Office were informed  by
    the college on 23 January 2014 that she had in fact failed to  commence
    studying with them.   Therefore  her  leave  was  curtailed  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(1) of the  Immigration  Rules  with
    immediate effect.  Further, a decision was made to remove her from  the
    United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (as amended).

2.   For reasons that will shortly become apparent, and as  Mr  Wilding  did
    not object, it is not necessary for us to go into any particular detail
    as to the basis upon  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  on  the
    evidence before him, decided that the appeal  must  be  dismissed.   It
    will suffice to say that the  only  evidence  of  attendance  that  was
    before the Judge was an attendance record that showed that  between  24
    January 2014 and 28 February 2014 the Appellant had  attended  thirteen
    out of sixteen sessions.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  and
    in granting permission he noted amongst other  things,  that  the  sole
    basis upon which the appeal failed and indeed the decision  to  curtail
    her leave was made, was simply because  of  the  non-attendance  report
    made by the college in the first instance.

4.    Thus the appeal came before us on 29 July 2014  when  our  first  task
    was to decide whether or not the determination of the First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

 5.    It was the evidence of the Appellant who  represented  herself,  that
    when she received the Letter of Refusal from the  Home  Office  it  was
    accompanied by an appropriate form that it was open to her to  complete
    if she sought to appeal that decision. She noted that at the top  right
    hand corner of the form there appeared a box ticked to confirm that the
    matter would be decided on the papers. Further,  the  Appellant's  name
    was already entered. Both entries  were  in  the  same  typeface.   The
    Appellant having decided  to  appeal,  proceeded  in  her  longhand  to
    complete the rest of the form, for this purpose

6.   The Appellant told us that whilst she had noticed  that  there  was  an
    option to tick the box requesting an  oral  hearing  she  thought,  not
    being a lawyer or understanding these matters, that because the box for
    a paper hearing had already been ticked, that this was the only way  in
    which her appeal could proceed.  Had she  appreciated  that  she  could
    have had an oral hearing then she would have undoubtedly sought it.

  7.    Indeed, since the appeal was lodged and  prior  to  the  hearing  of
    this appeal before us, the Tribunal received from  the  Appellant  with
    her letter of 30 June 2014 a bundle of documents that in fact  included
    the record of attendance of the  Appellant  at  the  college  from  the
    outset of her course.

 8.    The Appellant explained that she  had  mistakenly  thought  that  she
    only needed to provide to the  First-tier  Tribunal  evidence  from  24
    January 2014.  She readily accepted before us, that this was clearly  a
    mistake.

 9.  The concern that the Appellant's evidence raised with us,  was  whether
    in these circumstances there had been procedural unfairness due to  the
    fact that  the  Appellant  was  thus  denied  or  albeit  inadvertently
    mislead, into believing that she could  not  take  the  opportunity  of
    electing to have an oral hearing in which she  could  have  given  oral
    evidence in support of her own appeal and indeed at the  oral  hearing,
    produce all of the documents that are now before us.  Clearly, had  the
    First-tier Judge seen the record of attendance that is  now  before  us
    and had he considered that it was cogent evidence  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's case that she did not fail to attend  her  course,  he  may
    well have come to a different decision.

10.   We were thus concerned that that there  had  in  consequence,  been  a
    procedural irregularity which has led to an unfair hearing  recognising
    that justice must not only be done but seen to be done.

11.      Most helpfully, Mr Wilding for  the  Respondent  accepted  that  in
    such circumstances the appropriate course would be to set the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge aside and to make a fresh decision.

12.    Upon our careful consideration of the matter, we  concluded  for  the
    above reasons that the appropriate course was to set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. We considered whether to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal  but  having  ascertained  that  a  remitted
    hearing of this appeal could take  many  months,  we  decided  with  Mr
    Wilding's and the Appellant's agreement,  that fairness  demanded  that
    we should ourselves proceed to make that fresh decision.  We  therefore
    proceeded to consider the evidence  that  was  now  before  us  in  its
    totality.

13.  Having seen and heard the Appellant's unchallenged oral  evidence  that
    was not the subject of  cross-examination,  we  had  no  difficulty  in
    concluding that she was an honest and credible witness, who had had  no
    intention of deceiving the Tribunal and indeed what  she  told  us  was
    reinforced  by  the  attendance  record  that  we,  upon  our   careful
    consideration, found to be both a reliable, persuasive and cogent piece
    of documentary evidence.

14.  Thus upon our consideration of the evidence in its totality, both  oral
    and documentary, and for the above reasons, we  had  no  difficulty  in
    concluding that the Appellant had discharged the burden of  proof  upon
    her, to the requisite standard of a balance of probabilities,  to  show
    that contrary to the  Respondent's  understanding,  the  Appellant  did
    indeed attend and complete her course of study.





Conclusion

15.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16.    We set aside the decision.

17.  We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
