
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th September 2016                        |On 10th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MS NOkuthulo Thalitha MABUza
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the  parties
    as they were described before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Mabuza as the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 29th  May  1978  and
    the Secretary of State refused her application to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of her private life under Paragraph 276ADE.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Samimi allowed her appeal against that  refusal  on
    the basis of Article 8  outside  the  Rules.  At  paragraph  3  of  the
    decision  Judge  Samimi  recorded  that  Counsel  for   the   appellant
    acknowledged that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State's challenge rested on five different grounds  as
    follows

          i) at [7] of her decision the judge relied on an  historic  error
             by the Home Office in failing  to  grant  the  appellant  'the
             usual three year...leave'. It  was  argued  that  this  was  a
             weighty factor relied upon by the judge in her assessment  and
             it was incumbent on her to provide an explanation as  no  such
             error was conceded.

         ii) The judge  relied  on  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
             immigration rules but as a matter of fact the appellant became
             an overstayer on 9th March 2014 and ignorance of the Rules  is
             not a defence.

        iii) The judge has used Article 8 as  a  general  dispensing  power
             Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and there are Rules which provide for  an
             extension  of  leave  on   this   basis.    Her   professional
             qualifications did not enhance her rights and Nasim and others
             (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)  pointed  to  the  limited
             utility of Article 8.  If the appellant wished to  pursue  her
             employment in the UK she should make the relevant application.
             There was no disproportionate interference

         iv) The judge was required to consider all of the public  interest
             factors under Section 117 and these were absent.

          v) Her private life could be reconstituted in her country.

 4. At the hearing Mr Whitwell took me through the correspondence  to  show
    that in fact the Secretary of State had  granted  leave  in  accordance
    with the Rules and that there had been no error  in  the  Secretary  of
    State granting the period of leave for  two  years  rather  than  three
    years.  Mr Chohan relied on the fact that the appellant had  relied  on
    the immigration advice of the NHS which  had  a  specialist  department
    dealing with such matters.

 5. In relation to ground (i) it is correct that the judge recorded at [7]

         '... the appellant's current predicament has come about partly  due
         to the error made by the Home Office in failing to  grant  her  the
         usual  three  year  Tier  2  (General)  leave  in  line  with   the
         certificate of sponsorship by her employers the University  College
         Hospital'.

    The judge however then states at [7]

         'In any event she has gained valuable training  and  experience  in
         her field and I find that to remove the appellant from  the  United
         Kingdom would not only constitute a violation of her private  life,
         in terms of her strong net work of friends and colleagues who  have
         written in her support, but more importantly her  employment  where
         she has established herself as an extremely important and  valuable
         member of a sensitive and highly specialist medical team.   I  find
         that the appellant's removal would mean that the NHS would lose  an
         extremely valuable clinician, in whom  substantial  resources  have
         been invested proceeds by having provided  her  with  training  and
         experience.  The appellant removal would mean a loss of her  skills
         and specialist training that  this  country  clearly  currently  is
         clearly in need of.  I find  that  these  are  exceptional  factual
         reason pertaining to the  appellant's  private  life,  which  would
         render the respondent's decision a violation of her  private  life.
         I have regard to Jasarevic v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  where  the  CA
         found that a long period of living and working gin the UK may  give
         rise to a private life engaging Article 8(1)'

 6. The judge was clear that the matter was to be  determined  outside  the
    Rules  and  gave  reasons  as  to  why  she  considered   this   matter
    exceptional.   Even if the understanding of the grant of leave were  an
    error the judge has nonetheless proceeded to make further  findings  in
    her decision which render this error of fact not material.  The judge's
    use of the words 'in any event'  show  that  the  factor  of  grant  of
    reduced leave was marginalised in her assessment. The judge clearly did
    not rely on this fact alone.

 7. I note that there  was  argument  that  the  appellant  had  become  an
    overstayer but clearly the judge accepted that her overstaying was  not
    a deliberate event, albeit  that  ignorance  of  the  Rules  is  not  a
    defence.   The judge recorded and accepted at [5] of her  decision  the
    appellant explanation that she had erroneously believed that  her  visa
    had been valid from 8th March 2012 to 7th March 2015 in line  with  her
    work permit.  Her work permit expired on 7th March 2015.  She left  the
    United Kingdom for a holiday on 13th December 2014 after her  visa  had
    expired (7th March 2014).  Indeed as the  appellant  left  the  UK  for
    South Africa for a short holiday only, this  would  have  been  a  very
    surprising move had her overstaying been  deliberate  act,  bearing  in
    mind she had a job and purchased a home in the UK and she ran the  risk
    of not being able to return.  She only realised that that her visa  had
    expired prior to 7th March 2015 and she had no leave  to  remain,  when
    she returned to the UK after a holiday.  She was then granted leave  to
    enter the UK on her return on 14th January 2015 and almost  immediately
    attempted to regularise her immigration status.  It  was  open  to  the
    judge to  take  into  account  her  explanation  of  her  visa  in  her
    assessment.

 8. I reject the argument that the appellant can gain a positive  advantage
    from 'her skills and specialist training' but there is  no  doubt  that
    the weight given to the public interest in immigration control  can  be
    ameliorated.   The  appellant  had  been   employed   as   a   Clinical
    Physiologist by University College since  2004  at  University  College
    Hospital.  She was recorded by the judge to be highly qualified in  her
    field and that her job is currently on the  Home  Office  'shortage  of
    occupation list'.

 9. It is correct  that  the  appellant  could  return  to  make  a  formal
    application and that Section 117 was not specifically referred  to  but
    the judge identified at [8] that

         '... there is ample evidence in the form of the appellant's 11 year
         work experience and training as a highly specialist Neurophysiology
         Clinician which would mean that not only  the  appellant's  removal
         would violate a fundamental aspect of her private life in the  form
         of her work, friends, and home but crucially in this case, it would
         constitute an unnecessary loss of a specialised and highly regarded
         clinician whose skills are of huge asset to the UK'.

10. As Lord Justice Richards stated in UE v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975  at
    paragraph 44 as to how to approach contribution to the community

         'I also agree that the authorities do not stand in the way of  that
         conclusion.  On  its  face,  RU  (Sri  Lanka)  expressly  precludes
         reliance on contribution to the community as a freestanding factor.
         The  possibility  that  contribution  to  the  community  could  be
         relevant in other ways was left open by the decision.  Scott  Baker
         LJ, with whom I agreed, dealt by way of example, at  paragraph  40,
         with its possible relevance to private life but he did not say that
         that was its only possible relevance. Pill LJ  said  in  terms,  at
         paragraph 43, that it could be relevant  in  other  ways.  One  can
         certainly speculate what conclusion might have been reached if  the
         case had  been  argued  on  the  basis  that  contribution  to  the
         community should be considered not as a freestanding factor but  as
         something that tended to reduce the weight  to  be  placed  on  the
         public interest in effective immigration control; but the case  was
         not in fact argued on that basis, the court did not  rule  on  that
         basis and there was no binding decision on the point'

11. From a reading of the decision as a whole  the  judge  was  not  merely
    using Article 8 as a general dispensing power  as  asserted  in  ground
    (iii).  Judge Samimi identified that the appellant had been here living
    and working for 11 years for the NHS and had put down roots because  of
    the 'long period of living  and  working  in  the  UK'  [7].   Although
    Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was  not
    specifically quoted as noted in ground (iv) of  the  challenge,  it  is
    evident from the judge's findings that  the  appellant  was  fluent  in
    English and was in work.  She had never been a burden  financially  and
    not likely to be a burden  on  the  United  Kingdom.   Indeed  she  had
    invested in purchasing a house and a mortgage.

12. Crucially, as identified by the judge and critical to her analysis  was
    that this appellant, as Mr Whitwell graciously accepted,  had  remained
    in the UK legally for 10 continuous years.   That  is  crucial  in  the
    assessment of  the  judge  and  that  is  weighed  into  the  balancing
    exercise.  I appreciate the reference to Nasim and others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) but that  decision  was  couched  in  terms  of
    education and made with primary reference to students and their working
    lives.  This is an appellant who had worked for 11 years with  the  NHS
    in a highly specialised field for the benefit of the public, had bought
    a home in the UK and to her knowledge and the accepted of the judge had
    always believed she had complied  with  immigration  requirements.   In
    general ignorance of such rules would  be  damaging  to  her  case  but
    clearly, and in the particular and exceptional circumstances, the judge
    found that the transgression  did  not  weigh  heavily  in  the  scales
    against her when assessing the public interest.  It  was  open  to  the
    judge to take this factor into account in the balancing  exercise.  The
    consequences of refusal did have consequences of such gravity  contrary
    to the  position  of  the  appellant  students  in  Nasim.   Mr  Chohan
    confirmed that he  represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and that considerable time had been spent assessing  the
    periods of leave spent by the appellant in the UK. This was recorded at
    paragraph 4 and at the start of the decision.

13. The judge at [4] recorded that the appellant entered the UK with  leave
    on 21st February 2004 and she had leave extended until 8th March  2014.
    The appellant clearly did not realise that she was  eligible  to  apply
    for 10 years residence at that point but this  is  a  factor  that  the
    judge took into account when finally, having weighed  various  factors,
    made her decision. Although the appellant by the date of  the  decision
    could not succeed under the immigration rules the  judge,  nonetheless,
    in the specific circumstances undertook the relevant balancing exercise
    and evidently reduced the weight to be attached to the public  interest
    in immigration control ultimately finding the decision  to  refuse  her
    leave to remain to be disproportionate. With regard to the last  ground
    (v) that her life could be reconstituted in her own country  the  judge
    clearly found that the appellant still had family in South  Africa  and
    had spent her formative years there she had spent 11 years in  the  UK,
    put down roots  here  and  established  a  career  which  had  made  an
    outstanding contribution as a Neurophysiology Clinician  as  recognised
    by University College and further more had her home and  friends  here.
    Clearly the judge found that could not be easily reconstituted in South
    Africa.

14. The judge made a decision as to where  the  balance  should  be  struck
    between the private and public interest  in  this  matter  and  from  a
    reading of the decision overall answered the first three  questions  of
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 in the affirmative. On a  further  overall
    reading of the decision, I cannot locate an error of  law  particularly
    when bearing in mind the last two questions  of  Razgar  which  are  as
    follows

         If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

         If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         ends sought to be achieved?'

15. I am not persuaded that any error of fact is material such  that  there
    is an error of law or that the judge misdirected herself.  The decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington               Date 26th September 2016



