
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12230/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 January 2015                              |On 30 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MRS TASNIM SHAHEEDA SELEMAN
                        (NO anonymity DIRECTION made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Kenny, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:  None

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Majid sitting at Taylor House on 3  October  2013)
    allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision by the Secretary of
    State to refuse to grant her indefinite leave to remain on UK  ancestry
    grounds under paragraph 193 of the rules, with reference  to  paragraph
    192(i) and paragraph 186(iii) of HC 395 (as amended).

 2. The sole ground of appeal is that the judge wrongly allowed the  appeal
    despite Counsel for the SSHD at the outset of the  hearing  withdrawing
    the decision appealed against on instructions from the Home Office.

 3. Permission to appeal  on  this  ground  was  granted  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge on 26 November 2014, and in a letter on file sent to the
    Upper Tribunal the claimant's solicitors have agreed that  Judge  Majid
    was wrong to allow the appeal after the decision  had  been  withdrawn.
    They report that the SSHD has since issued a  fresh  refusal  decision,
    which their client is now appealing.

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

 4. The stance now taken by the claimant's solicitors is not  determinative
    of the error of law question, but having exercised my own  judgment  on
    the matter I am satisfied that the concession is rightly given.

 5. The hearing took place shortly  before  the  introduction  of  the  new
    procedure rules on 20 October 2014. Under the new procedure  rules  the
    SSHD has to justify a late withdrawal such as occurred here. But  under
    the 2005 procedure rules which continued to apply as of 3 October  2014
    the judge did  not  have  discretion  to  reject  the  notification  of
    withdrawal on the ground that its effect was to  deny  the  claimant  a
    fair hearing. Rule 17 (2) was expressed in mandatory terms: "an  appeal
    shall be treated as withdrawn if the respondent notifies  the  Tribunal
    that the decision to which the appeal relates has been withdrawn."

 6. Accordingly the judge had no jurisdiction to proceed with  the  hearing
    of the appeal after Counsel for the SSHD announced  that  the  decision
    was withdrawn; and he had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  should  have  served  on  the
    parties a notice that this  appeal  has  been  recorded  as  withdrawn,
    pursuant to Regulation 17(3) of the 2005 Rules. This procedural step is
    not however necessary now, as both parties  accept  that  the  decision
    appealed against has been withdrawn.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal contains an
    error of law, such that it  should  be  set  aside  and  the  following
    decision substituted: The First-Tier Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal, following the notification of the  withdrawal  of  the
    decision appealed against in accordance with Rule  17(2)  of  the  2005
    Procedure Rules.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

