
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2015                               |On 9 July 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       Mr MAHISHAN SUMUDITHA LIYANAGE
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Clark, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms  G  Kiai  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Lighthouse,
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter came before me following the  favourable  decision  of  the
    claimant's (Mr Mahishan Sumudittha Liyanage's)  appeal  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal and the grant of permission to  appeal  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, hereafter known as the appellant.

 2. The respondent is a national of Sri Lanka. He had applied for grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  that  he
    had lived in the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  for  at  least  ten  years
    (Paragraph 276B of the Rules). The appellant refused  that  application
    on 19 February 2014 and on the same date the appellant  issued  removal
    directions against the responded under Section 47 of the Act.

 3. On 12 January 2015, Judge H Graves, a Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal
    heard the appeal at Hatton Cross. Both parties were represented at  the
    hearing. The respondent and his three witnesses gave oral evidence that
    in effect adopted their written witness statements. At the end  of  the
    hearing, Judge H Graves reserved his decision, which  he  gave  in  his
    written determination promulgated on 6 February 2015. Taking account of
    the relevant law and the appellant's guidance on  "Long  Residence  and
    Private Life" Version 10,  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, rejecting the appellant's contention that there  had
    been two gaps in the respondent's stay of at least  ten  years  in  the
    United Kingdom. The Judge gave reasons for his  conclusion  on  alleged
    gaps in Paragraphs 35, 36,37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42,  43  and  44  of  the
    determination.

 4. On 11 February 2015 the appellant sought permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal contending that the Judge of the First Tier Tribunal had
    made a material error of law and misdirected himself.  The  grounds  of
    appeal cited the relevant paragraph of the Rules (276  B  (i)  (a)  and
    (v).

 5. The grounds went on to repeat the assertions it had made in her  letter
    of refusal in relation to the two gaps in the  respondent's  continuous
    residence and the rest of the grounds contended that the appeal  should
    not have been allowed, and that even if it had to be allowed it  should
    have been allowed to the  limited  extent  of  being  remitted  to  the
    appellant to make a fresh decision.

 6. The application for permission to appeal came  for  a  decision  before
    First Tier Judge Levin. He granted the application.  The  decision  was
    made on 25 March 2015 and for  what  follows  it  is  critical  that  I
    reproduce verbatim the reasons for decision to grant permission.  Judge
    Levin  in  paragraph  1  puts  down  the  narrative  that  led  to  the
    application. In paragraph 2 he states, "It is arguable that the Judge's
    finding that the appellant's lawful residence in the UK was not  broken
    was materially flawed." In paragraph 3 the Judge  states,  "However  as
    the Judge allowed the Appeal under the Immigration Rules and not on the
    grounds that it was not otherwise in accordance with the law  there  is
    no merit in the second ground." And the final paragraph of the decision
    states, "As the first ground is arguable it follows  that  the  grounds
    and the decision disclose an arguable error of law."

 7. At the hearing before me  the  respondent  relied  on  the  President's
    judgement in Nixon (permission to appeal grounds)  [2014]  UKUT  00368)
    IAC and argued that the decision  granting  permission  to  appeal  was
    fundamentally defective as it had failed to identify at all or with any
    clarity the arguable error of law which was material to  the  decision.
    Mr Clark representing the  appellant  sought  a  short  adjournment  to
    consider the implications of the Nixon decision in  this  appeal.  This
    was granted.

 8. When the hearing reconvened Mr Clark took me through the  determination
    arguing that the findings of facts made by Judge H Graves were "wrong".
    He argued that the written grounds of appeal submitted by the appellant
    were clear in stating with clarity that the decision made  by  Judge  H
    Graves was in  material  error  of  law.  He  contended  that  as  full
    particulars of the material error of  law  had  been  set  out  in  the
    grounds in support of the application, the principles set out in  Nixon
    had no application in this case.

 9. In response Ms Kiai, counsel for the respondent  took  me  through  the
    grounds upon which the application had been made.  She  contended  that
    the ground 4 is no more than a summary of  the  appellant's  case  upon
    which Judge H Graves had made the decision to allow the appeal. So  the
    appellant, she contended was seeking  to  re-argue  the  facts  without
    identifying a material error of law in the decision of Judge H  Graves.
    She drew my attention to the Rule 24 response that the  respondent  had
    filed on 10 April 2015. The  appellant  had  therefore  had  sufficient
    opportunity to prepare its case in the light of the decision in  Nixon.
    She argued that the Upper Tribunal had no jurisdiction to proceed  with
    this appeal as no material  point  of  law  can  be  found  within  the
    formulated grounds of the appellant. Judge Lewis, she  said,  had  been
    wrong to grant permission and that the principles of law and  procedure
    as set out in the Nixon decision (in particular paragraphs  23  and  24
    thereof) apply to this appeal. She asked that I  find  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to  determine  this  appeal.  In   the
    alternative, Ms Kiai asked that I dismiss the  appeal  as  no  material
    error of law could be found in the decision of the First Tier Judge.

10. I reserved my decision, which I give with the following reasons. Having
    considered the arguments advanced  before  me  and  the  decision  with
    reasons given by Judge H Graves and in particular the decision of Judge
    Levis "granting permission to appeal", I find that in  accordance  with
    the principles set out in the case of Nixon, I have no jurisdiction  to
    determine this appeal. In coming to this decision  I  have  also  given
    careful consideration to  the  grounds  of  appeal  placed  before  the
    Tribunal on 11 February 2015. None of the  grounds  submitted  identify
    the alleged error of law  or  its  materiality  to  the  decision.  The
    decision given by Judge Levin simply says in paragraph 4 "As the  first
    ground is arguable  it  follows  that  the  grounds  and  the  decision
    disclose an arguable error  of  law."  The  first  ground  states'  The
    Respondent seeks permission to appeal in time, against the decision  of
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge Graves dated 6 February 2015 allowing the
    Appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK on the grounds of
    his long residence and to issue directions to remove the Appellant from
    the UK to Sri Lanka by way of directions under section 47 of  the  2006
    Act." I cannot understand what Judge Levin meant by saying,  "  As  the
    first ground is arguable it follows that the grounds and  the  decision
    discloses an arguable error of law". Judge Levis does not say  how  and
    why the first ground is arguable and nor does  the  Judge  say  in  his
    final paragraph that the "error" in law, whatever that was, is material
    to the decision.  He simply says "arguable error of law". That  is  the
    wrong test as has been  explained  by  the  learned  President  in  the
    decision in Nixon. Most respectfully I  adopt  his  reasoning  and  the
    rationale behind the relevant law.

11. If I am wrong in my decision of lack of  jurisdiction,  having  engaged
    with the grounds upon which permission to appeal  has  been  granted  I
    find that the decision of Judge H Graves is not in  material  error  of
    law. The findings made by Judge H Graves accord with the evidence  that
    was placed before him and which the Judge appraised correctly  applying
    the relevant law as is evident from paragraphs 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,  40,
    41, 42 and 43 of the determination. I am satisfied  that  the  findings
    and conclusions of the Judge were comfortably open to the Judge, having
    regard to the issues raised.

12. The appeal is dismissed as I have found no material error  of  law  and
    the grounds do not identify any material error of law in  this  appeal.
    Permission to appeal should not have been granted in this matter.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:     5 July 2015
