
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 June 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Prepared 23 June 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DR CHUNXIAO HOU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G McCall, Counsel instructed by Richmond Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of the People's Republic  of  China,  date  of
    birth 23 October 1967, appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse an application made on 7 February 2013 for indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled) Migrant in the UK under the Points-
    Based System.  The appeal came to be heard before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Telford (the Judge) who, on 9 February 2015, allowed  the  appeal
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended)  (the
    Rules).

3.   The gravamen of the Secretary of State's complaint is that  the  Judge,
    having found as a fact that the Claimant had had at  least  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom, went on to carry out
    the exercise under paragraph 276ADE(b)(ii) of the Rules and  following,
    to conclude that the appeal should be allowed outright.  The  Secretary
    of State asserted that what should have happened when the  finding  was
    made under paragraph 276B(i)(a) was to have remitted the matter to  the
    Secretary of State to decide whether  to  exercise  her  discretion  to
    grant leave which previously had not been exercised by the Secretary of
    State at all.

4.   The position so far as the Claimant was concerned was  that  the  Judge
    was entitled as a matter of law to exercise that discretion  and  there
    was no material error of law.  The Secretary of State relied  upon  the
    case of Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 307  (IAC).   It
    seemed to me that reference could equally have  been  made  to  Irhmedu
    [2011] UKUT 340 wherein a similar approach was taken to that argued  by
    the Secretary of State.  Ms McCall had argued  with  reference  to  the
    cases of Lamichane [2012] EWCA Civ 260, Patel & Others [2013] UKSC  72,
    as well as AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, that it was  open  to
    the Tribunal, notwithstanding the terms of paragraph  276B(ii)  of  the
    Rules, to consider those  matters.   Indeed  it  was  argued  that  the
    Tribunal was encouraged to do that same thing in order to  resolve  the
    issues in one decision.

5.   I preferred the decision in Ukus for from a plain reading of the  Rules
    it can be seen from the Notice of Immigration Decision and the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter, dated 10 January 2014, the Secretary of  State  had
    not actually addressed the issue of  the  exercise  of  discretion  but
    rejected the application on what has been found in fact to be erroneous
    grounds in relation to other matters.  On the findings of fact made  by
    the Judge the Claimant did meet  the  primary  requirement  to  succeed
    under paragraph 276B.

6.   It seemed to me there  is  further  force  in  the  point  that,  since
    paragraph 276B of the Rules had never been considered by the  Secretary
    of State, the  public  interest  issues  which  arise  under  paragraph
    276B(ii) need to be addressed by her.

7.   It is clear that the Judge, for the reasons set out, may  have  reached
    a  decision  on  limited  issues  on  what  he  thought  were  relevant
    requirements of 276B(ii).  The decision contained no reference  to  any
    assessment  of  the   public   interest   or   any   other   particular
    considerations.  In doing so the decision revealed the difficulty  that
    comes, absent of agreement between the parties, in a judge moving  into
    that area, primarily one for the Secretary of State to make  the  first
    decision.  I do not say there may not be cases where the discretion can
    be exercised.  I do not find in relation  to  a  Tier  1  points  based
    application that a First-tier Tribunal Judge has a  general  discretion
    to consider the exercise of discretion when  that  has  not  previously
    been carried out by the Secretary of State.

8.   The fact that there may have been many months  between  the  date  when
    the Section 120 notice and its particulars were served on the Secretary
    of State was, if I may put it this way,  a  merits  point  rather  than
    creating any time bar to the  Secretary  of  State  being  entitled  to
    exercise the primary discretion of  which  she  was  seized  under  the
    Rules.  For these reasons I therefore find the Original  Tribunal  made
    an error of law and the following decision should be substituted:

NOTICE OF DECISION

9.   The appeal of the Appellant with reference to paragraph 276B(i) of  the
    Immigration Rules stands but the balance of the decision with reference
    to paragraph 276B(ii) and following is to be returned to the  Secretary
    of State upon which she should consider the exercise of  discretion  in
    accordance with the law.

10.   No  anonymity  order  was  previously  made  and  none  is   evidently
    appropriate.



Signed        Date 21 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

