
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2014                          |On 5 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

                                   Between

                               MR ARSHAD BAIG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Markus of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Home Office Presenting Officer

             DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR/
                          NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who is  represented  by  Paragon
    Law of Nottingham.  He was born on  27  April  1951.   The  appellant's
    immigration history is unclear but he claims to have arrived in the  UK
    via Turkey and France in 1997.  Unfortunately,  it  was  not  until  12
    April 2012 that he submitted an application for  leave  to  remain,  it
    seems, on the basis that his rights under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) would be infringed if he were  to  be
    removed from the UK.  His application was considered under Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, which came  into  effect
    on 9 July 2012. It was refused on 1 July 2013.

2.   The appellant was served with a notice that he would be removed  as  an
    illegal entrant pursuant to  paragraph  8-10A  of  Schedule  2  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision. His notice of appeal which was lodged on 13 March  2014.   It
    seems that at the time of the notice of appeal  was  represented  by  a
    firm of solicitors (Armada Legal Services).  That firm was subsequently
    investigated by the Office of the  Immigration  Services  Commissioner.
    Members of that firm were subsequently struck off as solicitors  and/or
    were  found  guilty  of  illegally  providing  immigration  advice  and
    services.

4.   The respondent decided that the  appellant  had  provided  insufficient
    evidence of long residence in the UK.  Indeed, by  way  of  documentary
    evidence, he had only produced an electricity bill  dated  25  February
    2011.  The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  been
    resident in the UK for the required period.  What the  required  period
    was is a matter that is extremely  unclear.   It  was  claimed  by  the
    appellant that he had  been  continuously  resident  for  a  period  of
    fourteen years.  His application was considered under Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE (which deals with an application for leave  to  remain
    on grounds of a private life in the UK) as well as  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR itself.  The respondent rejected the application  on  the  grounds
    that  he  had  not  established  the  necessary  period  of  continuous
    residence nor were any of the Articles in the ECHR engaged.

The First -tier Tribunal Proceedings

5.   The appellant subsequently unsuccessfully appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   His  grounds  initially  stated  that  the   decision   was
    incompatible with  the  appellant's  Convention  rights  and  also  was
    contrary to the Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  claimed  to  have
    become integrated into British society.  He claimed to be  involved  at
    the local mosque and to  undertake  voluntary  work.   He  also  had  a
    cardiovascular condition which would prevent him returning to any third
    world country.

6.   The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pacey  (the
    Immigration Judge).  Judge Pacey noted that the appellant had requested
    a paper determination of his appeal but had  provided  no  evidence  in
    support of his claim either  to  satisfying  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules or being  allowed  exceptionally  to  remain  outside
    those Rules.  The Immigration Judge was not satisfied that he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph  276ADE  and  had  not  provided  independent
    evidence of probative value which would enable the Immigration Judge to
    conclude that the appeal fell to be considered outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellant had only produced a  very  generalised  statement
    and his medical condition was not such as to engage Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.  The Immigration Judge regarded the appeal  as  being  solely  on
    human rights grounds.  Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

7.   The initial grounds of appeal drafted, according to Mr Markus,  by  the
    appellant's former solicitors, asserted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had not attached sufficient  weight  to  the  substantial  evidence  of
    fourteen years' residence in the UK, had failed to have regard  to  the
    inadequacy of medical treatment in Pakistan, had failed to have  regard
    to two photographs showing the appellant with mosque  leaders  and  had
    applied an excessively high standard of proof to the  determination  of
    the appeal.  In addition, the allegation was made that the Tribunal had
    been biased.  Following the refusal of that application for  permission
    revised grounds were filed and settled by Mr Markus.  These state  that
    the correct version of the Immigration Rules is 276A1.   Unfortunately,
    because of frequent changes to the Immigration Rules I  have  found  it
    difficult to find a copy of the relevant rule at the relevant date  but
    have been assisted by Mr Markus who provided a  bundle  which  included
    (at page 33)  the  relevant  rule.   By  reading  276A1  with  276B,  I
    understand  that  that  the  appellant  had  to  show  fourteen  years'
    "continuous residence" in the UK before an application  could  be  made
    for leave to remain here under the rules in existence  before  the  9th
    July 2012.  The grounds of appeal  state  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    decided the  case  against  the  wrong  benchmark,  i.e.  twenty  years
    continuous user under paragraph 276ADE rather than fourteen years.  The
    appellant contends in his grounds that the Immigration Judge was  wrong
    to apply the twenty year requirement incorporated into the Rules  on  9
    July 2012.  Accordingly, there  was  a  material  error  of  law  which
    required to be rectified.

8.   I heard representations from the parties  and  a  full  note  of  those
    representations is contained in the Tribunal file.

9.   The parties first of all confirmed that there was no issue  about  late
    service of the notice of appeal.

10.  Mr Markus pointed out that the appellant had been advised and  assisted
    by a solicitor who had since been struck off the register and convicted
    of a  criminal  offence.   The  appeal  had  not  therefore  been  well
    prepared.  The appellant provided information  to  the  solicitors  but
    they had "lost  it".   This  included  a  video  taken  in  2011.   The
    appellant had been told by his solicitors that they had  submitted  the
    application when they  had  not.   The  application  was  in  fact  not
    submitted until April 2012.  At this point I was referred to the bundle
    of documents prepared.  This included  a  letter  at  page  130,  which
    refers to a number of enclosures.  This asserts that the appellant  had
    been involved in "running of the mosque" and "a great deal of voluntary
    work in the community".  It also asserts that the  appellant  had  been
    "here for over fourteen years".  Unfortunately, the letter referred  to
    did not make clear which Immigration Rule was  relied  on.   Mr  Markus
    accepted that his client could not meet the requirements of 276B of the
    Immigration Rules as it stood up to 8 July 2012 because his client  did
    not have sufficient knowledge of the English language as  was  required
    under 276B(iii) of that Rule.  However, his client had ticked  the  box
    "long residence in the UK"  in  his  application  and  the  box  "other
    purposes" (i.e. outside the Rules).  He submitted that his client  also
    me the requirements of 276A1. I understand 276A1  to  require  fourteen
    years continuous' residence whether or  not  that  residence  had  been
    unlawful.  It was submitted that the respondent had wrongly interpreted
    the application as being solely under Article 8 when  in  fact  it  was
    under the Immigration Rules also.  Again I was referred to the  grounds
    of appeal at page 46 in the bundle where the appellant asserted in  his
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that the "decision is  not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules".

11.  At this point  Mr  McVeety  pointed  out  that  his  client  could  not
    consider such a vague application.

12.  Mr Markus  went  on  to  explain  the  proper  factual  basis  for  the
    application.  The appellant's former solicitors had  carelessly  ticked
    the box saying that he wanted a  paper  hearing.   There  was  credible
    evidence from the appellant and his friends to confirm that he  had  in
    fact been in the UK for fourteen years at the date of that application.
     Mr Markus's instructions were that several  documents  were  submitted
    but these are no longer available as they had, he speculated, been lost
    by the appellant's former solicitors.  Unfortunately, he had  not  kept
    copies.  Mr Markus concluded by saying there were therefore two  errors
    of law:

    (1)  The failure to deal with the Immigration Rules  in  force  at  the
         time of the alleged fourteen years' continuous residence (276A1 and
         B). In particular, the Immigration Judge had erroneously considered
         that twenty years' continuous residence was  required,  i.  e.  the
         relevant period for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE.


    (2)  The failure  to  deal  adequately  with  appeal  under  Article  8
         application. The Immigration Judge  made  no  findings  as  to  the
         number of years the appellant had been in the  UK  and  she  should
         have done so. It was clear, Mr Markus submitted, that he  had  been
         in the UK for a long time. Alternatively, if the evidence  did  not
         appear satisfactory, the Immigration Judge should have directed  an
         oral hearing.

13.  Mr McVeety submitted that it was  insufficient  for  the  appellant  to
    place full responsibility for preparation of the appeal into the  hands
    of his legal  representatives.   The  respondent  had  never  seen  any
    documentary evidence to support his alleged long residence in  the  UK,
    for example, no  copies  of  any  Inland  Revenue  documents  had  been
    produced and many documents evidencing residence, such as  wage  slips,
    can be obtained in copy form.  This made it difficult  to  accept  that
    the appellant had submitted documentation as  he  claims.   Third,  the
    documentation which fell short of establishing  a  full  fourteen  year
    period of continuous residence and was inadequate in any event.

14.  Mr Markus then pointed out that his  client  did  not  either  read  or
    write English.  He accepted that his client nevertheless had the burden
    of producing documentation but he  referred  to  paragraph  14  of  the
    grounds of appeal which he had settled where it states that there is no
    rule of English law by which a represented party is automatically fixed
    with the errors of his legal representative.   There  he  refers  to  a
    number of authorities.  This is a case in which the appellant cannot be
    said to be wholly responsible for what has occurred.   He  referred  to
    page 33 of the appellant's bundle and submitted  that  paragraph  276A1
    was the correct Immigration Rule.  He then went on to make  submissions
    as to the directions that would be necessary in the event that an error
    of law was found.

15.  At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether
    or not there was a material error of law.

Discussion

16.  The appellant claims that he qualifies under  paragraph  276A1  of  the
    Immigration Rules, alternatively,  that  the  respondent  would  be  in
    breach of his protected human rights under the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR), specifically Article 8 of the ECHR, in  the  event
    that he were removed from the UK.

17.  The appellant was legally represented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to the extent that the notice of appeal with some  supporting  evidence
    was supplied to the First-tier Tribunal.  It seems that the box on  the
    appeal form indicating that he wished to have a paper determination  of
    his  appeal  was  ticked.   This  was  presumably  completed   on   the
    appellant's instructions.

18.  I have considerable sympathy with the appellant because it  seems  that
    he was inadequately represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    firm of solicitors which is no longer in existence.   However,  one  of
    the issues that I  have  to  consider  is  the  extent  to  which  that
    inadequate representation caused the appellant to lose his appeal.  The
    normal position is that a solicitor instructed on an appellant's behalf
    acts as his agent with ostensible authority to  bind  his  client.   Mr
    Markus points to certain authorities at paragraph 14 of his grounds  of
    appeal which suggest that there is  no  rule  of  English  law  that  a
    represented party is automatically and irrecoverably fixed with  errors
    of his representatives.  However, the difficulty the appellant faces is
    in setting out with any particularity what documents or other  evidence
    he did supply to his solicitors.  It seems to  me  to  be  insufficient
    simply to say that documents were supplied  without  saying  what  they
    were.  Have any steps been taken to try and recover these documents  by
    the Office for Supervision of Solicitors?   I  note  that  despite  now
    instructing competent solicitors to act on his behalf,  who  have  done
    everything they can to present the case favourably  for  their  client,
    there is still no documentary evidence to support the  claim  that  the
    appellant has been continuously resident in the UK for fourteen  years.
    There were some photographs, which were considered by  the  Immigration
    Judge at paragraph 11 of her determination but as she stated there  was
    no indication as to when they were taken or who they feature.   As  far
    as the appellant's work is concerned,  this  seems  to  have  consisted
    largely  of  voluntary  work  according  to   paragraph   10   of   the
    determination.  What has the appellant been living  off  for  the  last
    fourteen years?  If he was working he must have been able  to  give  an
    indication as to the name of his employer.  He has still not done so in
    his most recent witness statement.  If he was on benefits  there  would
    be a record of that with the Department of Social  Security.   No  such
    record has been produced even in the bundle prepared for this  hearing,
    which includes documents  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant does have testimonials in letter form from friends  to  state
    that they knew him in the late 1990s.  But there  is  no  corroborating
    evidence such as a tenancy agreement  to  confirm  that  the  appellant
    lived in Derby during the relevant period.  Did  he  pay  council  tax?
    Why is no record produced?  The appellant claims that  he  can  neither
    read nor write English which leads one to  question  whether  he  could
    have carried out any form of employment during this  period.   His  NHS
    records begin in 2011 and refer to the fact that he speaks English.  If
    he suffers from a heart condition why there are no NHS records for  the
    period prior to 2011?  Why no steps have been taken to  establish  from
    his GP whether he has any medical history prior to 2011?  I  note  that
    the appellant, despite being unable  to  read  or  write  English,  has
    signed his witness statement.

19.  The Immigration Judge dealt with the  respondent's  refusal  and  there
    was no basis whatsoever for her to direct  an  oral  hearing  when  the
    appellant had not  requested  one.   He  may  well  not  have  had  the
    resources to pay for such a hearing and appeared to be  happy  for  the
    matter to be dealt with on the papers.   The  Immigration  Judge  dealt
    with the application for leave to remain  as  though  it  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE because the respondent in her refusal refused leave to
    remain on that basis.  However, the Immigration Judge  also  considered
    Article 8 of  the  ECHR  in  substances  at  paragraphs  13-14  of  her
    determination but noted the absence of any evidence  supporting  strong
    family links or a private life in the UK.  It seems  to  me  that  that
    evidence is still wholly lacking.  The appellant does not claim  to  be
    in any form of relationship in the UK and his failure to read and write
    would be a major impediment to integration within UK  English  society.
    In any event, the  Immigration  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  9  of  her
    determination that the appellant claimed to have been  in  the  UK  for
    fourteen years as I repeat that no evidence  was  supplied  to  support
    that claim other than the evidence summarised above. I  regret  to  say
    that the evidence produced before this Tribunal  provides  very  little
    additional substance to the 14-year claim.

20.  I am satisfied that  had the  Immigration  Judge  been  presented  with
    cogent evidence that the appellant  had  been  enjoying  a  private  or
    family life in the UK over a sustained period, whether  fourteen  years
    or less, this would have been an important factor in her  consideration
    of his claim under Article 8.  She fully considered  the  ECHR  in  her
    determination but concluded that neither the requirements of Articles 3
    nor 8 were met.  I find that this was a conclusion she was entitled  to
    come to on the evidence presented to her.  Had the evidence now  before
    this Tribunal been presented to the First-tier Tribunal I have  reached
    the clear conclusion that would not have made  any  difference  to  the
    outcome and it is still inadequate.  Whilst I have  sympathy  with  the
    appellant in the manner of his representation I am not  satisfied  that
    if he had  competent  representation  he  would  be  in  any  different
    position than that which he is now  in.  there  simply  was  no  cogent
    evidence to support the 14-year claimed period of continuous residence.
    I accept Mr McVeety's submission that if the appellant had have been in
    the UK for as long as fourteen  years  some  documentary  record  would
    exist.  Unfortunately, such records are still lacking.

21.  For the above reasons, whilst there may have been a technical error  in
    the reference to paragraph 276ADE  both  in  the  refusal  and  in  the
    determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  ground  1  which  is  the
    principal ground on which permission to appeal was given in this  case,
    presupposes that the appellant had been in continuous residence in  the
    UK for at least fourteen years at the date that the new Rules came into
    force on 9 July 2012.  Given the lack of  adequate  evidence  of  this,
    such as would discharge the burden of proof which rests  on  him  to  a
    standard of balance of probabilities, it follows that  the  errors  was
    immaterial.

22.  I should add that I do not regard paragraph 276A1  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  as  necessarily  being  relevant  in  any   event   because   it
    specifically refers to a person "seeking an  extension  of  stay"  ....
    This appellant was not seeking an extension of stay.  He came to the UK
    illegally, by his own admission.  He never had any right to be  in  the
    UK.

Notice of Decision

23.  I consider that there is no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and that  decision  stands.   Accordingly,  the
    dismissal of the appellant's application for leave to remain in the  UK
    on the grounds of long residence or under the ECHR stands dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant has not been successful in  his  appeal  and  I  make  no  fee
    award.





Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury







