
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12383/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2016                     |On 4 October 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    M S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Ahammad, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  10  June  1984.  He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 15 October 2014  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove
    him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.   His appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Nightingale ("the FTTJ") who, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 24 February 2016, dismissed his appeal.

 2. The  appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  FTTJ.  His
    representative, Ms Ahammad, made an application  to  adjourn  it  inter
    alia on the ground that the appellant had been taken into  hospital  on
    the morning of the hearing and was unable to attend.  The FTTJ directed
    that the appellant submit by 15 February 2016 any medical evidence that
    he was unfit to attend the hearing. In  the  absence  of  "any  medical
    evidence" the appeal would be determined on  the  papers.   No  medical
    evidence being on the file by the due date, the FTTJ decided the appeal
    on the papers, dismissing the appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth on 9 August 2016  on  the
    ground that there was on the Tribunal file a faxed  letter  from  Epsom
    and St Helier Hospital dated 11 February 2016 and it was arguable  that
    the decision should not have been made on the papers, given the  FTTJ's
    direction.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. Mr Clarke accepted that the appellant's representative  had  faxed  the
    tribunal prior to 15 February 2016 medical  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's admission to hospital on 11 February 2016. He accepted  the
    FTTJ's decision to decide the hearing on the papers  was  a  procedural
    error and material, given the direction of the  FTTJ  that  the  matter
    would be decided on the papers if no medical evidence were produced.

 6. I agree with the parties that the  decision  of  the  FTTJ  contains  a
    procedural  error:  there  is  on  file  a  faxed  letter  from   those
    representing the appellant submitting a letter from the  Epsom  and  St
    Helier Hospital dated 11 February 2016. This fax was transmitted on  15
    February 2016 and was thus sent in accordance with  the  directions  of
    the FTTJ. The FTTJ should not have decided the appeal  on  the  papers.
    It was procedurally unfair for a hearing on the papers to  take  place,
    given the direction of the FTTJ.

 7. The appellant produced for the hearing  before  me  fresh  evidence  in
    support of his appeal. The respondent's representative did  not  object
    to this additional evidence being adduced but sought time  to  consider
    it. Both representatives submitted that the appropriate course was  for
    the matter to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing. I do not disagree and direct accordingly.

 8. In summary, the decision of the FTTJ contains a procedural error  which
    amounts to an error of law; it is  material  to  the  outcome  and  the
    decision must be set aside for the matter to be decided afresh.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Nightingale.

10. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal but given my
    reference to the appellant's admission to hospital, such a direction is
    appropriate now.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 3 October 2016


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 3 October 2016
                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Hatton Cross with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. A Bengali interpreter is required.





A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 3 October 2016

