
IAC-AH-sc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2014                            |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              miss Nasrin akter
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hassan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Sweet), promulgated on 8 September 2014 in which the  Claimant's
    appealed against a decision dated 20 February 2014 to remove her and to
    refuse leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

2.   The Claimant's date of birth is 1 January 1985 and she is a citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

Background

3.   The Secretary of  State  considered  the  application  under  paragraph
    245DD(d) and  paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules  which  set  out
    the specified documents required to be  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application.   The  Rule  provides  for  the  exercise  of   evidential
    flexibility in certain circumstances including where,

    (i)  A sequence of documents or some of the documents in  the  sequence
         have been missing (for example if one bank statement from a  series
         is missing).

4.   The Secretary of State considered that the Claimant failed  to  produce
    bank statements to cover the required 90 consecutive day period  ending
    no more than 31 days before the date of the application.  The Secretary
    of State identified the period from 28 September to 23 December 2013.

5.   The Tribunal found  that  the  relevant  90  day  period  was  from  23
    September to 23 December 2013, and that the Claimant omitted the  final
    Halifax bank statement issued on 23 December 2013.  The Tribunal  found
    that the Secretary  of  State  ought  to  have  used  discretion  under
    paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules. It was quite clear  that  the
    bank statements for the period showed  the  required  funds  up  to  23
    December 2013 needed to meet the Rules.  The Tribunal  found  that  the
    missing bank statement was a document in a sequence of  documents  that
    had been omitted.  The bank statement was in existence and  could  have
    been obtained and it was in a sequence that directly followed  on  from
    the bank statements at Section F in the respondent's bundle.

Grounds of Application

6.   The Secretary of State argued that the judge failed to have  regard  to
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in the Secretary of State for  Home
    Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA  Civ  2.   The  Secretary  of  State
    asserted that the omitted statement was not one missing in  a  sequence
    and did not fall within the parameters of paragraph 254AA.

Permission

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    on 27 October 2014.   The grounds having disclosed that a determination
    involved an arguable error of law.

The Hearing

Submissions

8.   Mr Duffy conceded that having further considered  the  issues  and  the
    evidence that was before the Tribunal, it may be that the decision made
    was open to the Tribunal.  He conceded that the missing bank  statement
    did come within the category envisaged in paragraph 245 as  a  document
    missing from a sequence of documents.  He relied on Chao Gu [2014] EWHC
    1634 (Admin).

9.   Mr Hassan submitted that the Claimant ordered from her  bank  the  full
    range of bank statements for the relevant  period  and  that  the  bank
    omitted to send the final bank statement  for  23  December  2013.   He
    submitted that Rodriguez was factually distinct from  this  case.   The
    Claimant did have the funds available and the  missing  bank  statement
    was put in evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion and Decision

10.  Essentially there was agreement between the parties that  the  Claimant
    had indeed met the requirements of the Rules by producing  evidence  of
    her finances in bank statements covering a 90  day  period.   Mr  Duffy
    sensibly conceded that the missing document was part of a  sequence  of
    documents, namely bank statements covering a period of time and as such
    came within the remit of paragraph 245AA.

11.  The facts in Chao Gu related to  documentation  where  a  page  in  the
    middle of a document was missing.  Because the missing page was in  the
    middle it could be considered to be a document missing from a sequence.
     I am satisfied that the same principle clearly applies to  a  document
    at the end of  a  chronological  series  and  which  forms  part  of  a
    sequence.

12.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal correctly applied paragraph 245AA  and
    concluded that the decision made by the Secretary of State was  not  in
    accordance with the law by her failure to apply paragraph  245AA(b)(i).
    I find no material error of law disclosed in the Tribunal's decision.

Decision

13.  There is no material error of law in the decision.

14.  The decision shall stand.


     No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.



Signed        Date 15.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

