
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|                                 |
|On 12 December 2016                       |On 16th January 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent (Mr A): Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr A, who was the original appellant in this case,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan who entered this country as a student on  23  September  2003.
    After a number of extensions of his  leave,  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted in June 2009 by which time his wife and son  had  arrived  in
    the UK following an appeal in May 2008.  The son was born  on  2  April
    2003 and so was 5 when he came.  He has now been in this  country  some
    eight and a half years.  Mr A made an application by  letter  dated  18
    October 2014 which was refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision
    dated 11 March 2015 against which Mr A appealed.

 2. His appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  but  the
    Secretary of State appealed against  this  decision.   Her  appeal  was
    allowed by an Upper Tribunal Judge but that decision  was  reviewed  by
    this Tribunal and set aside pursuant to this  Tribunal's  powers  under
    paragraph 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the
    effect of which is that the appeal against Judge Lagunju's decision has
    now again to be determined, permission having originally been given  to
    appeal against that decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes on
    26 May 2016.  Accordingly this remains the appeal of the  Secretary  of
    State but for ease of  reference  I  shall  hereafter  throughout  this
    decision refer to Mr A (who as noted was  the  original  appellant)  as
    "the claimant" and to the Secretary of  State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 3. I have been asked to make an anonymity direction because the claimant's
    son, who is affected by this appeal, is now 13 years old and it  would,
    it is argued, be inappropriate for him to be identified.  I agree  that
    in these circumstances it is appropriate to make an anonymity order and
    I do so.  Accordingly this case cannot be reported  in  any  way  which
    might identify the claimant's son.

 4. There is no issue in this case regarding the behaviour of the  claimant
    and his wife.  They have not had leave to be  in  this  country  for  a
    considerable period of time and what is more, the claimant  has  worked
    in this country which he was not permitted to do.  Clearly there  is  a
    considerable public interest in removing people such as  this  claimant
    who are not permitted to be here.  This is made even  clearer  than  it
    already was by Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  which  inserted
    the new Part 5A into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
    dealing with the public interest considerations of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The very great public interest  in  effecting  removal  of  such
    people is set out within paragraph 117B, which begins by stating at (1)
    that "the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
    public interest".  Then at sub-paragraph (4) it is provided that little
    weight should be given to either a private life or relationship  formed
    with a qualifying partner which is established by a person  at  a  time
    when that person in this country unlawfully and at  (5)  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when that person's immigration status is  precarious.   Accordingly  in
    this case  such  private  life  as  the  claimant  and  his  wife  have
    established in this country should be  regarded  as  of  little  weight
    because throughout the last few years neither  of  them  have  had  any
    lawful right to be in this country and  their  position  has  obviously
    been precarious; if they had been apprehended  earlier  as  they  might
    have been, steps might then have been  taken  to  remove  them  sooner.
    However, Section 117B(6) now provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                  the United Kingdom".

 5. The definition of "qualifying child" for  these  purposes  is  set  out
    within Section 117D(1) in which it is said to mean that he  or  she  is
    either

         "(a) a British citizen, or

           (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more".

 6. Although at the time of application the claimant's son had not been  in
    this country for seven years, by the date of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which it is accepted on all sides was the relevant
    date, the claimant's son had been in this country for seven  years  and
    therefore the Tribunal had to consider  in  light  of  Section  117B(6)
    whether or not it would be "reasonable" to expect the  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 7. The Court of Appeal has  recently  given  guidance  (in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705) with  regard  to  the  implementation  of  Section
    117B(6) and the manner in which "reasonable" should  be  construed  and
    although that decision was promulgated after Judge Lagunju's  decision,
    nonetheless it sets out the basis upon which she should have considered
    her decision.

 8. Essentially the basis of the Secretary of State's appeal is that at  no
    stage within the decision does the judge give either specific  or  even
    proper consideration to whether or not  it  would  be  "reasonable"  to
    expect the claimant's son to leave the UK.  Section 117B(6)  is  simply
    not mentioned within the decision at all.  Obviously, the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) is not considered, because it  had
    not by then been handed down, but it is clear from that  decision  that
    when considering whether or not it is "reasonable" to expect a child to
    leave the United Kingdom a  Tribunal  must  have  in  mind  the  public
    interest in effecting the removal of the particular applicant  in  that
    case, so factors such as the applicant's poor immigration  history  are
    material to that decision.

 9. It is accepted  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  by  Mr  Martin  who  has
    represented the claimant throughout that the judge's  failure  to  have
    specific regard to Section 117B(6) was an error of law but  he  submits
    further that that error was not a material one because, he says, it  is
    clear from the reading of the judge's decision as  a  whole  that  even
    though she did not specifically mention Section 117B(6), the  test  she
    applied was no easier than the test she would have been bound to  apply
    had she had this Section specifically in mind.

10.  In  the  course  of  argument  this  Tribunal  asked  Mr  Tarlow,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, whether when considering whether or
    not it would be proportionate to remove the  claimant,  the  judge  had
    disregarded any particular factor to which regard should have been  had
    and  Mr  Tarlow  very  reasonably  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not
    overlooked any particular factor.

11. In the course of his  concise  but  persuasive  submissions  Mr  Martin
    identified  the  factors  to  which  the  judge  had  had  regard  when
    considering whether the removal of the claimant would be proportionate.
     The claimant's son had been in this country for over seven  years  and
    these seven years had been from the age of 5 rather  than  from  birth,
    such that significant weight had  to  be  given  to  it  following  the
    guidance given by this Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed and  Others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) Iran UTIAC [2013] but she also  had
    regard to the very great public interest that must be given to the need
    to enforce  effective  immigration  control.   Her  starting  point  at
    paragraph 24 was that "it is  notable  that  it  will  be  unusual  for
    someone who cannot meet the Rules to succeed under Article 8", and then
    at paragraph 25 specifically when "assessing proportionality" the judge
    had  "regard  to  the  appellant's  poor  immigration  history".    She
    specifically attached limited weight to the  private  life  established
    when the claimant's leave was precarious and when he had had no  lawful
    leave in this country and set out in terms that he should have had  the
    intention to return to Pakistan on completion of his studies  which  he
    failed to do.

12. All in all therefore, it is clear that the judge  did  have  regard  to
    those factors negative to the claimant but her reason  for  considering
    that it would still not be proportionate to return him to Pakistan  was
    because of the disruption that this would cause to his son's  life  and
    future  prospects.   She  considered  that  it  would  not  be  in  the
    claimant's son's best interests to leave and had regard to the evidence
    which was provided to show that the effect on the claimant's son  would
    be significant.

13. It is right that I indicate that this is not  a  decision  which  would
    necessarily have been made by every judge considering this question and
    indeed, had I been re-making this appeal I may well myself have reached
    a different conclusion,  but  my  obligation  in  this  hearing  is  to
    consider whether or not the judge's failure  specifically  to  set  out
    that the test was whether or not it would be "reasonable" to expect the
    claimant's son to return to Pakistan was a material one; that is, would
    it  have  made  a  jot  of  difference  to  her  decision  if  she  had
    specifically had the word "reasonable" in  mind.   Mr  Martin  suggests
    that if  anything  the  test  to  be  overcome  by  the  claimant  when
    considering whether or not his return  would  be  proportionate  is  an
    easier one once the word "reasonable" is used with regard to the  son's
    removal rather than just relying on established Article 8 jurisprudence
    relating to proportionality.  Whether that is so or not,  it  certainly
    in my judgment cannot be said that his task would have been harder.  It
    is clear from the judge's decision (even though she did  not  use  this
    specific word) that she did not consider in all  the  circumstances  of
    this case that it would be reasonable for the claimant's son to  return
    to Pakistan now (after having had regard  to  the  public  interest  in
    removing the claimant) and I must have in mind also that  at  paragraph
    49 of MA (Pakistan) it is stated that "the fact that the child has been
    in the UK for seven years would need to be given significant weight  in
    the proportionality exercise" such that "leave should be granted unless
    there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary".   Whether  or  not  the
    reasons are sufficiently powerful must be considered on  the  facts  in
    any specific case and in this case the judge  did  have  this  test  in
    mind, albeit that it was not expressed through  the  prism  of  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which would have been preferable.

14. Although as I have indicated I myself would very likely have reached  a
    different decision, it cannot be said  that  the  decision  was  either
    perverse or was one which was not open to the judge on the basis of the
    material which she considered or that she has failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for reaching the decision which  she  did.   Accordingly,  such
    error as there was in the judge failing specifically to have regard  to
    the provisions of Section 117B(6) was not  a  material  error  and  the
    respondent's appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal,  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  by  the
Secretary of State of further leave to remain,  is  dismissed.   The  First-
tier Tribunal's decision allowing the claimant's appeal is affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: Decision given orally on 12 December 2016

     Signed:  12 January 2017

