
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12207/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DAVID JAMESON
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Muitulu (Just and Brown Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of David Jameson, a citizen  of  St  Lucia  born  21
    March 1972, originally against the decision of  the  Respondent  of  25
    February 2014 to issue removal directions against him under section  47
    of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 having  refused  his
    application for further leave to remain, and  now  with  permission  to
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  dismissed
    that appeal.

 2. He had applied for further leave to remain on 29 January  2014  on  the
    basis of his family life in this country, with his wife  [EJ]  born  16
    March 1971, and their children [MJ], born 2  February  1999  and  [KJ],
    born 2 March 2008, all nationals of St Lucia, the children having  been
    born here; his wife had two sons from an earlier relationship, [D]  and
    [M], born 3 February 1995 and 18 April 1996, who had lived in St  Lucia
    between 1997 and 1999, now British citizens both, as was their  natural
    father. Mr Jameson arrived here in August 2005 with a view to  visiting
    [EJ] and [MJ], who were themselves  present  in  this  country  to  see
    [EJ]'s sons [D] and [M], who their mother felt were being subjected  to
    abuse: she had found it difficult to subsequently return  to  St  Lucia
    absent resolution of this situation. She also had a granddaughter, five
    months old, and a British citizen. She had applied for leave to  remain
    on 27 March 2012.

 3. He had overstayed alongside her, working to support the family, and she
    had been later granted shared custody of the boys.  They  continued  to
    need the support from him. In January 2014 the boys'  father  [ML]  had
    required [M] to leave the family home. [M] was an  outstanding  student
    who had performed exceptionally well at school, and  was  then  working
    with a view to taking a number of examinations in May or June 2014, and
    was  a  promising  athlete  whose  accomplishments  in  shot  put   and
    basketball caused his teachers to believe that he had  the  ability  to
    achieve great success and compete at the highest level.  The  Appellant
    was an active member of the Seventh Day Adventist Church  who  assisted
    elderly church members who were unable to  attend  because  of  age  or
    infirmity. He had studied courses in English and  Mathematics  and  was
    now on a three-year course studying renewable energy, and  believed  he
    could make a valuable contribution to this country.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  commended  the  Appellant  for  his  candour,
    exemplified by  his  freely  identifying  the  substantial  numbers  of
    siblings they had in St Lucia, and so  determined  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the factual history advanced by him. The decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Rules was because the Appellant  did  not  qualify
    under the partner route as his  wife  was  lacked  the  settled  status
    required to be a Sponsor under Appendix FM, and under the parent  route
    because the couple were in an extant relationship; as to their  private
    life,  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    relocation to St Lucia given that he retained family connections in  St
    Lucia, where he would be able to speak the language, and  where he  had
    lived until the age of 33. Outside the Rules, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that there was  no  interference  likely  to  occur  with  the
    parties' family life, as it was more likely than not  that  the  family
    would return abroad together.  The connections  between  the  Appellant
    and  his  wife's  adult  children  were  moderate  and  any   financial
    dependency they had developed with him was quite recent. On a return to
    St Lucia, the family unit would have  the  advantage  of  both  adults'
    numerous siblings on which  to  rely,  and  any  connections  with  the
    community in this country, including the church and  their  work  here,
    had been established on a precarious basis.

 5. The critical factor in the appeal was the best interests of Malachi who
    had been here from just under the age of six until  the  present  date,
    when (at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing) he was set to  be
    taking his GCSE examinations in June 2015; Kandi had lived  here  since
    her birth on 2 March 2008. The Judge did not accept that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect Malachi to return abroad to make a new life with
    his family in  their  own  country,  given  there  was  no  independent
    documentary evidence relating to his progress at school, his  prospects
    of success in his GCSEs bearing in mind his likely achievements in this
    country weighed against the possibility  of  equivalent  qualifications
    being attained in St Lucia, and the sporting opportunities  there;  and
    there was no evidence as to whether a  single  year  set  back  in  his
    education caused by an interruption in his studies would have any  real
    significance to him in the  long  run.  The  children  would  have  the
    advantage of an extended family to help them assimilate there. None  of
    this was to punish the children for parental wrong-doing, a  matter  of
    which they were innocent: rather the decision reflected a return to the
    status quo that should and would have prevailed were it not  for  their
    parents' transgression of the Immigration Rules in this country.

 6. The Appellant's grounds of appeal challenged this decision on the basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal had not  considered  Malachi's  degree  of
    integration in this country, failed to take the views of  the  children
    into express account, failed to assess the interests of the Appellant's
    wife's adult children who were still  part  of  the  family  unit,  and
    failed to  consider  the  contribution  the  family  had  made  to  the
    community  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  having
    originally refused permission to appeal, Judge McWilliam of  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission on 18 May 2015 on the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that inadequate consideration had been given to  the  question
    of reasonableness.

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Muitulu made submissions  consistent  with
    grounds of appeal; for the Secretary of State Ms Everett accepted  that
    this was an appeal that could have  been  determined  either  way,  but
    maintained that there was  enough  reasoning  to  support  the  outcome
    chosen by the First-tier Tribunal which had not erred in law.

Findings and reasons

 8. A consideration of immigration appeals involving the right  to  private
    and family  life  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  must  give  central
    attention to the statutory considerations identified  in  117B  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  addressing  the  public
    interest considerations applicable in all such cases, which sets out:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child (has lived in the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more), and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

 9. Christopher Clarke LJ stated in EV (Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
         present, the  need  for  immigration  control  outweighs  the  best
         interests of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the
         relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in  their  best
         interests to remain here; and also to take account of  any  factors
         that point the other way.

         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
         into account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

10. Alongside him Lewison LJ stated at [60] that

         "... none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

11. Overall the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  an  impressively
    detailed one, and the thought processes that led it to its  conclusions
    are  set  out  extensively.  There  is  nothing  within  it   that   is
    inconsistent with the guidance just cited from EV Philippines.  It  can
    certainly not be criticised for any inadequacy of reasons or failure to
    take relevant considerations into account. I note that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal began by making a provisional conclusion as to proportionality
    at paragraph 39, which focuses on the circumstances  of  the  Appellant
    and his limited ties with this country,  before  proceeding  to  decide
    whether  Malachi's  own  length  of  residence  and  connections   here
    displaced "the  provisional  balance  arrived  at".  There  is  nothing
    objectionable in so doing: as Lord Hodge stated in Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC
    74 at [25], "It was legitimate for the decision-maker to ask ...  first
    whether it would have been proportionate to remove the parents if  they
    had no children and then, in considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    children in the proportionality exercise, ask whether their  well-being
    altered that provisional balance".

12. Once the decision is read as a whole, it becomes clear  that  the  true
    concern  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarding  the  best  interests
    assessment was the paucity of evidence before it which would assist  in
    evaluating where the best interests of both  Malachi  and  his  younger
    sister truly lay, the Judge expressing his concerns as to the  lack  of
    evidence in several respects: regarding the Appellant's likely progress
    at school  in  his  (then)  imminent  GCSEs,  differences  between  the
    education systems of the United Kingdom and St Lucia,  and  his  actual
    achievements  and  the  likely  consequences  of  switching  from   the
    education system of the former to the latter. The burden of proof is on
    an Appellant in immigration appeals generally:  it  was  not  suggested
    before me that this was a case where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have exercised its case management  powers  to  augment  the  available
    evidence, a possibility discussed in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options)
    [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).

13. Certainly this is an appeal that might have been determined  in  favour
    of the Appellant given his son's length of  residence  here.   However,
    different Tribunals  may  come  to  different  conclusions  on  similar
    evidence. Mr Muitulu indicated at the hearing, when I raised the First-
    tier Tribunal's concern as to a lack of evidence with him, that it  was
    his understanding that the Appellants had provided significant evidence
    to the Secretary of State that may not have been before the  First-tier
    Tribunal: if that is right, then the Home Office will have to  look  at
    the case again before any further action is taken. But the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chambers of the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  can  only
    determine appeals on the basis of the material before them.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

    The appeal is dismissed


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
Signed:     Date: 2 November 2015

