
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12519/2015
                                                               IA/12515/2015
                                                               IA/12516/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 3rd October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                        Avneet [b] (first appellant)
                        Vivek [B] (second appellant)
                           [T b] (third appellant)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Fari Farhat, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
    of the Secretary of  State  dated  18th  March  2015  to  refuse  their
    application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their private
    and family life.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Turquet  dismissed  the
    appeals in a decision promulgated on 18th August 2016.  The Appellants'
    application for permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    refused as was a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants applied for permission to  apply  for  Judicial  Review.
    That application was granted by the High Court on 7th  June  2017.  The
    High Court noted that the  Secretary  of  State  has  a  discretion  in
    considering the issue of 'continuous residence' in long residence cases
    and considered that it was arguable that the Secretary of  State  ought
    to consider exercising the same  discretion  in  a  case  such  as  the
    instant one in relation to the question as to  whether  the  Appellants
    had established  continuous  residence  under  paragraph  276A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  On 27th June 2017, there being no application for a
    substantive hearing, the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse
    permission to appeal was quashed.  Following that  decision  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Vice President  Ockelton
    on 21st July 2017 in light of the decision of the High Court.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the first Appellant  entered  the
    UK in September 2001 with entry  clearance  as  a  student  until  31st
    January 2009 and that leave was extended until 7th February 2011  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  The Appellants returned to India  on
    7th February 2011 and re-entered the UK on 14th September 2011 with the
    first Appellant having leave to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    until 2nd February 2015.  The second Appellant is the  husband  of  the
    first Appellant and the third Appellant is their son who was born on  [
    ] 2001 in India.  They were issued with leave in line with that of  the
    first Appellant.  On 2nd  February  2015  the  Appellants  applied  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of private and family life.   That
    application was refused on 18th March 2015.

Issues and Error of Law

 4. The issue before me centred on the question of the  potential  exercise
    of discretion by the Secretary of State  in  relation  to  a  break  in
    continuity of residence caused by the absence of the parties  from  the
    UK for  a  seven  month  period  in  2011.  The  Appellants  sought  to
    demonstrate a period of continuous residence in the UK from their entry
    to the UK on 14th September 2007 until their application for  leave  to
    remain on 2nd February 2015.  This is significant because, if  it  were
    to be accepted that there was a period of continuous  residence  of  at
    least seven years prior to the application, then at  the  date  of  the
    application the  third  Appellant  would  have  established  continuous
    residence for at least seven years and there is a possibility that EX.1
    of Appendix FM would apply under the parent route.

 5. The issue is whether the break during  which  the  family  returned  to
    Pakistan between 7th February 2011 and their return to the UK  on  14th
    September  2011,  a  period  of  seven  months,  broke  the  period  of
    continuous residence established since September 2007.  It  is  not  in
    dispute that the period of absence of seven months is in excess of  the
    six months absence permitted by paragraph 276A(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. However it is the Appellant's case that, under the  Home  Office
    guidance on long residence,  the  Secretary  of  State  could  exercise
    discretion in relation to periods in excess of six  months  absence  in
    appropriate circumstances.

 6. It is the Appellant's case, which is not disputed  by  the  Respondent,
    that the first Appellant had undertaken her Master's  dissertation  and
    had identified an area of research but she  was  unable  to  secure  an
    unconditional offer before the expiry of her Post-Study  Work  visa  in
    February 2011. Therefore the family left the  UK  on  7  February  2011
    planning to return to the UK in April 2011 with a fresh  student  visa.
    However as a result of the first Appellant's supervisor going on  leave
    the start date for her PhD was postponed from April to September  2011.
    As a result she was granted entry clearance and the family returned  to
    the UK in September 2011. During their absence they  had  continued  to
    pay their rent and council tax and their  child  remained  enrolled  at
    school and followed the school curriculum whilst in India.

 7. Paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules defines continuous residence in
    the context of  the  interpretation  of  paragraph  276B  to  276D  and
    276ADE(1) as follows:




      "Long residence in the United Kingdom

      276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).
          (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom
          for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period shall not
          be considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent
          from the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or less at any
          one time, provided that the applicant in question has existing
          limited leave to enter or remain upon their departure and return,
          but shall be considered to have been broken if the applicant:
             (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, section
             10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the United
             Kingdom having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or
             (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced a
             clear intention not to return; or
             (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he
             could have had no reasonable expectation at the time of
             leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or
             (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment or was directed to be detained in an
             institution other than a prison (including, in particular, a
             hospital or an institution for young offenders), provided that
             the sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or
             (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the
             United Kingdom during the period in question."

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellants  had  not
    established residence from September 2007 as their absence from the  UK
    in 2011 broke their continuity of residence.

 9. The judge decided that  the  Appellants  did  not  have  continuity  of
    residence between February and September 2011 because they had leave to
    remain on the day they left the UK but that leave expired and they  did
    not have any leave for a period of over six months  and  there  was  no
    guarantee they would have been granted leave to return to the UK  [46].
    The judge found that the Appellants were in the UK until the expiry  of
    their leave in February 2011 but that is not  part  of  any  continuous
    residence after that date and their residence runs from September  2011
    [42].  However, it was properly accepted by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  that
    the Appellants did not fall foul of the other provisions of  paragraphs
    276A because they had existing leave to remain when they  left  the  UK
    and entry clearance upon their return to the  UK.   She  accepted  that
    such leave did not have to be ongoing during their absence nor  did  it
    have to be in the same category. Accordingly  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in her interpretation of paragraph 276A of the  Immigration
    Rules.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the Home Office  guidance  and
    found that it was not applicable because it applied to  long  residence
    [46].  However, it is clear from paragraph 276A that the definition  of
    continuous residence there applies to 276B to  276D  (which  deal  with
    long residence applications) and 276ADE (which deals with private  life
    applications).  The definition of continuous residence therein  is  not
    limited to long residence applications only but also applies to private
    life applications under 276ADE.   Paragraph  276A  (c)  clarifies  that
    'lived  continuously  and  'living   continuously'   mean   'continuous
    residence'.  Any  guidance  on  the  interpretation   of   the   phrase
    'continuous residence' is therefore capable of  being  applied  to  the
    interpretation  of  'lived  continuously'   within   paragraph   276ADE
    Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to  consider
    whether the Home Office guidance applied.

11. In the Grounds of Appeal as amplified by Mr Farhat at the  hearing,  it
    is contended that, had the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the
    Home Office guidance, she should have decided  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to consider exercising the discretion contained in the
    guidance and concluded that the decision of the Secretary of  State  is
    not in accordance with the law.  It is contended that  such  a  finding
    was open to the  judge  because  this  appeal  was  brought  under  the
    previous version of Section 84(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

12. The issue therefore is whether the period of seven months, which is  in
    excess of the six month period set out in the definition of  continuous
    residence in 276A (a) was a circumstance capable  of  being  considered
    under the relevant Home Office guidance. For the reasons set out  above
    I  am  satisfied  that  the  guidance  as  to  the  interpretation   of
    'continuous residence' is relevant to assessing  whether  a  child  has
    established that s/he has 'lived continuously' in the UK for at least 7
    years under 276ADE(1)(iv).

13. The version of the guidance relied on at the hearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in the Grounds for Judicial Review was that dated 8th  May
    2015 and a complete version of that guidance had not been submitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal. When the  parties  were  given  an  opportunity  to
    obtain the relevant guidance, it  became  apparent  that  the  relevant
    guidance applicable at the date of the decision in this case is in fact
    that dated on 17th October 2014 and not the  May  2015  guidance.   The
    relevant provisions of both guidances are different.

14. The October 2014  guidance  sets  out  the  definition  of  'continuous
    residence' as that set out at paragraph 276A of the Immigration  Rules.
    The October 2014 guidance is divided into a number  of  sections  under
    the heading 'Long residence'.  Page  13  contains  a  section  entitled
    'Breaks in continuous residence' which states that continuous residence
    is considered to be broken if  (inter  alia)  the  applicant  has  been
    absent from the UK for a period of more than  six  months  at  any  one
    time, or is absent from the UK for a shorter period but does  not  have
    valid leave to enter the UK on their return, or valid leave  to  remain
    on their departure from the UK.  The key section of the  2014  guidance
    is at page 17 which has a section entitled 'Time spent outside the  UK'
    where it states:

         "Continuous lawful residence is broken if the applicant has  a  gap
         of leave of more than 6 months.

         However, it is not broken if the  applicant  has  a  gap  of  leave
         outside the UK of six months or less.  For example, applicants  who
         leave the UK before their valid  leave  expires  and  obtain  fresh
         entry clearance and re-enter the UK do not break continuous  lawful
         residence providing  the  absence  from  the  UK  is  less  than  6
         months...

         It is also not broken if the applicant leaves the  UK  after  their
         valid leave has expired and returns to the UK with valid leave that
         was granted within 28 days of the original leave expiring.


         Discretion for breaks in lawful residence
         You must always  discuss  the  use  of  discretion  with  a  senior
         caseworker. You must be satisfied the applicant has acted  lawfully
         throughout the whole 10 year period and has made  every  effort  to
         obey the Immigration Rules.  The decision  to  exercise  discretion
         must not be taken without consent from a senior  executive  officer
         (SEO) or equivalent.


         Gap(s) in lawful residence
         You may grant the application if an applicant:

           . has short gaps in lawful  residence  through  making  previous
             applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days, and



           . meets all the other requirements for lawful residence

         You can use your judgment and use discretion in cases  where  there
         may be exceptional reasons why a single application was  made  more
         than 28 days out of time ..."

15. The equivalent provisions in the May 2015 long residence  guidance  are
    at page 13 of that guidance which states:


         "Events that break continuous residence
         Continuous residence is considered to be broken  if  the  applicant
         has:

           . been absent from the UK for a period of more than 6 months  at
             any one time, or is absent from the UK for  a  shorter  period
             but does not have valid leave to enter the UK on their return,
             or valid leave to remain on their departure from the UK

           . spent a total of 18 months outside the UK throughout the whole
             ten year period


         Time spent outside the UK
         Continuous residence is not considered broken if the applicant:

           . is absent from the UK for 6 months or less at any one time

         ...

         If the applicant has been absent from the UK for more than 6 months
         in one period and more than 18 months  in  total,  the  application
         should normally be refused.   However  it  may  be  appropriate  to
         exercise  discretion  over  excess  absences   in   compelling   or
         compassionate circumstances, for example where  the  applicant  was
         prevented  from   returning   to   the   UK   through   unavoidable
         circumstances.

         This must be decided at senior executive officer (SEO) level with a
         grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules being the  appropriate
         outcome.

         Things to consider when assessing if the absence(s) was  compelling
         or compassionate are;

           . for all cases -  you  must  consider  whether  the  individual
             returned to the UK within a reasonable  time  once  they  were
             able to do so

           . for the single absence of over 180 days.

                o you  must  consider  how  much  the  absence  was  due  to
                  compelling  circumstances  and   whether   the   applicant
                  returned to the UK as soon as they were able to do so

                o you must also consider the reasons for the absence

             ...

         All of these factors must be considered together  when  determining
         whether it was reasonable to exercise discretion"

16. Page 18 of the 2015 guidance replicates page 17 of the 2014 guidance to
    the extent that it deals with time spent outside the  UK  and  gaps  in
    lawful residence.  However that section does  not  does  not  deal  not
    replicate the section in the 2014  guidance  entitled  'Discretion  for
    Breaks in Lawful Residence'.

17. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the 2014 guidance does  not  give  a
    general  discretion  which  would  have   been   exercisable   in   the
    circumstances of this case.  She submitted that the guidance at page 17
    of the 2014 guidance is in the context of the requirement to  show  ten
    years lawful  residence  under  the  long  residence  provisions.   She
    submitted that the 2015 guidance deals with  breaks  in  continuity  of
    residence and  does  not  reflect  a  similar  provision  in  the  2014
    guidance.  She submitted that this is a new provision which  was  added
    into the 2015 guidance and is not endeavouring to expand upon the  2014
    guidance.  She submitted that, if the discretion  referred  to  in  the
    2014 guidance was a wide-ranging discretion applying to everything,  it
    would have been at the start of this section.  She submitted that there
    should be a narrow interpretation to the discretion referred to at page
    17 of the 2014 guidance.  In her submission the 2015 guidance could not
    inform the interpretation of the 2014 guidance.

18. On the other hand Mr Farhat submitted that the fact that the discretion
    referred to in the  2014  guidance  was  not  replicated  in  the  2015
    guidance indicates that the 2015 guidance provides clarification on the
    existing power to exercise discretion.  He submitted that if there  was
    any ambiguity it should be  construed  in  a  way  in  which  it  could
    reasonably be interpreted by an applicant without doing violence to the
    language.

19. As set out above  it  is  clear  that  the  policy  can  apply  to  the
    interpretation of 'lived continuously' in the UK  in  paragraph  276ADE
    (1) (iv). I have looked carefully at the wording of  both  versions  of
    the policy. As properly suggested by Mr Farhat as this  is  guidance  I
    must apply the clear and natural meaning to the wording. The discretion
    set out in the 2014 version of the policy is set out under the  heading
    'Discretion for breaks in lawful residence'  therefore  it  must  be  a
    discretion applicable  to  situations  where  there  is  a  'break'  in
    residence.  The section dealing with discretion comes after the section
    looking at 'Time spent outside the UK'.  The  following  section  deals
    with 'Gaps in lawful residence' and goes on to look at  examples  where
    it may be appropriate to grant an application where there is a  gap  in
    lawful residence and where it may be appropriate to exercise discretion
    even though an application was made late.  Therefore reading  pages  17
    and 18 of the  2014  guidance  together  and  looking  at  the  section
    entitled 'Discretion for breaks in lawful residence' in the context  of
    the preceding and subsequent sections  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the
    discretion referred to must refer to breaks as a result of absence from
    the UK for a period of 6 months or more. In my view this  is  confirmed
    by reading the 2015 guidance which omits this section and  replaces  it
    at page 14 with a specific discretion dealing with  absences  from  the
    UK.

20. In these circumstances I  find  that,  at  the  date  of  the  decision
    appealed against, the Secretary  of  State  had  a  discretion  in  the
    context of the Appellants' absence from the UK for a period exceeding 6
    months. It is not in dispute that the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    exercise that discretion.  At  the  time  the  appeal  was  lodged  the
    Tribunal had the power to decide that a decision was not in  accordance
    with the law.

21. Accordingly, I find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the interpretation of  paragraph
    276A of the Immigration  Rules  and  the  Home  Office  long  residence
    guidance.  Therefore  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In remaking the decision I find that the Secretary  of  State
    failed to consider exercising discretion in relation to the Appellants'
    absence from the UK in accordance with  her  policy  and  guidance.  In
    these circumstances the  application  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State to consider the exercise of discretion and to make a
    lawful decision in relation to the Appellants' applications.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

23. I remake the decision by deciding that the decision of the Secretary of
    State is not in accordance with the law  and  the  application  remains
    outstanding before her for a lawful decision to be made.

24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 29th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the application remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.


Signed                              Date: 29th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

