

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA122752015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On June 13, 2016                   |On June 14, 2016              |
|                                   |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ARSHAD MAHMOOD
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan (Legal Representative)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. On September  14,  2012  the
       appellant entered the United  Kingdom  with  entry  clearance  as  a
       spouse. On October 16, 2014  he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a spouse. The respondent refused his application on  March
       12, 2015 and took a decision to remove  him  by  way  of  directions
       under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
       2006.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 26, 2015.

    4. The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on October 20, 2015 and in  a
       decision promulgated on October 21, 2016 he allowed the  appellant's
       appeal against refusal under paragraph 322(1A) HC  395  but  refused
       the substantive application under paragraph 287 HC 395. In  essence,
       he found that the appellant had not been aware a fraudulent document
       had been used with his application.

    5. The  respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  October  28,  2015
       submitting the  Judge  had  erred  in  the  way  he  had  considered
       paragraph  322(1A)  HC  395.  She  argued   that   the   Judge   had
       misinterpreted the Court's conclusions in AA (Nigeria) v  SSHD  2010
       EWCA Civ 773 and had failed to have regard to  the  decision  of  in
       JK(India) v SSHD 2013  EWCA  Civ  1080  which  made  it  clear  that
       paragraph 322(1A) was deliberately  couched  in  terms  intended  to
       prevent the making of dishonest applications with  the  result  that
       applications were to be refused even though the dishonesty  employed
       may not be that of the applicant himself or herself.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Holmes on April 7, 2016  who  found  it  was  arguable  the  Judge's
       approach to paragraph 322(1A) was flawed.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    8. No anonymity direction has been made.

SUBMISSIONS

    9. Mr McVeety relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  and  referred  me  to
       paragraph  [67]  of  AA.  This  distinguished  a  document  from   a
       misrepresentation. AA had been concerned  with  a  misrepresentation
       and the issue was whether it had to be shown  the  misrepresentation
       was dishonest or merely a mistake. The Court of Appeal  in  AA  made
       clear that where a fraudulent document was submitted,  even  in  all
       innocence, for the purpose of obtaining entry clearance, or leave to
       enter or to remain  the  response  of  a  requirement  of  mandatory
       refusal is entirely understandable in such  a  situation.  The  mere
       fact that a dishonest document has been used for such  an  important
       application is understandably a sufficient reason  for  a  mandatory
       refusal. That is why the rule expressly emphasises that  it  applies
       "whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge".  He  invited  me  to
       allow the appeal and confirm  the  application  was  also  dismissed
       under paragraph 322(1A) HC 395.

   10. Mr Khan argued the Judge had the bundle of  evidence  including  two
       statements and he had the benefit  of  hearing  the  appellant  give
       evidence. The conclusion he reached was open to him. Whilst  it  was
       accepted the document was fraudulent he argued  the  Judge  accepted
       the appellant was as much a victim.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   11. The Judge dealt with an application for indefinite leave to  remain.
       The refusal letter found a fraudulent certificate had been used  and
       this certificate had been  submitted  for  a  mandatory  requirement
       under the Rules.

   12. There was no dispute the document was fraudulent  but  applying  the
       guidance  in  AA  the  Judge  concluded  the  respondent   had   not
       demonstrated the appellant had acted dishonestly.

   13. I am satisfied the Judge's approach was  flawed.  The  cases  of  AA
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 and JK (India)  v  SSHD  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 1080 make clear the approach to be  taken  when  fraudulent
       documents were submitted.

   14. It cannot be said that mens rea is always required on  the  part  of
       the applicant in order for the Secretary of State to invoke 322(1A).



   15. Firstly, the very wording of Paragraph 322(1A) is inconsistent  with
       such a construction. A  representation  and/or  a  document  may  be
       false, "whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge".  As  Rix  LJ
       observed in AA at paragraph [68] where a dishonest representation is
       promoted by another party, then the Rule requires mandatory  refusal
       "irrespective of the personal innocence of the  applicant  herself".
       Rix LJ went on to say ""false" requires dishonesty  -  although  not
       necessarily that of the applicant himself". At paragraph  [76],  Rix
       LJ also stated that: "Dishonesty or deception is needed, albeit  not
       necessarily that of  the  applicant  himself,  to  render  a  'false
       representation' a ground for mandatory refusal."

   16. Secondly, the blanket requirement of mens rea on  the  part  of  the
       applicant fails to make  the  necessary  distinction  between  false
       documents and false statements for the reasons identified by Rix  LJ
       in AA at paragraphs [67 and 68]. I  accept  that  Rix  LJ's  remarks
       regarding documents are obiter but his reasoning is  persuasive  and
       has been accepted by Tomlinson LJ in JK.

   17. Thirdly, the fact that the  theme  of  deception  runs  through  the
       relevant IDI and entry clearance guidance does no more than serve to
       identify the importance of dishonesty. Indeed, the IDI  states  that
       "an application should be refused even where the applicant does  not
       know (or claims not to know) it is a  false  document".  As  Rix  LJ
       explained, the necessary ingredient of dishonesty lies in the  false
       document itself.

   18.  I  acknowledge  that  the  consequence  of  this  approach  may  be
       draconian. However, the use of false documents is a  serious  matter
       even if the falsity is unknown to the applicant. The  use  of  false
       documents can be distinguished  from  making  perfectly  honest  but
       inaccurate statements.

   19. The Judge erred in finding that  the  respondent  had  to  show  the
       appellant knew  the  document  was  fraudulent.  When  refusing  the
       application under the Immigration Rules, the respondent was entitled
       to be satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  used  deception  in  his
       application. This must be considered in the context of deception  as
       set out in the Immigration Rules and the IDI, and  as  explained  in
       AA. As discussed above this includes submitting a false or dishonest
       document, whether or not to the applicant's knowledge. In this  case
       the appellant submitted a false document in relation to which it  is
       accepted there had been dishonesty by another.

   20. It follows that contrary to Mr Khan's submissions,  there  has  been
       dishonesty in this application - a dishonest document was submitted,
       whether or not to this appellant's knowledge. It  matters  not  that
       the party who promoted the document is not a parent, sponsor,  agent
       or representative of the appellant's. What matters is whether or not
       a false or dishonest document has been submitted.

   21. The Judge therefore erred in  his  approach  and  I  set  aside  the
       decision he made under paragraph 322(1A) HC 395.

DECISION

   22. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.
       I remake the decision and I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I reverse the fee award made as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                                             Dated:

 [pic]

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Alis
