
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12796/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2013                            |On 7 January 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                MARKO MRKAJA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Kiss, senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Serbia.  He entered  the  United  Kingdom
    on 17 September 2011 as a student on a  visa  valid  until  30  January
    2013.   He subsequently made an application for further leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 Student.

2.   The application was refused on 25 March 2013.

3.   The reason for the refusal was that the bank  statements  submitted  to
    establish maintenance were not dated within 31 days of the application.



4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington on 26 September  2013.



5.   The appellant accepted that he did not meet the Immigration Rules.   He
    had a letter from his mother confirming that her  money  was  available
    for his maintenance, this being a  compulsory  document  which  he  had
    enclosed  with  his  first  application.    He  did  not  resubmit  the
    document with the current application because he did not  realise  that
    he had to do so.  Similarly he had submitted his previous bank  account
    which  was  not  one  that  met  the  time  requirements  of  the   new
    application.

6.   Fundamentally the appellant went on to say that he had  the  money  and
    if he had known  to the contrary he would have submitted   the  correct
    documentation.

7.   By the time of the hearing the appellant  had  in  fact  achieved  that
    which he had set  out  to  achieve,  namely  his  Masters  degree.  His
    dissertation had been completed pending the appeal and he was expecting
    his results in two weeks from the hearing.

8.   Essentially the appellant was looking for  a  discretionary  period  of
    leave to end with the graduation ceremony.

9.   The appeal was allowed on the basis of human rights.  The  Judge  noted
    that the appellant had  sufficient  funds  as  required;  had  spent  a
    considerable amount of time and money in studying for his  Masters  and
    would not be able to complete his Masters from overseas.

10.  The respondent sought to appeal against that  decision  to  the  effect
    that the Judge had not considered the public  interest  and  failed  to
    give adequate or proper reasons why it was disproportionate  to  remove
    the appellant.

11.  Leave to appeal was  granted.  Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    pursuance of that grant.

12.  The appellant attended in person and indicated  that  his  application,
    made on 29 January 2013 for leave to remain, was in order  for  him  to
    have completed his Masters. That he had now done.

13.  What he would like to do is to apply to be a Tier 2 Migrant.    He  has
    employment   which he wishes to do is well within the lists  of  skills
    that are set out in the Immigration Rules.   If he were to apply in the
    United Kingdom he would not be expected to satisfy  the  market  labour
    test. He would have to do so if he returned  home.  Thus  to  make  the
    application from home there were many more difficulties that  would  be
    in his way.  He would have to show that he had a particular skill  that
    could not be found elsewhere in order to stand  any  chance  of  coming
    back in that capacity.  Thus, he submitted, it was easier  for  him  to
    stay in the  United  Kingdom  and  make  the  application  rather  than
    returning.

14.  I asked the appellant whether or not he had made a  formal  application
    to remain under that capacity and he indicated that he had not done  so
    to date.

15.  Miss Kiss, who represents the  respondent,  invited  me  to  find  that
    there was in fact no challenge to the fact that the appellant could not
    meet the Immigration Rules.  She submitted that a near-miss was in  the
    circumstances an irrelevant consideration  for  Article  8  and  in  so
    considering the judge had fallen  into  error.    She  cites  Miah  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 271
    by way of an example.

16.  My attention was drawn particularly to  paragraphs  24  and  25  noting
    that Lord Justice Sedley, who gave the judgment,  considered  the  Rule
    should remain a Rule and that to make a Rule subject to  the  near-miss
    penumbra would be to enter the steep slope away from predictable Rules.



17.  Lord Justice Sedley went on as follows:

         "For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal in relation  to  the
         near-miss  argument.   In  my  judgement  there  is  no   near-miss
         principal applicable to the Immigration Rules.   The  Secretary  of
         State, on an appeal to the Tribunal, must assess the strength of an
         Article 8 claim, but the requirements of immigration control is not
         weakened by the degree  of  non  compliance  with  the  Immigration
         Rules."

18.  In this case the appellant was candid about the reason for  his  making
    the appeal, namely to buy time to finish his Masters  degree  which  he
    has now done.

19.  The Judge give very few reasons for allowing the appeal  under  Article
    8.  The fact that the appellant may have  access  to  sufficient  funds
    does not absolve him from the obligation to make the application in the
    proper way and in the proper manner. There is no suggestion  here  that
    it was the respondent who was at fault in what was done.

20.  It was said at paragraph 27 of the determination by the judge that  the
    appellant would be  unable  to  complete  his  Masters  from  overseas.
    Indeed the Masters has already been completed subject to attendance  at
    the ceremony in the future.

21.  No reasons were given why Article 8  should  be  established  over  and
    above the fact that it would be more convenient for  the  appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

22.  I find that the lack of reasoning and the lack of  recognition  of  the
    importance of immigration control in circumstances such as this  to  be
    an error of law.  Accordingly the decision is set aside to be remade.

23.  The appellant was very honest with me, indicating that  in  reality  he
    wished to stay in the  United  Kingdom  because  to  make  any  further
    application would be much easier for him to do than to  return  to  his
    home country. He would be able to satisfy the requirements but may  not
    be able to do so from abroad. It seems to me however  that  that  is  a
    circumstance that is yet to arise, no application to stay on that basis
    having been made. The fact that it  may  be  more  convenient  for  the
    appellant to apply in the United Kingdom or indeed  that  he  may  face
    difficulties, if applying from overseas, has little  bearing  upon  the
    appellant's immediate rights which are engaged with the study to  which
    he has largely completed.

24.  I find that   the appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

25.  I bear in mind the case of Miah and the fact that the appellant has  in
    fact completed that which he sought to undertake in the United Kingdom.
       There is no reason why the appellant could not return  to  his  home
    country to make any further application acknowledging, of course, as  I
    do that it may be more difficult for him. Those are the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules as set down by Parliament and agreed and it would  be
    wrong therefore to use Article 8  to  circumvent  the  requirements  so
    imposed.

26.  In all the circumstances although I hope that  the  respondent  may  be
    generous in allowing an in-country appeal, that is  a  matter  for  the
    respondent and not for me.

27.  In the circumstances the appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules  is
    dismissed.  That in respect of human rights is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
