


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/12661/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 8th February 2016                     |        On 16th February 2016       |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                MICHAEL BREW
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born  on  24  February  1975.   By
    letter dated 16 February 2015  he  asked  for  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the UK based on his "special and  compelling  circumstances",
    namely residence in the UK for over 10 years; being  let  down  by  his
    university over extension of leave as a student; and alleged failure by
    the  respondent  to  consider  his  position  under   her   policy   on
    discretionary leave.

 2. The respondent refused the application by letter dated 13  March  2015,
    paragraph  4  of  which   conveniently   summarises   the   appellant's
    immigration history.  The following  clarification  was  added  by  the
    respondent, and agreed by the appellant, at the outset of  the  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant travelled to the  UK  from  Ghana
    with entry clearance on 15/16 October 2001.  He returned to Ghana on 15
    December 2001 and remained there until 6 September 2002.

 3. The  decision letter declines to grant leave  under  reference  to  the
    ECHR Article 8, to the Immigration Rules, and to the best interests  of
    the appellant's children (who would be  returning  to  Ghana  with  the
    appellant and his wife), and  finds  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  were  as
    follows:

        1.  Decision  contrary  to  law.   Respondent  failed  to  consider
           application pursuant to policy on discretionary leave.

        2. Decision inconsistent with paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
           Rules.  At the time of "initial refusal in 2013"  the  appellant
           had completed 10 years continuous lawful residence in the UK.

        3. Decision  incompatible  with  appellant's  Article  8  right  to
           private  and  family  life,  there  being   "no   countervailing
           circumstances"; the application "ought to have  succeeded  under
           the Immigration Rules and it would therefore not  be  compatible
           with his Article 8 right to private life for the application  to
           be refused."

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 5 August 2015.

 6. I do not find the appellant's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    to be very clearly framed.  Ground 1 appears to be an  insistence  that
    the appeal should have been allowed because the appellant qualified for
    leave under the Rules based on 10 years' residence.  Ground 2 opens  by
    submitting that if the appellant meets those Rules, that is relevant to
    Article 8 (although if so, there would be no need to  rely  on  Article
    8).  The argument appears to be that because (a) the appellant might at
    some historical point have qualified  for  leave  based  on  10  years'
    residence, (b) there was a failure by his university to advise  him  of
    the refusal of a prior leave  application,  and  (c)  the  Home  Office
    failed to apply its [unspecified] policy on discretionary leave,  those
    factors  should  have  counted  in  the   Article   8   proportionality
    assessment.

 7. Mr Ndubuisi said that in the First-tier Tribunal two arguments were run
    for the appellant - firstly that his case should be allowed  under  the
    Rules on  10  years'  residence,  and  secondly  that  he  should  have
    succeeded under Article 8 of the ECHR, outside the Rules.  However,  on
    the 10 years point I found the submission rather confused.  It was  not
    clear to me whether the argument either in the First-tier  Tribunal  or
    in the Upper Tribunal was that the appellant was  entitled  to  succeed
    under the Rules, or that a missed opportunity to do so (due to previous
    errors in advice and failure to appeal on time, or to  seek  to  appeal
    out of time) contributed to the Article 8 assessment.  It was also  not
    clear to me whether or not Mr Ndubuisi accepted that due to the gap  in
    residence mentioned above, the appellant at no time was in  a  position
    to succeed based  on  10  years'  lawful  residence.   Eventually,  the
    submission appeared to be that although the appellant could never  have
    succeeded under the Rules on the basis  of  10  years'  residence,  the
    judge, in failing to apply his mind properly to the  argument  made  in
    respect of the 10 year rule, went astray on a  matter  which  ought  to
    have led to a favourable outcome in terms of proportionality.

 8. That is as much as I could make of the grounds and submissions.

 9. Mr Matthews submitted that the reference to  10  years'  residence  had
    always been a "red  herring".   The  appellant  had  never  been  in  a
    position to meet the requirements of that Rule.  The matter could  have
    no bearing on proportionality.  It was now accepted that the  appellant
    could  not  meet  any  of  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    considered in the refusal letter - Appendix FM and/or paragraph 276ADE.
     The appellant made a student application on 20 October 2011 which  was
    refused on 9 January 2012.  That  might  have  been  through  misguided
    actions on the part of the university sponsor, but no appeal  had  been
    taken and leave had come to an end on or around 20 January  2012.   The
    appellant made a further application on 28 May 2012, while  he  had  no
    leave, and so refusal gave no  right  of  appeal.   There  was  then  a
    further gap until 16 February 2015 when he made the application leading
    to these proceedings.  When his leave ended in January 2012  he  was  8
    months short of 10 years' residence.  No such  application  could  ever
    have succeeded.  There were further reasons to attach no importance  to
    the 10 years' residence argument.  The appellant had not sought to show
    that he met the terms of  the  relevant  rule,  apart  from  length  of
    residence.  It was a requirement that an applicant should not have been
    an overstayer for more than 28 days, but he had been an overstayer  for
    almost 3 years when he first raised the point.  The First-tier Tribunal
    would have been bound to apply that provision of the Rules, and not  to
    consider the matter on the basis of a fictitious  earlier  application.
    The appellant did not apply on the required form and did  not  pay  the
    required fee.  There was no application before the  respondent  at  any
    time, made according to the requirements of the Rules.  The  judge  did
    not  appear  to  have  directly  addressed  the  matter  of  10  years'
    residence, but that was beside the point, as it could have  led  to  no
    other conclusion.

10. In terms of the appellant's reference to policy on discretionary leave,
    Mr Matthews pointed out that the grant of leave in this case was for  a
    very particular compassionate reason, a child of the  appellant  having
    died.  That was obviously by its nature a grant of a finite nature  and
    not one which would normally lead to any extension.

11. Finally, Mr Matthews said that  the  judge  was  obviously  correct  to
    consider that removal of the appellant, with his  family,  involved  no
    disproportionate breach of Article 8 rights.

12. Mr Ndubuisi in response at last directed attention to the  respondent's
    discretionary leave policy, and to  the  representations  made  to  the
    Secretary of State with the application.  He submitted that having been
    granted leave as time to mourn the death  of  a  child,  the  appellant
    should then have been  enabled  to  apply  for  further  leave  in  the
    capacity of a student.  It would have been reasonable in terms  of  the
    policy to grant further leave, not on the same discretionary basis, but
    to enable the appellant to  resume  his  studies.   That  was  a  "very
    significant  factor"  in  the  Article  8  assessment  which  had  been
    overlooked by the judge.

13. I reserved my determination.

14. The final point made by Mr Ndubuisi was extracted at a very late stage,
    and is not to be identified in the earlier written and oral  pleadings.
    It is not mentioned in the letter of 16 February  2015  triggering  the
    decision and subsequently these proceedings  (page  88  of  appellant's
    First-tier Tribunal bundle.)  Nor is it the basis of  the  request  for
    further leave dated 27 April 2011 (page 83).  The  respondent  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal  are  not  to  be  faulted  for  dealing  with  the
    appellant's case as it was put, ie as  one  deserving  a  discretionary
    grant outside the Rules, and not as one where the appellant, due to the
    twists and turns of his immigration history, should have an exceptional
    opportunity to apply further as a student - in which direction he  gave
    no indication of his hopes or intentions.

15. There is of course no reason why the  appellant  might  not  in  future
    apply from outside the UK, if he is a position to meet the  Immigration
    Rules as a student or in any other capacity.

16. The crucial part  of  the  judge's  assessment  was  that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect the appellant and his family  to  leave  the
    UK, there being no reason in terms of Article  8  why  they  should  be
    entitled to remain, notwithstanding the requirements of the Rules.   On
    the case put to the First-tier Tribunal, and in that  outcome,  I  find
    that the appellant's grounds  and  submissions  fail  to  disclose  any
    matter which might require the decision to be set aside, or which might
    discernibly have led to any other rational outcome.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            11 February 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




