
   [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12152/2013
     IA/12153/2013
     IA/12154/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 January 2014                            |On 31 March 2014             |
|Prepared 24 January 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                 WISAM TAHA
                                JASMINE TAHA
                             JUDIT TAHANE SZABO

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R de Mello, Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens  of  Hungary,  the  first  appellant  ("the
    appellant") being the husband of the third  appellant  and  the  second
    appellant being their daughter, who was born in 2004. They  applied  in
    September 2012 for documentation to certify their  permanent  residence
    in  Britain  pursuant  to  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   Their applications were refused on 19 February  2013.   The  appellants
    appealed.  Their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Taylor on 9  August  2013  and  dismissed.  They  then  appealed,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal and in a decision promulgated  on  20
    November 2013 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall set aside the  decision.
    In these circumstances the appeal came before us for a hearing afresh.

3.   The  notice  of  refusal  dated  19  February  2013  addressed  to  the
    appellant stated:

         "You have applied for Permanent Residence on the basis that you are
         an EEA national who has  resided  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  Regulation
         15(1)(a)  with  reference  to  2(4)  and  5(6)  of  the   Accession
         (Immigration and  Worker  Registrations)  Regulations  2004  for  a
         continuous period of five years.  However  you  have  not  provided
         evidence that you have resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
         with  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006,
         Regulation 15(1)(a) with  reference  to  2(4)  and  5  (6)  of  the
         Accession (Immigration Worker Registration) Regulations 2004 for  a
         continuous period of five years."

4.   The reasons for refusal letter stated as follows:-

         "Under Regulation 15(1)(a) of the European Regulations 2006 an  EEA
         national who has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
         these Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years  will  be
         issued with a document certifying their permanent residence.
          With further  reference  to  Regulations  2(4)  and  5(6)  of  the
         Accession (Immigration and  Worker Registration) Regulations  2004,
         an EEA national from Hungary wishing to exercise Treaty  rights  in
         the United Kingdom as a worker was, until 30 April  2011,  required
         to first  register  under  the  Worker  Registration  Scheme  (WRS)
         his/her employment with an employer be  issued  [sic]  with  a  WRS
         certificate and accrue twelve months' continuous  legal  employment
         with that employer or should they change employers inform  the  WRS
         and acquire a new certificate within one month of the start of that
         new employment for it to count towards the required twelve  months'
         continuous legal employment stated.  That twelve months  acts  then
         as a starting point for any claimed five years continuous residence
         in accordance with the regulations referred to in Regulation 15  as
         stated.  It should be noted that any lawful employment starts  from
         the date of issue of the WRS certificate for each  employer  rather
         than the actual date employment commenced.


         Our  records  indicate  that  you  registered   with   the   Worker
         Registration Scheme (WRS) Registrations on 29 June 2007.  The first
         employer you registered was NES Health Care (UK).  However you have
         provided a P45 showing the termination of your employment with this
         company ending 27 July 2007. As our records show that you  did  not
         register any further employment on the  WRS,  you  have  failed  to
         complete the initial twelve months' qualifying period to  make  you
         eligible for permanent residence.


         Therefore you will not be eligible for  permanent  residence  until
         you have completed twelve months' continuous employment on the  WRS
         in  accordance  with  the   Accession   (Immigration   and   Worker
         Registration) Regulations 2004.


         On the basis that you are not able to provide evidence you have yet
         to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance   with   these
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years your  application
         is refused under Regulation 15(1)(a) of  the  European  Regulations
         2006 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 [sic]  with  further
         reference to  Regulations  2(4),  (5)  and  (6)  of  the  Accession
         (Immigration Worker Registration) Regulations 2004.


         As your application for permanent residence has been  unsuccessful,
         this also means that as  a sponsor, family members linked  to  your
         application will also be ineligible for permanent residence."

5.   The appellant's evidence, which  was not  disputed,  was  that  he  had
    come to Britain with his wife and child  in  November  2006  as  an  EU
    citizen.  He sought work until March the following year  when  he  took
    his first job in the private sector,  being  employed  by  NES  (Health
    Care) for four months.  That company  enrolled  the  appellant  in  the
    Workers Registration Scheme.  The appellant had not known that  he  was
    required to be part of that scheme.  He had  believed  that  as  an  EU
    national he had freedom of movement as long as he was exercising Treaty
    rights.

6.   In August 2007 he  started  work  as  a  clinical  fellow  in  vascular
    surgery at University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation  Trust.   That
    job lasted until 30 October 2008 and thereafter the appellant worked as
    a surgeon in a large number of  hospitals  more  or  less  continuously
    until 3 June 2011.  Thereafter, he stated, he had worked in 39 jobs  at
    various hospitals until April 2012 before starting work at  a  hospital
    in Wales.

7.   Hungary became a member of the European Union on  1  May  2004.   There
    was then a transition period until 1 May 2011 during which  there  were
    restrictions on  the freedom to work here of Hungarians  and  nationals
    of other countries which had acceded to the EU at the same time  (their
    citizens being known as the A8 nationals).  Those restrictions ended at
    the end of the accession period on 30 April 2011.

8.   Mr Tarlow accepted that the writer of the letter of  refusal  had  been
    wrong when he had indicated that the appellant would  not  be  eligible
    for  permanent  residence  until  he  had  completed   twelve   months'
    continuous employment on the  WRS  in  accordance  with  the  Accession
    (Immigration and Worker Registration)  Regulations  2004.   Rather  the
    appellant, if he continued in work,  would  be  entitled  to  permanent
    residence on 1 May 2016.

9.   Mr de Mello argued that the starting point  for  any  consideration  of
    the appellant's position was Directive 2004/38 EC. He referred  to  the
    recitals to that Directive and Articles 1,  2,  3,  7  and  16.   Those
    Articles read as follows:



       " Article 1
         Subject


         This Directive lays down:


         (a)  the conditions governing the exercise of  the  right  of  free
             movement and residence within  the  territory  of  the  Member
             States by Union citizens and their family members;
         (b)  the right of permanent  residence  in  the  territory  of  the
             Member States for Union citizens and their family members;
         (c)  the limits placed on the rights set out  in  (a)  and  (b)  on
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health.


         Article 2
         Definitions


         For the purposes of this Directive:
           (1) 'Union Citizen' means any person having th nationality  of  a
             Memebr State:
            (2) 'Family member' means:


              (a)      the spouse;


             (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted  a
                  registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of
                  a Member State, if the  legislation  of  the  host  Member
                  State treats  registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                  marriage and in accordance with the conditions  laid  down
                  in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;


             (c)  the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
                  dependants and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined
                  in point (b);


             (d)  the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line  and
                  those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);


         3)   'Host Member State' means the Member State to  which  a  Union
             citizen moves in order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
             movement and residence.


         Article 3
         Beneficiaries


         1.   This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to
             or reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are
             a national, and to their family members as defined in point  2
             of Article 2 who accompany or join them.


         Article 7


         Right of residence for more than three months


         1.   All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of longer  than
             three months if they:


             (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  Member
                  State; or


             (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
                  members not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance
                  system of the host Member State  during  their  period  of
                  residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover
                  in the host Member State; or


             (c) - are enrolled  at  a  private  or  public  establishment,
                  accredited or financed by the host  Member  State  on  the
                  basis of its legislation or administrative  practice,  for
                  the principal purpose of  following  a  course  of  study,
                  including vocational training; and


                  - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host
                  Member State and assure the relevant  national  authority,
                  by means of a declaration or by such equivalent  means  as
                  they may choose, that they have sufficient  resources  for
                  themselves and their family members not to become a burden
                  on the social assistance system of the host  Member  State
                  during their period of residence; or


             (d)    are family members  accompanying  or  joining  a  Union
                  Citizen  who satisfied  the  conditions   referred  to  in
                  points (a), (b) or (c)


          Article 16
         General rule for Union citizens and their Family Members


         1.   Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host Member State shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there. This right  shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.


         2.   Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family  members  who  are  not
             nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with  the
             Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
             of five years.


         3.   Continuity of residence shall not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total of six months  a  year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of  twelve  consecutive  months
             for  important  reasons  such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,
             serious illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in
             another Member State or a third country.


         4.     Once acquired  the right of permanent  residence   shall  be
             lost only through absence from the host member  state   for  a
             period  exceeding two consecutive years.

10.  Mr de  Mello   stated  therefore  that  it  was  evident  that  workers
    exercising Community rights who  resided in the home state for a period
    of five years were entitled to permanent residence.  He stated that the
    relevant question was whether or not that period must comply  with  the
    Accession Regulations as contended by the respondent or simply  to  the
    Union citizen having resided in the home  country  in  accordance  with
    Article 7(1)(a).

11.  Having referred to the provisions of  in Article 16  (1)   which  would
    lead to rights of permanent residence he argued that any breach of  the
    Accession Regulations which had occurred during the period of residence
    should  be  disregarded.  He  argued  that  it  was  only  in   certain
    circumstances such as those set out in Article 16(3)  that   continuity
    might be interrupted.   Moreover  legal  residence  was  an  autonomous
    concept which had had to have the same  meaning  in  Poland,  Bulgaria,
    Romania and Britain.

12.  He referred to the Accession Treaty  which  gave  freedom  of  movement
    rights to the nationals of EU states such as HuHungary which had joined
    in 2004.  He accepted, however,  that domestic legislation  gave    the
    Secretary of State the ability to  make regulations  which   controlled
    the movement of workers  of Accession  countries.

13.  Having pointed out that there was no relevant case law on the issue  of
    the rights of those such as the appellant who had not complied with the
     regulations in force regarding the  registration of   A8  workers,  he
    referred to  the argument  in his outline submissions that it would  be
    appropriate  to refer the issue to the European Court  of  Justice.  We
    stated that we did not consider that that would be appropriate and that
    we would endeavour to determine the issue ourselves.

14.   Mr de Mello then referred to case law which he  argued  supported  his
    position. He first referred to the judgment  in  the  case  of  MG  (C-
    4000/12) which dealt with the entitlement to residence of a  Portuguese
    national who, although she had entered Britain as a worker in 1998, had
    given up work to have her first child in 1999 and thereafter  had  been
    supported by her husband until they had  separated  in  December  2006.
    She had remained married to her husband.  In April 2008   her  children
    had been placed in foster care following a report that injuries to  one
    of the children was non-accidental and in 2009 she had  been  convicted
    of criminal offences relating to the child and had been sentenced to 21
    months' imprisonment. Her husband had  been   awarded  custody  of  the
    children. In May 2010 she had applied for permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That application had been  refused and the  First-tier
    Tribunal (IAC) had found, on appeal, that  she  had  not  acquired  the
    right of permanent residence for the  purposes  of  Directive  2004/38.
    The Upper Tribunal referred that issue to the ECJ.  The issue of M  G's
    entitlement to residence was considered, and in particular  whether  or
    not the requisite period of ten years should count back from  the  date
    of the decision to expel or forward from the date  of  the  appellant's
    residence in Britain.  In paragraph 24 of the judgment the court stated
    that:-

         "24. ... Unlike the requisite  period  for  acquiring  a  right  of
             permanent residence, which begins when  the  person  concerned
             commences lawful residence in the host member state,  the  ten
             year period of residence necessary for the grant  of  enhanced
             protection provided for under Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
             2004/38 must be calculated by counting back from the  date  of
             decision ordering that person's expulsion."

     Mr de Mello stated that on the basis of that authority  the  date  from
    which this appellant had resided legally must  have  started  in  March
    2007.

15.  He stated that the respondent was wrong to  conclude  that  the  period
    between July 2007 and 30 April 2011 should be disregarded  because  the
    appellant was not registered under the Worker's Registration Scheme and
    therefore that that period was not lawful and the appellant should  not
    be treated as a worker as he was only entitled to reside  in  the  home
    state in compliance with the WRS: the decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the Directive. Paragraph 24 of MG was authority for  the  argument
    that the period for acquiring a right of permanent residence began when
    the person concerned commenced lawful  residence  in  the  host  Member
    State. He accepted that the position of this appellant  was  of  course
    entirely different from that of a person sentenced to  imprisonment  as
    during imprisonment the person imprisoned is not  exercising  Community
    rights and was clearly not indicating that they  were  integrated  into
    society.

16.  He argued that legal residence for the  purpose  of  Article  16.1  was
    determined by reference to compliance with the terms of  the  Directive
    and not the Accession Treaty and that the Union citizen  had  to   show
    that he had resided in the host Member State in accordance with Article
    7.1 and not simply in accordance with the  Accession  Regulations.   He
    stated that that followed from the decision of the ECJ in the  case  of
    Ziolkowski Case C-424/10.   Ziolkowski was a Polish citizen who entered
    Germany  in  September  1989,   obtaining   a   residence   permit   on
    humanitarian grounds.  Although Ziolkowski and his wife had not  worked
    in Germany for the requisite period, the issue was whether or not  they
    had resided legally.

17.  In paragraphs 46 and 47 of the judgment it was stated that:

         "46.     ...  the concept of legal residence implied by  the  terms
             'have resided legally' in Article 16(1) of  Directive  2004/38
             should be construed as meaning a  period  of  residence  which
             complies with the conditions laid down in  the  Directive,  in
             particular those set out in Article 7(1).


         47.      Consequently a period of residence which complies with the
             law of the a Member State but does not satisfy the  conditions
             laid down in Article  7(1)  of  Directive  2004/38  cannot  be
             regarded as a 'legal' period of residence within  the  meaning
             of Article 16(1)."


    He stated that the judgment in Ziolkowski indicated that once  the  EEA
    national had complied with the initial provisions no further additional
    conditions could be provided.  The appellant had been  legally  working
    and should be treated as a worker who  had  worked  for  the  requisite
    period to be granted permanent residence.


18.  He  argued that there was no reason to disregard  the  period  of  stay
    prior to 2011 because it fell foul of any national measures.

19.  Mr de Mello also  claimed that Regulation 7A(2) and   Regulation  7A(5)
    of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations 2006  discriminated  against  the
    appellant as they  prevented the  appellant  from  acquiring  permanent
    residence because, after May 2011 when the transitional period came  to
    an end he would be required to demonstrate he  had  complied  with  the
    Accession Regulations during the transitional period.  This, he argued,
    was discriminatory in that it applied only to A8 nationals, moreover it
    applied to them in practice beyond 1 May 2011 and had placed that group
    at a disadvantage when compared with other EU nationals who had resided
    in Britain during  the  same  period  and  had  not  been  required  to
    register, who would meet the five year legal requirements.

20.  Britain's continued derogation after 1 May 2011  regulating  access  to
    permanent residence was, he argued,  impermissible, discriminatory  and
    contrary to EU law.  He stated that this was unequal treatment based on
    the appellant's nationality contrary to the Article 8 of the Treaty  of
    the European  Union.   He  emphasised  that  non-discrimination  was  a
    fundamental aspect of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
    Union.

21.  Before Mr  Tarlow's  submissions  we  asked  him  to  confirm  that  he
    accepted that the appellant was a worker who had worked  legally  since
    2007.  He initially stated that he accepted that propositions but  then
    resiled from that position, stating that the appellant had  not  worked
    in accordance with the Accession Regulations and therefore it could not
    be said that he had worked legally in  Britain.   He  argued  that  the
    accession arrangements were lawful  and  had  taken  effect  under  the
    Workers Registration Scheme.   The appellant had not complied with that
    scheme and the effect  was  that  he  was  not  entitled  to  permanent
    residence as he had not complied with the requirements of  the  Workers
    Registration Scheme. As he was not complying with the  scheme  then  he
    could not be said to be working in Britain legally.

Discussion.

22.  We note from the debate in Hansard on  28  April  2004  that  when  the
    Minister of State, Baroness Scotland of Asthal  moved  the  Regulations
    and the Accession  (Immigration Worker Registration)  Regulations  2004
    she stated:-

         "In summary, the Worker Registration Scheme has been   designed  to
         reflect and not to hinder the flexibility  and  creativity  of  our
         labour markets.  I must stress that  we  do  not  seek  to  prevent
         people from the Accession countries from  working,  providing  that
         they comply with the registration scheme.  But it is  important  to
         monitor that activity and to ensure that if they  are  not  working
         they do not have access to our social security system."

23.  We  note moreover the  reply  of  Baroness  Anelay  of  St  John's  who
    stated:-

         "I looked at the IND website today, where confusion abounds.  If  I
         were trying to find out what on earth will be going  on  next  week
         either as an employer or as a prospective employee, my heart  would
         sink. On 23 February we also welcomed the  essential  part  of  the
         package outlined by the minister; that is, those who  are  required
         to register for work should not be able immediately to claim social
         security, child benefit and work related benefits.  Their access to
         social housing should be restricted.  In her opening  remarks,  the
         minster was right to refer to those orders."

24.     It is clear from that exchange that the  purpose  of  the  Accession
      (Immigration  and  Worker  Registration)   Regulations  2004  was   to
      regulate the flow of workers  from A8 countries to Britain  so as  not
      to place an undue burden on social benefits here:  that  was  a  valid
      objective which in itself was certainly  not  unlawful.  We  note  the
      terms of   Regulations  4 through 7 which state as  follows(the  words
      in square brackets substituted  from 30 April 2006) :

        "Right of residence of  work  seekers  and  workers  from  relevant
        acceding States during the accession period

        4.  (1)  This regulation derogates during the accession period from
        Article 39 of  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community,
        Articles 1 to 6 of Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68(1)  on  freedom  of
        movement for workers within the Community  and  [Council  Directive
        2004/38/EC  of the European Parliament  and of the Council  on  the
        right  of citizens of the Union  and their family members  to  move
        and reside  freely within the  territory   of  the  Member  States,
        insofar as it takes over  provisions of]  Council  Directive  (EEC)
        No. 68/360  on  the  abolition  of  restrictions  on  movement  and
        residence within the Community for workers  of  Member  States  and
        their families.

        (2) A national of a relevant accession State shall not be entitled
        to reside in the United Kingdom for the purpose of seeking work  by
        virtue of his status as a work seeker if he would be  an  accession
        State worker requiring registration if  he  began  working  in  the
        United Kingdom.

        (3) Paragraph (2) is without prejudice to the right of a  national
        of a relevant accession State to reside in the United Kingdom under
        the [2006 Regulations] as a self-sufficient person  whilst  seeking
        work in the United Kingdom.

        (4) An accession State worker requiring registration shall only be
        entitled to reside in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
        2000 Regulations as modified by regulation 5.

        Application of 2006 Regulations in relation to an  accession  State
        worker requiring registration

        5.  (1)  The 2006 Regulations  shall  apply  in  relation  to  an
        accession  State  worker  requiring  registration  subject  to  the
        modifications set out in this regulation.

        (2) A national of a  relevant   accession  State  who  is  seeking
        employment  in the Unite Kingdom  shall not be  treated  as  a  job
        seeker  for the purpose of the definition of "qualified person"  in
        regulation 6(1) of the 2006  Regulations  and  an  Accession  State
        worker  requiring  registrations  shall be treated  as  worker  for
        the purpose  of that definition only during a period in which he is
        working in the United Kingdom for an authorised employer.

        (3) Subject  to  paragraph  (4),  regulation  6(2)  of  the  2006
        Regulations shall not apply to an accession State worker  requiring
        registration who ceases to work.

        (4) Where an accession State worker requiring registration  ceases
        working  for  that  employer  in  the  circumstances  mentioned  in
        regulation 6(2) of the 2006 Regulations during the one month period
        beginning on the date on which the  work  begins,  that  regulation
        shall apply to that worker during the remainder of that  one  month
        period.

         (5) An accession State worker requiring registration shall not be
        treated as a qualified person for the purpose of regulation  15  of
        the 2000 Regulations (issue  of  residence  permits  and  residence
        documents).



25.   We  note that the  Accession  (Immigration  and  Worker  Registration)
    Regulations 2004 Order were revoked with effect from 1 May  2011  under
    the Accession (Immigration Worker  Registration)  (Revocation,  Savings
    and Consequential Provisions) Regulations 2011.

26.  Regulation 7A of the  Immigration  (EEA)  regulations  2006  states  as
    follows:-


         "7A.- Application of the Accession Regulations
         (1)  This  regulation  applies  to  an  EEA  national  who  was  an
              accession State worker requiring registration on  30th  April
              2011 ('an accession worker').
         (2)  In this regulation-


             "accession State worker requiring  registration"has  the  same
             meaning as in Regulation 1(2)(d) of the Accession Regulations;
             "legally working" has the same meaning as in  Regulation  2(7)
             of the Accession Regulations.


         (3)  In Regulation  5(7)(c),  where  the  worker  is  an  accession
             worker, periods of involuntary unemployment duly  recorded  by
             the relevant  employment  office  shall  be  treated  only  as
             periods of activity as a worker-


             (a)  during  any  period  in  which  Regulation  5(4)  of  the
                  Accession Regulations applied to that person; or


             (b)  when the unemployment began on or after 1st May 2011.


         (4)  Regulation 6(2) applies to an accession worker where he-


             (a)  was a person to whom  Regulation 5(4)  of  the  Accession
                  Regulations applied on 30th April 2011; or


             (b)  became unable to work, became  unemployed  or  ceased  to
                  work, as the case maybe, on or after 1st May 2011.


         (5)  For the purposes of Regulation 15, an accession  worker  shall
             be  treated  as  having  resided  in  accordance  with   these
             Regulations during any period before 1st May 2011 in which the
             accession worker-


              (a)      was legally working in the United Kingdom; or


             (b)  was a person to whom Regulation 5(4)   of  the  Accession
                  Regulations applied.


         (6)  Subject to paragraph (7), a registration certificate issued to
             an accession  worker  under  Regulation  8  of  the  Accession
             Regulations shall, from 1st May 2011, be treated as if it  was
             a registration  certificate  issued  under  these  Regulations
             where the accession worker was legally working in  the  United
             Kingdom for the employer specified in that certificate on-


              (a)      30th April 2011; or
             (b)  the date on which the certificate is issued where  it  is
                  issued after 30th April 2011.


         (7)  Paragraph (6) does not apply-


             (a)   if  the  Secretary  of  State  issues   a   registration
                  certificate  in  accordance  with  Regulation   16  to  an
                  accession worker on or after 1st May 2011; and
               (b)       from  the  date  of  registration  stated  on  that
         certificate."


27.  We agree with Mr de Mello that there is no case law  before  us   which
    assists us in determining this appeal save that it is  clear  from  the
    judgment in MG that when  considering   a  period  of  entitlement   to
    permanent residence it is necessary to count back from the date of  the
    decision.

28.  In effect  Mr de Mello is asking us to find that the  Worker  Accession
    Regulations  and  also   Regulation  7A  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations are ultra vires as they are  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Directive. We do not  agree.  The  Worker  Accession  Regulations,  for
    proper  reasons as is shown by  the  exchange  in  Parliament  set  out
    above, regulated the  rights of workers from the A8 countries  to  work
    in Britain: those registered under the scheme were entitled to  certain
    privileges and those who were not registered were not. The  Regulations
     stem from the terms of the Accession  Treaties.  Those  Treaties  were
    entered into under the auspices of the EU and were valid  and  accepted
    as binding under  EU  law.  We  cannot  accept  that  Britain  was  not
    entitled to  regulate the flow of workers  from  the  A8  countries  to
    Britain.

29.   It follows therefore that  Britain was entitled to  decide who was  or
    was not working legally here.  As the appellant was not  registered  he
    was not working legally.  We consider that it therefore follows that as
    he was not working legally in Britain he could  not  have  accrued  the
    five years required to entitle him to permanent residence.

30.   Mr de Mello's further argument was that the fact  that  the  appellant
    was working lawfully on the date of the  application   means  that  the
    five year period  should be  counted back from that  date and that,  in
    effect, the  five  year  period   does  not  mean   five  years  lawful
    residence  but rather five years working here.   We  cannot  agree.  To
    follow that argument it would be necessary to  conclude that  the  fact
    that the worker  had  worked  her  unlawfully  should  be  ignored.  We
    consider that the  five year period must be lawful residence,  nor mere
    residence in the host country.

31.  Mr de Mello  also argued that the  decision  under  appeal,  which  was
    made after  Hungary became a full member of the  EU,  when   there  was
    freedom of movement without restriction for Hungarian nationals to work
    in Britain, unlawfully  discriminated between  Hungarians and nationals
    of other A8 countries and other EU nationals who had not  been  subject
    to  the restrictions set  out  in  the   Accession  regulations.  That,
    however, is  incorrect.  The  reality  is  that  nationals  of  the  A8
    countries were treated differently during  the  accession  period,  and
    Britain  is entitled  to  distinguish  between  a  national  of  an  A8
    country who was working in Britain during the  accession period and had
    to   comply  with certain conditions and the national of an EEA   state
    whose nationals did not have to comply with these conditions.   Britain
    is also entitled  to distinguish  between  the  A8  national   who  was
    working here legally, that is, in accordance with the  Regulations  and
    one  who was not.

33.   Although Mr de Mello made  much  of  the  claim  that   the  Accession
    Treaties  should be interpreted in the same way  in each EU state   the
    reality is that  there was nothing  before us to indicate that other EU
    countries  treated  the nationals  of A8 countries  in a way  that  was
    different  from Britain's treatment of such nationals.

34.   We have therefore concluded that  although the  decision of the First-
    tier Judge has been set aside it is appropriate to remake the  decision
    and to dismiss the appeal.

Decision
This immigration appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
