
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12036/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27th January 2015                 |On 25th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                             mr Tabassam Janjua
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Tabassam Janjua, a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born
    18th March 1977.  He appeals against the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholls issued on 22nd October  2014  dismissing  under
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
    Regs) and the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds, the appeal
    of the Appellant against the decision of the  Respondent  made  on  5th
    February 2014 to refuse to grant him a residence card as evidence of  a
    derivative right of residence in the UK.

 2. He submitted in the grounds  seeking  permission  that  Judge  Nicholls
    erred in his interpretation of Regulation  15A  in  particular  in  his
    understanding of the word "unable".  It is submitted that he imposed  a
    higher standard.  It is submitted that he failed to properly apply  the
    legal principles set out at paragraph 67 of Harrison  (Jamaica)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736 in which the Court said:

         "Of course, to the extent that the quality or standard of life will
         be seriously impaired by excluding the  non-EU  national,  that  is
         likely in practice  to  infringe  the  right  of  residence  itself
         because it will effectively  compel  the  EU  citizen  to  give  up
         residence and travel with the non-EU national.  But in such a  case
         the Zambrano doctrine would apply and the EU citizen's rights would
         have to be protected (save for the possibility of  a  proportionate
         deprivation of rights)."

 3. It is submitted that this gives weight to the "quality or  standard  of
    living" which must be considered.  Judge  Nicholls  had  said  that  an
    adult British citizen who is unable to care for himself will be  likely
    to qualify for assistance from the Government and other local authority
    but he failed to consider the  fact  that  there  is  a  difference  in
    relation to the level of care that a family member  who  is  a  primary
    carer as opposed to  the  level  of  care  the  social  services  would
    provide, such that quality of the living would be affected.

 4. It is submitted that the Judge also  misunderstood  the  facts  of  the
    case.  The Appellant had made enquiries about the level  of  care  that
    would be available to his father and was told that it would be two care
    visits of 30 minutes each, one in the morning and one  in  the  evening
    with three meals a day.

 5. It is also submitted that Judge Nicholls erred  in  his  assessment  of
    Article 8 ECHR.  He erred in his assessment of the  proportionality  of
    removal of the Appellant and  in  particular  failed  to  consider  the
    nature of the bond  between  the  Appellant  and  his  father  and  the
    complete reliance by the Appellant's father on the Appellant.  The test
    is  not  whether  there  would  be  alternative  support  to  meet  the
    requirements of the father's  needs.   There  has  to  be  a  balancing
    exercise and the Judge failed to carry that out.

 6.  On  12th  December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted
    permission to appeal.  He noted that Judge Nicholls had  accepted  that
    the Appellant was the primary carer for his father, a British  citizen,
    but was not satisfied that his father would be unable to reside in  the
    UK if  the  Appellant  were  required  to  leave.   He  relied  on  his
    entitlement to the care services available in  the  UK.   Judge  Holmes
    went on to say:

         "2.  The grounds complain about the Tribunal's approach to the test
             inherent in the use of the word 'unable' in Reg  15A(4A).   It
             does not appear that the Tribunal was referred by either party
             to the decision in Hines [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660  or  gave  any
             consideration to the issue of whether the care available  from
             social services  to  an  adult  was  comparable  to  the  care
             available from social services to a child  through  fostering.
             Arguably  there  was  therefore  inadequate  consideration  of
             whether the finding that the removal of  the  Appellant  would
             force the Sponsor to be dependent upon social services, should
             have led to a conclusion that this  would  effectively  compel
             the Sponsor to leave the UK with the Appellant.

         3.   Whilst the grounds complain about the approach  taken  to  the
             Article 8 appeal it is plain from the Determination  that  the
             Judge did consider the positions of both the Sponsor  and  the
             Appellant.  Even if no specific finding was  made  on  whether
             their relationship amounted to 'family life' or 'private life'
             it is plain that the Judge had well in  mind  its  nature  and
             strength so no material error could arise from that.  Moreover
             the grounds do not  engage  with  the  precarious  immigration
             status of the Appellant, the statutory considerations required
             by Section 117A/117B or identify  any  basis  upon  which  the
             appeal  could   be   allowed   on   Article   8   grounds   as
             disproportionate to the public interest if it had failed under
             Reg 15A(4A).  Accordingly the grounds  complaining  about  the
             approach  taken  to  the  Article  8  appeal  appear  to  have
             significantly less merit although they too may be argued."

 7. What Reg 15A (4A)  4 says at (c) is -

         'the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the  UK
         or in another EEA state if P were required to leave'.

 8. Ms Iqbal sought to rely on Hines.  She submitted  that  it  applies  to
    this case and the appeal should be allowed on that basis.   She  relied
    too on Harrison.   There  is  no  comparative  care  available  to  the
    Appellant's father and that is the test.  With regard to  Article  8  I
    said I would not exclude submissions because it may  be  arguable  that
    Judge Nicholls placed too much weight on the immigration history of the
    Appellant and not enough on his relationship with his  father  and  his
    father's reliance  on  him.   She  made  submissions  saying  that  the
    Appellant has had no family of his own  because  he  has  been  totally
    committed to looking after his father.  He is his father's only  carer.
    She said the Judge's assessment of family life was not reasonable.  She
    said too that there is no requirement for the care required to be on  a
    24 hour basis and there are cases on this point in the pipeline.

 9. I do note that the Judge Nicholls took into account the fact  that  the
    Appellant's father would have other support from close  family  members
    but that was not the evidence before me.  He noted that the Appellant's
    father has suffered strokes in 2002  and  2014.  In  January  2010  the
    Appellant had been granted Discretionary Leave for three months so that
    he could make alternative arrangements for the day to day care  of  his
    father. Judge Nicholls accepted that the Appellant is the primary carer
    of his father as defined in the EEA Regs.  He  also  appeared  to  take
    account of the fact that there was no  evidence  before  him  that  the
    situation had been subject to professional assessment.  He  noted  that
    there was nothing to say that the Appellant needs  24  hour  care.   He
    also said at paragraph 20:

         "As his father is required to be a British citizen which he is,  it
         must be recognised that most adult British citizens who are  unable
         to care for themselves will be likely  to  qualify  for  assistance
         from the Government and other local authorities which, depending on
         the individual needs, can include 24 hour  residential  or  nursing
         care.  It is not a matter of preference but of entitlement."

10. He concluded that it had not  been  established  that  the  Appellant's
    father needs 24 hour care.  He took into account that the Appellant had
    been  a  "deliberate  overstayer"  in  the  UK  for  twelve  years.  He
    considered the comments of the Court of Appeal in  Harrison.  He  noted
    that the Appellant's  representative  had  highlighted  the  concluding
    remarks about serious impairment of the quality or standard of life but
    found that there was no evidence beyond the unsupported  claim  of  the
    Appellant to demonstrate any serious or  significant  consequences  for
    the Appellant's father if the Appellant had to leave  the  UK  and  the
    father was to move to nursing or residential care.

11. The determination of Judge Nicholls is thorough and  comprehensive.  He
    did not consider Hines but he gave serious consideration to the  points
    raised in Harrison that were relied on by the Appellant's Counsel.  The
    Appellant in Hines was a child who was 5 years old at the date  of  the
    hearing and the issues were different to those in the case  before  me.
    At the heart of the decision was the issue of 'the  best  interests  of
    the child' which is not the case here. There was  no  medical  evidence
    before Judge Nicholls that the  Appellant's  father  requires  24  hour
    care. Ms Iqbal maintained that that is in any event not  the  test  but
    the fact of the matter is that  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  a
    submission that the Appellant would be unable to live in the UK without
    his son and no evidence that  the  level  of  care  he  gets  would  be
    compromised or his quality of life diminished if his son were to  leave
    the UK.  There is a letter from this father's GP dated 24th March  2015
    which lists this medical problems and notes  he requires a  great  deal
    of assistance with personal care and activities of daily living as well
    as his general mobility. He goes on to say,

         "To the best of my knowledge Mr Tabassam Janjua is the primary full
         time carer for his father and provides personal care and assistance
         to his father on a 24 hour basis. It is my opinion that Mr Tabassam
         Janjua has full knowledge of  his  father's  medical  and  physical
         problems elms and is best suited to meet his father's needs as a In
         all the circumstances and given his findings under the EEA  Regs  I
         find that there is no material error of law in his consideration of
         Article 8 which was also comprehensive and balanced.

12. It seems to me that the crucial failing in the Appellant's case is  the
    lack of satisfactory evidence of his father's needs and the effect  the
    loss of his son's care would have on him.   Judge Nicholls was entitled
    to rely on that. I consider that he was also entitled to  take  account
    of the care that would be available from the state in  the  UK  to  the
    Appellant's father as a British citizen.

Notice of Decision

I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and that the decision shall stand.



Signed        Date: 20th March 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
