
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13995/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 29 May 2014                                |on 30 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                DAVID GABUNIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:            Mr D Beagrie, of Maguire, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Georgia, born on  8  March  1972.   He  has
   been in the UK since 2005, with a long immigration history,  set  out  in
   the respondent's decision and in the FtT determination.  His relationship
   with his wife began around 2006 and they married  in  August  2011.   His
   wife and her adult daughter are citizens of both Georgia and the UK.  His
   wife's daughter has a son, born on 9 October 2013.   The  child's  father
   is a Georgian citizen, resident in Georgia.

2) On 19 April 2013 the respondent refused the  appellant's  application  to
   remain in the UK under Rule 276ADE and Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
   Rules and directed his removal to Georgia.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio dismissed the appellant's appeal  by
   determination promulgated on 10 December 2013.

4) The following summary of the appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper
   Tribunal is adapted from the grant of permission by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Shimmin:

     i) at  paragraph  120,  applying  the  wrong  test  of  insurmountable
        obstacles when assessing the proportionality of removal outside the
        Immigration Rules, and failing to assess the article  8  rights  of
        the appellant's wife;


    ii) at paragraph 143, reaching the decision on the basis that there was
        no reason for the appellant and his wife not to enjoy  private  and
        family life together in Georgia, although it  is  not  possible  to
        require a UK/EU citizen to relocate outside the UK/EU or to  submit
        that it would be reasonable for her to  do  so;  interference  with
        family life in such a case can be justified "only on the basis that
        the  conduct  of  the  person  to  be   removed   gives   rise   to
        considerations of such weight as to justify  separation"  -  Sanade
        [2012] UKUT 00048;

   iii) at paragraph 146, thinking that if the appellant were to succeed on
        Article 8 grounds he would obtain indefinite leave to remain in the
        UK, the respondent's policy in such a case being to grant 30 months
        discretionary leave  to  remain  -  an  error  of  fact  materially
        affecting the proportionality assessment;

    iv) at paragraph 146, taking into account an irrelevant  consideration,
        namely that the starting point is that the Immigration  Rules  must
        be satisfied by way of a fee paid application, and overlooking that
        leave can be granted outwith the Rules.

5) By agreement, I heard firstly from Mr Mullen in response to the  grounds.
    He submitted as follows.  While paragraph 120 of the determination might
   be poorly expressed in saying that the appellant "failed  to  prove  that
   his wife's UK/EU citizenship constituted an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
   his return to Georgia", a fair reading of the whole determination and  in
   particular paragraphs 123-147 showed that the judge correctly  took  into
   account all  factors  relevant  to  the  eventual  outcome  in  terms  of
   proportionality  and  reached  a  properly  considered   decision.    The
   appellant's wife did not have a permanent right of residence  in  the  UK
   until 2010, and did not become a citizen until 2012.  The judge explained
   why it was reasonable to expect them to continue  their  family  life  in
   Georgia.  She still has Georgian citizenship, and the country is familiar
   to  her.   She  has  always  known  that  the  appellant  had  precarious
   immigration status.  To carry on family life there at most involves minor
   inconvenience, not real hardship.  If anything,  the  judge  overstressed
   the significance of Sanade to the  situation  of  the  appellant's  wife,
   overlooking that as an adult she did not fall within  the  terms  of  the
   respondent's concession, as clarified in Izuazu.  The FtT judge correctly
   decided that this was a case where the appellant's wife could be  put  to
   such a choice, and that there was nothing  unreasonable  about  continued
   cohabitation abroad.  The position of the appellant's stepdaughter was of
   no real significance, she being aged 22 and having a child  of  her  own.
   That did not represent more than the normal ties to be found  between  an
   adult  and  his  adult  stepdaughter.   All   the   criticisms   of   the
   determination amounted to matters of form  rather  than  substance.   The
   appellant had a criminal history, although admittedly minor, and  a  poor
   immigration history.  The detailed consideration in the determination was
   more than enough  to  justify  the  proportionality  conclusion  reached.
   Notwithstanding any minor slips, it did not require to be disturbed.

6) Mr Beagrie submitted as follows.  There were errors which in  combination
   undermined the determination.  At paragraph 146, the judge  thought  that
   the appellant should be required to make an application under the  Rules,
   but the respondent had already fully considered his application  and  the
   matter  should  correctly  have  been  determined  by  the  Tribunal   in
   substance, without asking for any further formality.  Although the  judge
   did explain at paragraphs 141 and 142  in  relation  to  Mansoor  why  he
   thought that family life could be continued even if members of the family
   were geographically separated, he had gone wrong by not finding that  the
   stepdaughter remained dependent upon  her  mother  and  stepfather.   The
   stepdaughter proposed to return to University and to rely on the  child's
   grandparents to provide  care.   They  all  remain  members  of  the  one
   household.  There would be a significant  interference  with  the  family
   life interests of the appellant's stepdaughter.  The judge had  noted  at
   paragraph 79 that the respondent accepted that there was family life with
   the appellant's wife and to some degree her daughter and  the  daughter's
   child, but then appeared to have  overlooked  the  significance  of  that
   factor.  The judge was wrong in thinking that  success  under  Article  8
   would result in a grant of indefinite leave to remain, the usual practice
   being to grant 30 months discretionary leave (this was acknowledged by Mr
   Mullen).  Apart from the appellant's admittedly  quite  poor  immigration
   history and the general public interest in enforcing the Rules, there was
   nothing significant  on  the  respondent's  side  of  the  balance.   The
   appellant would not be able to apply from Georgia  for  entry  under  the
   Rules, because he would be unable to  meet  the  financial  requirements.
   This was not a case raising any Chikwamba issue (this also became  common
   ground).  The determination should be set aside and  the  proportionality
   outcome reversed.

7) I reserved my determination.

8) Sanade states at paragraph  95  that  "where  the  child  or  indeed  the
   remaining spouse is a British citizen and  therefore  a  citizen  of  the
   European Union, it is not possible to require them to relocate outside of
   the European Union or to submit that it would be reasonable for  them  to
   do so."  In Izuazu (Article 8 - New Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  00045  (IAC)  a
   panel comprising the  President,  Lord  Bannatyne  and  UT  Judge  Storey
   clarified that although the respondent continues to accept  that  EU  law
   prevents the state requiring an EU citizen to leave the  UK  nevertheless
   the  respondent  "contends  with  good  reason  that  this   is   to   be
   distinguished from a case where an independent adult can  choose  between
   continued residence in the UK or continued cohabitation abroad."

9) The judge  plainly  took  a  great  deal  of  care  over  this  case  but
   unfortunately, he did fall into some errors.  However,  I agree  with  Mr
   Mullen that  paragraph  120  discloses  little  more  than  an  error  of
   expression, because the judge went  on  to  weigh  all  relevant  factors
   rather than applying a literal "insurmountable obstacles" test, in or out
   of the Rules.  In relation to the appellant's wife, the criterion  is  to
   be found in Izuazu, not  in  Sanade.   In  relation  to  the  child,  the
   appellant is not the parent or a principal carer.  As the husband of  the
   child's grandmother, family life exists only in a broad sense.  The judge
   was entitled to find that the child's mother was able to care  adequately
   for herself and the child even if her mother and the  appellant  were  to
   return to Georgia (paragraph 129).  There was no reason for links  to  be
   severed (paragraph 142-143).  The judge's errors  as  to  the  extent  of
   leave the appellant would receive if he succeeded his appeal  and  as  to
   whether he should be required to make a  further  application  were  both
   minor matters.

10) On the fundamental issue in this case, paragraph 57 of Sanade is apt:

    At one end of the spectrum are cases where both parties to  a  marriage
    come from the same country, are nationals of that country, are familiar
    with the language,  religion  and  way  of  life  there,  and  face  no
    obstacles  to  relocation.   Immigration  action  may  hardly   be   an
    interference with family  life  at  all  and  very  little  by  way  of
    justification would be required to enforce the ordinary scheme  of  the
    state's immigration control regime.  At the  other  end  the  practical
    impossibility of enjoying family life outside the contracting state  is
    likely to make the interference disproportionate.


11) The essential facts of this case are much nearer to  the  first  end  of
   that spectrum than to the second.  The grounds of appeal disclose no good
   reason for interfering with the judge's striking of  the  proportionality
   balance.

12) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                29 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
