
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13044/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2017                          |On 10th November 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Ms mariam omokaro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant :    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


For the Respondent:  Miss S Pascoe (instructed by Bespoke, Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      with permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Dineen) promulgated on 27th January 2017 by which
      he allowed the appeal against a decision to remove the  Appellant  and
      her two children to Nigeria on Human Rights grounds.

   2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue  to  refer  to
      the Secretary of State as the Respondent and to Miss  Omokaro  as  the
      Appellant in this Judgment.

   3. It is appropriate at this stage to  say  that  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal there were three Appellants, the current Appellant,  born  on
      15th March 1974 and her two children born [ ] 2010 and [ ]  2013.  The
      second and third Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  were  born
      in the UK. However, the Secretary of State  had  lodged  decisions  in
      relation to all three and therefore there were  three  appeals  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The Secretary of State's application for permission to  appeal  refers
      only to the first Appellant and there are no applications in  relation
      to the second and third.  On that basis given that the two  children's
      successful appeals are unchallenged it is difficult to see how it  can
      be said that their mother's appeal could be dismissed and she  removed
      to Nigeria.

   5. Nevertheless I shall consider the grounds.

   6. The application for permission to appeal asserts that the Judge made a
      material misdirection in law in treating the child's best interests as
      a trump card. He had, it is claimed, elevated the consideration of the
      child's best interests from  being  a  primary  consideration  to  the
      primary consideration above that of the public interest.

   7. The grounds go on to  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  proportionality
      exercise must include a balancing exercise, taking  all  matters  into
      account, not just the child's best interests.

   8. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted  permission  to  appeal  on
      that basis.

   9. The facts of the case before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  that  the
      first Appellant entered the UK with a visit visa valid  from  December
      2008 to June 2009. She did not leave at the expiry of her visa and  on
      8th October 2010 gave birth to the second Appellant. She then applied,
      on 15th August 2011, for leave to remain outside the Rules  which  was
      refused.  Then on 16th August 2012 the Secretary of  State  agreed  to
      reconsider her application. On 30 June 2013 the Appellant  gave  birth
      to the third Appellant.

  10. On 20th March 2015 the Secretary of State served notices of  decisions
      to remove all three Appellants from the UK.  It  was  the  Appellants'
      appeals against those  decisions  which  came  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  11. At the hearing before Judge Dineen it was accepted by  the  Appellants
      that they could not succeed under paragraph 276 ADE or Appendix FM  of
      the Immigration Rules and the appeal therefore proceeded purely on the
      basis of Article 8 under the ECHR.

  12. The evidence was that all three Appellant s were living at the home of
      a cousin and her two children in the UK.  They  were  members  of  the
      congregation of a church which had been confirmed  by  the  Pastor  of
      that church. Financially the family was supported by the church and by
      their friends.

  13. The first Appellant was separated from her husband and  did  not  know
      his whereabouts. In Nigeria she had been a teacher and also worked  as
      the treasurer for a pharmaceutical company. She has no close family in
      Nigeria and is not close to  her  extended  family.  She  receives  no
      financial support from her husband.

  14. It is fair to stay that none of those facts were determinative in  the
      Appellants favour and did not feature as  the  Judge's  reasoning  for
      allowing the appeal.

  15. What did it tip the balance the Appellant s favour in  this  case  was
      the situation of the second Appellant.  He  suffers  from  sickle-cell
      disease. He is receiving treatment from  the  NHS.  The  Judge  had  a
      report from the Department of Haematology at Queens Hospital,  Romford
      in which it was stated that he has Haemoglobin S Lepore. He apparently
      inherited the Haemoglobin S from his father and the Haemoglobin Lepore
      from his mother. That was described as a sickly disorder  but  one  of
      the milder forms. It was said that he was at increased risk of painful
      crises that require analgesia and occasionally hospital admission.  He
      is reviewed regularly in the Haemoglobinopathy clinic to look for  any
      complications. His current medication is penicillin and folic acid and
      he has completed vaccinations for Hepatitis B  and  Influenza  and  is
      awaiting vaccination for Pneumothorax and Meningitis B.

  16. Additionally there was a care planning document before the Judge  from
      Child Health Services at the NHS Foundation Trust which  deals,  among
      other things, with procedures for ensuring  child  safety  at  school.
      That document stated that sickle-cell crises can often  occur  for  no
      apparent reason, although it may be triggered by changes  in  weather,
      excessive exposure to sun, or the  body  suddenly  becoming  short  of
      oxygen as a result of physical exertion or stress. In the event of his
      suffering pain in the head, an ambulance must be called  as  a  stroke
      can occur. If he suffers high temperature, severe pain during a sickle-
      cell crisis, breathing difficulties,  severe  abdominal  pain,  severe
      headache, stiff neck or dizziness, or changes  in  mental  state,  his
      mother must be telephoned, and if that is not  possible  999  must  be
      called and an ambulance  requested.  Ambulance,  medical  and  nursing
      staff must be told that he suffers from sickle-cell  disease  so  that
      they are aware of the potentially serious nature of his condition.

  17. There is no cure for sickle-cell disease.

  18. The Judge then considered documents  referring  to  the  situation  in
      Nigeria which indicated that the care available  for  the  disease  is
      suboptimal.

  19. The Judge then noted that the gov.UK document  reported  that  Nigeria
      has the largest population of people with sickle-cell disease  in  the
      world with around 150,000 babies born with the condition each year.  A
      Consultant at Guy's and St Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust in London has
      been working with the NHS screening programme to  support  and  assist
      such a project in Katsina State, Nigeria. He reported that:-

         "It is estimated that only 50% of children with sickle-cell disease
         live past the age of 10 in Nigeria, compared to over 96%  surviving
         to adulthood in the UK and the US".

  20. The Judge then noted that the Secretary of State accepted that sickle-
      cell disease is a life-threatening condition.

  21. It was that child's situation which was determinative of  this  appeal
      and at paragraph  51  the  Judge  stated  that  it  was  necessary  to
      establish  whether   there   were   compelling   circumstances   which
      contraindicated the removal of that child. In so doing  he  took  into
      account that there is no cure for sickle cell disease which  is  life-
      threatening. He took into account that the World  Health  Organisation
      states the disease has major social and economic implications  for  an
      affected child and also that only 50% of such  children  survive  past
      the age of 10 in Nigeria. He said at paragraph 55 that there  is  what
      can be described as a real risk that in Nigeria the second Appellant's
      life would be cut short before he attains adult hood.

  22. The Judge then went on to consider the criteria  set  out  in  section
      117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and at paragraph 60  took
      into account the fact that the child's best interests  are  a  primary
      consideration but not the only or paramount consideration.

  23. The Judge took into account  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  to
      immigration officers which set out the  relevant  considerations  when
      considering whether it would be unreasonable to expect  a  non-British
      child to leave the UK which include situations where there is evidence
      that the child is  undergoing  a  course  of  treatment  for  a  life-
      threatening  or  serious  illness  and  the  treatment  would  not  be
      available in the  country  of  return.  The  Judge  noted  that  while
      treatment would be available in the country of return, it would not be
      available in the same form as in the UK in this case or with the  same
      likely outcome.

  24. The Judge also referred himself to paragraph 11.3 of the same guidance
      which states  that  exceptional  circumstances  mean  those  in  which
      refusal would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
      applicant or the applicant's family. Clearly what weighed  heavily  in
      the Judge's mind was the reduction in life expectancy beyond  the  age
      of 10 years for the second Appellant and on that basis  he  found  his
      removal would be a disproportionate interference with his private life
      and that the removal of his mother and brother to that country without
      him would be a disproportionate interference with the family  life  of
      all three Appellants.

  25. On the particular facts  of  this  case,  given  the  gravity  of  the
      situation of the second Appellant I am unable to find that the  First-
      tier Tribunal made an error of law allowing the appeal and in  finding
      removal of the child disproportionate. Although the best interests  of
      the child are not a paramount consideration  as  they  are  in  family
      proceedings, they are nevertheless a primary consideration. There must
      be good reasons for coming to a conclusion which is not in the child's
      best interests. This is not a finely balanced case of a child  who  is
      settled in the UK but is otherwise fit and healthy.  This  is  a  case
      where the child will have extremely serious  medical  consequences  if
      removed; in this case that he is unlikely to live beyond  the  age  of
      10. He is already 7.

  26. Additionally, even were I to  find  that  the  Judge  had  misdirected
      himself and his consideration of proportionality flawed and set  aside
      the determination, in redeciding it different factors come into  play.
      The child has now been in the UK seven years and the case  would  need
      to be  considered  under  paragraph  276  ADE.  In  its  present  form
      consideration would need to be given to whether it would be reasonable
      to expect that child to leave the UK. Given the medical  evidence  and
      his situation and the evidence as to the consequences of  his  removal
      to Nigeria it  is  not  conceivable  that  any  Judge  would  find  it
      reasonable to remove this child. Nor can I conceive of  any  situation
      where a Judge would find it reasonable or proportionate for  the  said
      child to remain in this country without his mother and siblings.

  27. For all of the above reasons I find the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      make an error of law in its Decision and Reasons.

 Decision

 The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


 There having been no application for anonymity in this case and none  made
 by the first-tier Tribunal I see no justification for making one now.




Signed                              Date 8th November 2017




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
