
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13093/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                     isuru nadeeshan wickrama arachchige
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  16  April
    1993.  The appellant entered the UK on 19 September  2011,  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 Student valid from 19 July 2011 until 6 September
    2012.  The appellant was granted an extension valid  until  30  January
    2015.  On 30 January 2015 the appellant applied for  further  leave  to
    remain as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  [CJ].   The  respondent
    refused that application on 16  March  2015.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Wright in a decision promulgated on 22 March 2016.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    grounds that (1) the judge erred in his assessment  of  EX.1,  and  (2)
    that the judge erred in his consideration of Article 8 outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Decision on Error of Law

 3. Mr  Martin  submitted  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  EX.1  was
    contained solely in paragraph [35] of the decision despite  the  length
    of the decision.  It was submitted that it was not sufficient  to  show
    that all the factors were considered and that  appropriate  weight  had
    not been given.  He submitted that it was not enough  to  say,  as  the
    judge had, that he was applying the guidance in the case of  Agyarko  &
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  Mr Martin submitted that  the  appellant's
    case could be distinguished from Agyarko which was  a  judicial  review
    and in which there had been  very  little  evidence  including  a  weak
    statement, whereas in this case the judge had heard evidence  from  all
    the family members.  Looking at the  appellant's  wife,  if  she  faced
    serious difficulties in relocating to Sri  Lanka  which  could  not  be
    overcome that would be  sufficient.   It  was  Mr  Martin's  submission
    therefore that the judge needed to give greater  consideration  and  it
    was insufficient to say as he had done that the  appellant's  wife  was
    working in the UK and that she could work there or  her  husband  could
    look after her.

 4. Mr Martin submitted that the reality for the appellant's wife was  that
    in this country she is very engaged including  with  her  career  as  a
    hairdresser, but in Sri Lanka she could not progress if she  could  not
    speak to the customers in their language  or  read  products.   If  she
    cannot do that and if her husband is at work it was submitted that  she
    could not engage in life in Sri Lanka.   It  was  his  submission  that
    these were arguably very significant difficulties and  that  there  was
    not an adequate assessment by the judge.

 5. In relation to ground 2 it was submitted that the judge's assessment of
    Section 117B was inadequate and it was argued that the judge had failed
    to give weight to the  positive  factors,  for  example  there  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant is anything other than fluent in  English
    or a burden on taxpayers and that the weight given by the judge at [44]
    was only in relation to negative factors.

 6. Mr Martin relied on the  case  of  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054.   He
    indicated that this was in the skeleton before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the judge failed to address this issue.  At paragraph 46 the  judge
    addresses the Chikwamba point and relies on the case of Chen v SSHD IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  However Mr  Martin  submitted  that  as  with
    Agyarko, the case of Chen had been a judicial review whereas  the  case
    of Hayat was a live appeal and the court set out in Hayat how Tribunals
    should apply the Chikwamba guidance  and  that  they  should  focus  on
    distinguishing between those lawfully here (as was  the  case  of  this
    appellant) and those not;  and  secondly  that  the  respondent  should
    identify a reason why someone should have to  jump  through  the  entry
    clearance hoop.

 7. Mr Martin further submitted that there were no findings in relation  to
    the wider Article 8 issues including the impact of the decision  on  Mr
    and Mrs [J], the appellant's parents-in-law,  and  the  impact  of  her
    departure which Mr Martin  submitted  lent  weight  to  the  Article  8
    assessment.

 8. Ms Fijiwala relied on the respondent's Rule 24 response.   It  was  her
    submission that the judge had properly considered that the  appellant's
    wife is British, had lived here and has two jobs and also  referred  in
    paragraph [35] of his decision to the fact that  the  appellant's  wife
    mainly pursues a hairdressing career.  She submitted that the judge was
    entitled to find that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant and his wife relocating to Sri Lanka.  She further  submitted
    that the judge's determination must be read as a whole and at [44]  the
    judge had considered relevant factors including that the appellant  had
    family in Sri Lanka and that although the  appellant's  wife  had  been
    caring for her mother she had the support of her husband and her  adult
    son in the UK and that the partner's mother's  health  was  now  a  lot
    better.

 9. Ms Fijiwala pointed to paragraph [15] of the decision where  the  judge
    had considered that the appellant and her partner had previously rented
    accommodation which would be a relevant consideration for the return to
    Sri Lanka.  In addition, at [43], it was recorded that the  appellant's
    wife said she was prepared to go to Sri Lanka.  At [45] the judge  took
    into consideration that neither  the  appellant  nor  his  partner  are
    suffering from any medical conditions.

10. Ms Fijiwala relied on paragraphs 21 to 25 of Agyarko  &  Others  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 440 (above).  Paragraphs 21 to 25 set out that  insurmountable
    obstacles is a high hurdle and that a fact sensitive approach has to be
    taken.  She submitted  that  the  judge  had  undertaken  such  a  fact
    sensitive approach and had  made  sustainable  findings.   Although  Mr
    Martin had relied on the fact that  the  case  of  Agyarko  had  little
    evidence which was distinguishable from this  case,  it  was  submitted
    that the judge assessed the evidence in this case.   Ms  Fijiwala  also
    relied on the  case  of  Wasif  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  82.   In  particular
    paragraph 60 refers to the  fact  that  someone  could  not  speak  the
    relevant  language  would  fall  "far   short"   of   constituting   an
    insurmountable obstacle to relocation.  At paragraph 61  of  Wasif  the
    Court of Appeal indicated that Agyarko established  the  stringency  of
    the insurmountable obstacles test and that no special  features,  about
    the circumstances or background of that appellant took the case out  of
    the ordinary, had been identified.  Ms Fijiwala  submitted  that  there
    were no special features in this appellant's case.  Any  alleged  error
    was therefore not material.

11. In relation to ground 2, Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    correct in his approach  in  finding  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances and applying SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387  and
    Ms Fijiwala relied on paragraphs 33 and 34 of SS (Congo).

12. However the judge went on in the alternative to consider Article 8  and
    Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge was entitled to take into  account
    the issue of entry clearance and the judge quoted from Chen (above)  at
    paragraph  46  of  his   decision.    Temporary   separation   is   not
    disproportionate and the judge had taken into account  that  there  was
    evidence that the application would take four to six weeks and that the
    appellant's wife could get two  weeks  off  work.   There  was  nothing
    irrational about that  finding.   In  relation  to  Hayat  Ms  Fijiwala
    submitted that the judge had to take into account all the factors,  not
    just policy reasons, and in any event the judge had found  that  family
    life could continue in Sri Lanka and that there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles under EX.1.

13. In respect of Agyarko, paragraph  31,  Ms  Fijiwala  acknowledged  that
    where there are no insurmountable obstacles it is possible to  succeed.
    However, such a case would need to establish exceptional  circumstances
    and Ms Fijiwala submitted that given that the judge  found  that  there
    were no compelling circumstances, that were not sufficiently recognised
    under the Rules, to warrant consideration outside  Article  8,  it  was
    clear  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances.  At paragraphs 29 and 30 Agyarko the fact that there  is
    not insurmountable obstacles does  not  mean  that  a  case  cannot  be
    exceptional.  The court found that there  is  a  gap  between  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM and what Article 8 might require in  some  cases  but  this
    does not mean that the issue of insurmountable obstacles to  relocation
    drops out of the picture where there is reliance on Article 8 and  that
    the issue of insurmountable obstacles is a material fact  to  be  taken
    into account which the judge properly did in Ms  Fijiwala's  submission
    at [42].

14. Ms Fijiwala relied  on  the  recent  Court  of  Appeal  of  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  803  which
    sets out at paragraphs 61 to 65 confirmation that at best factors in an
    appellant's favour  can  only  be  neutral  factors.   In  addition  Ms
    Fijiwala pointed  out  that  Rhuppiah,  at  paragraph  65,  found  that
    financial independence means independence not just of the state but  of
    others and  that  the  appellant  in  this  case  was  not  independent
    financially as he was dependent on his wife.

15. Ms Fijiwala relied on Rajendran (Section 117B  -  family  life)  [2016]
    UKUT 138 where it was confirmed that it is an  established  feature  of
    Article 8 jurisprudence that precariousness is a criterion of relevance
    to family life as well as private life  cases.   Although  the  "little
    weight" provisions of Section 117B(4)(a) and (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are confined to private life, this does
    not mean that when answering the public interest question  a  court  of
    Tribunal should disregard "precarious family life"and  given  that  the
    provisions of Section 117 are not exhaustive in certain cases it may be
    an error of law for a Tribunal to disregard  relevant  public  interest
    considerations.  It was Ms Fijiwala's submission  that  the  judge  had
    taken into consideration that the appellant had originally  arrived  in
    the UK for a temporary purpose and it was clear  that  his  status  had
    been precarious, as set out in the judge's findings at  [42].   It  was
    submitted that for all these factors there was no error in the  judge's
    approach.

16. Mr Martin submitted that there was a danger in reading in  the  judge's
    findings under Article 8  to  his  decision  under  EX.1  as  different
    questions  were  addressed.   Under  paragraph  EX.1  the   judge   was
    considering the couple moving to Sri Lanka permanently whereas  Article
    8 was concerned with a temporary stay.  Mr Martin argued  that  it  was
    not enough to point to Wasif and say that a court considered a fact  in
    a certain way.  It is clear that these cases  are  fact  sensitive  and
    just because another party may have been in a  position  to  learn  the
    language that does not mean it is the  same  for  this  appellant.   He
    submitted that there was no consideration of the implications  for  the
    appellant of moving to Sri Lanka for the  rest  of  her  life.   Whilst
    obstacles might over time be overcome Mr Martin reminded that EX.2 does
    not require its literal meaning but it is a case of looking to  see  if
    there are very serious hardships or  a  very  real  difficulty  for  an
    appellant.  In relation to Hayat the respondent must point to  sensible
    reasons for requiring entry clearance and it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge had not provided these reasons.

Ground 1

17. The judge was not satisfied that there were insurmountable obstacles to
    family life with the appellant's partner outside the UK  in  Sri  Lanka
    and the judge took into consideration, at [35] that this was  the  case
    despite the fact that the appellant's wife is a  British  citizen,  had
    lived in the UK all her life, was living with her  parents  along  with
    the appellant and was in  two  jobs,  namely  pursuing  a  hairdressing
    career.

18.  The judge also  applied  the  jurisprudence  in  Agyarko  (above)  (as
    discussed in detail in the submissions from the representatives).   The
    judge set out that insurmountable obstacles means the "very significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in
    continuing their family life outside the UK  and  which  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the  applicant  or
    their partner".  It is evident therefore that the judge had in mind the
    relevant test and had taken into account all the factors.

19. That those factors are not set out in detail at paragraph 35 is  not  a
    material error in the judge's decision.   Read  in  its  entirety,  the
    judge had regard to all the relevant factors and  the  obstacles  which
    would be faced by the appellant and his partner if they had to relocate
    to Sri Lanka.  I am satisfied that the judge had in mind the  potential
    implications for the appellant, his  partner  and  their  families,  of
    relocation to Sri Lanka

20. Although Mr Martin submitted that there was a danger in reading  across
    the judge's findings made in the context of his alternative  Article  8
    decision, as those  findings  were  made  only  in  the  context  of  a
    temporary stay in Sri Lanka, I am not satisfied that this is the  case.
    Although the  judge  did  consider,  in  his  Article  8  reasons,  the
    proportionality of the appellant returning to make entry clearance,  he
    also considered a more permanent move including  finding  at  paragraph
    [42] that there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant,  for
    example, could not set up his business in Sri Lanka as  opposed  to  in
    the UK.  It is not the case that the findings in relation to Article  8
    were confined to a temporary stay therefore and these include  findings
    in relation to the appellant's partner's mother and the fact  that  she
    continues to have the support of her husband and her adult son  in  the
    UK.  This is relevant not just to a temporary stay in Sri Lanka but  to
    a permanent move by her daughter.  The judge considered, at [44],  that
    the appellant would have the support of his family  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    found that the appellant's claim that his father  had  difficulties  in
    Sri Lanka was not established.  Again this is relevant not  just  to  a
    temporary return to Sri Lanka but a permanent  move.   The  judge  also
    considered that the couple could keep in  contact  if  the  appellant's
    wife now chose not to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  took  into
    consideration at [43] that the appellant's partner  had  admitted  that
    she would be prepared to go to Sri Lanka although the judge noted  this
    was contrary to the appellant's evidence.

21. I am not satisfied therefore that any material error has been disclosed
    in the judge's consideration of EX.2 of Appendix FM and  whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles.  In any event, even if the  judge  erred
    in not providing further reasons  at  [35],  such  an  error  would  be
    material given that I am satisfied that read as a  whole  his  decision
    discloses cogent reasons for not being  satisfied  in  this  particular
    case, that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  relocation  to  Sri
    Lanka.

22. The fact that the judge did not make a specific finding in relation  to
    language is not a material error when considered in the context of  all
    the findings, including that the appellant's partner had at  one  stage
    been prepared to go to Sri Lanka, and the relevant jurisprudence.

23. I am not satisfied that any material error is disclosed in ground 1.

Ground 2

24. The judge was entitled to find as he did at [40]  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances in this case not sufficiently recognised under
    the Immigration Rules and the judge relied on Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604
    including that where  there  are  no  such  circumstances  it  will  be
    sufficient for a decision maker to say so.  In addition  there  was  no
    error in the judge's reliance  on  the  principle,  also  expressed  at
    paragraph 33 of Sunassee, that the failure to qualify under  the  Rules
    will tend to suggest that the public interest requires refusal of leave
    to vary, unless some countervailing factors are present which  are  not
    already taken into account  under  the  Rules.    Where  there  are  no
    compelling circumstances justifying such a  consideration,  the  appeal
    could not be properly allowed and any claimed subsequent error  by  the
    judge in his alternative consideration of the  appellant's  case  under
    Article 8 cannot be material.

25.  I am not satisfied in any event that the judge's approach  to  Article
    8, in his alternative findings,  disclosed  any  material  error.   The
    judge was  entitled  to  be  satisfied  as  he  was  that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to require the appellant to return, for the reasons he
    gave from [42] to [46].  The judge also properly took into  account  as
    part of the proportionality balance, that it was a material factor that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to relocation.

26. There was no error in the judge's approach to Section  117B  and  I  am
    bound by the Court of Appeal's decision in Rhuppiah  (above)  that  the
    most that can be said for factors such as the  appellant's  ability  to
    speak English, was that these are neutral factors.  There is  no  error
    in the judge not mentioning factors as  positive  weight  tor  for  the
    appellant.  Indeed, if he had done so, this may well have constituted a
    material error.  Equally, the judge was entitled, in the  wider  public
    interest assessment not confined to the factors  in  Section  117B,  to
    give weight to the fact that the appellant was only in  the  UK  for  a
    temporary purpose and that he came here with the intention of returning
    to Sri Lanka to set up his own business.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider as he  did  that  this  was  a  precarious  family  life  case
    (Rajendran (above) applied).

27. Although it might be found in exceptional cases that an Article 8  case
    outside the immigration rules could succeed even  where  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles and that a gap exists, the judge made no error
    in not finding this to be such an exceptional case including finding as
    he did that there were no compelling circumstances.

28. There was no error in the Tribunal's approach to the  Chikwamba  point.
    The judge relied on the Tribunal's guidance in Chen (above)  considered
    the court of Appeal in Hayat in some detail:

    'Mr Palmer relied upon para 30c) and d) of Hayat to suggest that  there
    must be a 'sensible  reason'  to  require  an  individual  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance from abroad.  I reject the  submission.
    I do not accept that, in using the phrase 'sensible reason',  Elias  LJ
    was setting out the test for applying the guidance  in  Chikwamba,  not
    that he reversed the burden of proof.   The  burden  remains  upon  the
    applicant to place before the Secretary of State all material  that  he
    or she relies upon to suggest that removal pursuant to the  refusal  of
    leave would breach Article 8 (Kotecha, at para 56).'

29. I similarly reject the argument that Hayat set out a test for  applying
    Chikwamba, or that the burden of proof is  reversed.   The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons, including at [46]  considering  the  short  time  for
    consideration of an entry clearance application, as to why in this case
    removal would not be disproportionate.  There was nothing irrational in
    that approach.



Notice of Decision

30. I am not satisfied that the decision  of  Judge  Wright  discloses  any
    material error of law.  The  decision  shall  stand.   The  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was sought or made and there were no  reasons  before
me which would indicate that such a direction would be appropriate.


Signed                                  Date: 29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





Fee Award

As the appeal is dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

