
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13619/2015
     IA/13625/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 September 2016                       |On 21st October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          AMA SENRANGI EGODAGAMAGE
                       DAMITHRA THIWANKA AMBAGASPITIYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, Counsel, instructed by VMD Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Widdup) allowing an appeal by the applicants
    against the decision made on 20 March 2015 refusing  to  grant  further
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  In this determination I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the applicants as the appellants and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background

2.   The first appellant ("the appellant") is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born
    on 19 August 1986 and the second appellant also a citizen of Sri Lanka,
    born on 5 October 1983, is her dependant in this application.

3.   The appellant first entered the UK in March 2011 with leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 30 December 2014.  On  23  December
    2014 she applied for further leave to remain  outside  the  Rules.  The
    reasons for the application are set out in the letter dated 29 December
    2014 accompanying the application. The appellant was enrolled with  the
    London Institute  of  Management  and  Technology  (LIMT)  studying  an
    Associates Degree in  Business  Studies.  The  respondent  revoked  the
    college's licence but on her account the appellant did not receive  any
    notice or correspondence from the Home Office.  She has not  been  able
    to complete her current course or obtain a new  CAS.   Her  application
    sought an extension of leave for six  months  to  collate  a  new  CAS,
    enable her to sit her IELTS exam and then submit a Tier  4  application
    with the supporting documentation.

4.   However, the application was refused as it was the respondent's  policy
    to consider granting leave outside the Rules  only  where  particularly
    compelling circumstances existed. The respondent was not satisfied that
    there were any such circumstances in the appellant's case  which  might
    warrant a grant of leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR  outside
    the requirements of the Rules.

5.   The appellants appealed against this decision, arguing in  the  grounds
    that they had  demonstrated  exceptional  circumstances  and  that  the
    decision was otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law.  The  grounds
    further argue that any discretion under  the  Rules  should  have  been
    exercised differently and that the decision was unlawful because it was
    incompatible with their rights under the ECHR.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  judge  asked  the
    appellant's representative to identify the issues in  the  appeal.   He
    indicated that the appellant had been  on  a  course  of  studies,  the
    college licence had been revoked and she had been  left  stranded.  She
    could not apply for another course because the 60-day  letter  had  not
    been sent. The appellant's leave to remain had expired in 2014  and  in
    order to extend her right to remain an application  outside  the  Rules
    had been made.  The judge then asked the presenting officer  about  the
    revocation of the college licence. She said that there was no  evidence
    that the licence had been revoked, the appellant's leave to remain  had
    not been curtailed and, if there had been no curtailment,  no  60-  day
    letter would be sent.  The judge was referred to  a  letter  from  LIMT
    dated 27 May 2014 giving details of the  appellant's  progress  at  the
    college.

7.   The appellant confirmed that the  contents  of  her  witness  statement
    were true.  She said she had received the letter dated 27 May 2014 when
    she  went  to  the  college  to  ask  for  it  because  she  had   some
    examinations.  The office was not open and there were no courses.   She
    had asked friends who told her that this was the case.  She went to the
    college in June 2014 and found that it was closed. She applied to other
    colleges but was told that she had to have a 60-day letter. She checked
    the UKBA website but the college was not shown. After taking advice she
    had asked for a 60- day letter and then applied for  further  leave  to
    remain.

8.   In cross-examination she explained that when she had  stopped  studying
    she had been to the college in May 2014 for tuition.  The academic year
    had started in January and was due to finish in December. She had taken
    exams but no results had been issued. She went on the UKBA  website  in
    June 2014 but she did not know she should contact UKBA.  She  had  been
    told by universities she had approached that she needed a 60-day letter
    but they did not explain why.  In response to a question from the judge
    about who had confirmed at the end of 2014 that the college licence was
    fully revoked, she said that she had called the administrative  officer
    who had said this but she had had no letter about it.

9.   The judge asked the presenting officer  what  the  respondent's  policy
    had been in 2014. She said that if the  student  had  more  than  three
    months' leave to remain  she  would  be  told  of  the  revocation  and
    curtailment of leave to remain would take place and the  student  would
    be given 60 days' leave. The judge then asked further about whether the
    college's licence had been revoked.  The case  was  then  put  back  to
    allow enquiries to be made  and  when  it  was  resumed  a  letter  was
    produced dated 15 November 2011 referring  to  the  suspension  of  the
    sponsor's  licence  in  August  2011.   The  letter  gave  the  college
    principal notice that the college was removed from  the  register  with
    immediate effect.  In her submissions the presenting officer said  that
    unusually there had been no curtailment of leave and no  60-day  letter
    but argued that the appellant had not been prejudiced because her leave
    to remain had not been curtailed.

10.  In  reply  the  appellant's  representative  said  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the college had reapplied for a licence and the appellant
    had been prejudiced in that her studies were terminated.

11.  In setting out his conclusions the judge  said  that  the  appeal  gave
    rise to a number of unresolved questions of fact. He found  as  a  fact
    that LIMT's licence was revoked on 15 November 2011, noting  that  this
    information only came to light during the hearing  and  undermined  the
    presenting officer's initial submissions that  there  was  no  evidence
    that the licence had been revoked.  There  was  no  evidence  from  the
    respondent that the licence had been reinstated thereafter or that LIMT
    was on the register in the  summer  of  2014.   The  judge  said  that,
    bearing in mind that in November 2011 the appellant had more than three
    years' leave to remain, the respondent should have curtailed that leave
    and granted 60 days' leave in order to enable  the  appellant  to  find
    another college.  He considered whether the appellant would  have  paid
    LIMT fees and continued with her studies there had she been notified by
    the respondent of the revocation of the licence and the curtailment  of
    the leave to remain and said he had no hesitation in saying  that  this
    was highly unlikely.

12.  The judge said that he did not overlook the fact that some features  of
    the evidence presented by the appellant were unsatisfactory in that she
    was unable to explain who confirmed to her that the  college's  licence
    had been revoked and it would seem that she had  been  able  to  attend
    lessons at the college and sit examinations until May  2014,  some  two
    and a half years after the revocation.  Her continued involvement  with
    LIMT was supported by the documents in the appeal bundle at pages 8 and
    9 and pages 74 to 76 showed receipts from LIMT for  fees  paid  by  the
    appellant.   He found that these matters did not alter  the  fact  that
    the licence was revoked in November 2011 and there was no  evidence  of
    notice of revocation being given to the appellant.

13.  The judge found that the appellant was not notified of the  revocation,
    her leave to remain was not curtailed and she was not  given  a  60-day
    letter. In consequence the respondent  did  not  comply  with  her  own
    policy.  The judge added that he did not need to consider  whether  the
    appellant had suffered prejudice because of the omission to notify  her
    of the revocation but in any event  he  rejected  the  submission  that
    there was no prejudice as she still  had  leave  to  remain.   Had  the
    appellant been notified of the revocation of the licence  in  or  about
    November 2011, it was highly unlikely that she would have continued  to
    attend LIMT and the omission to serve a 60-day letter  meant  that  she
    was unable to seek a new CAS.

14.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 finding  that  the  appellant's
    private life  in  the  UK  as  a  student  was  engaged  and  that  the
    respondent's failure to comply with  her  own  policy  meant  that  the
    appellant's studies were interrupted and  delayed.   This  failure  had
    consequences of sufficient seriousness to engage  Article  8.  He  then
    found that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    by reason of the  failure  to  follow  her  own  policy  and  in  these
    circumstances  he  did  not  need  to  deal  with   the   question   of
    proportionality. The judge allowed the appeal to the  extent  that  the
    application was remitted to the respondent to enable her to comply with
    her policy.

The Grounds and Submissions

15.  In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the judge  erred  in  law
    by failing to understand the presenting officer's submission  that  the
    appellant's leave had not been curtailed and therefore  the  respondent
    would not have been required to provide the 60-day leave letter as that
    procedure was activated only when leave was curtailed.  The  presenting
    officer had reiterated this more than once but  it  appeared  that  the
    judge  did  not  understand  this  despite  the  clear  fact  that  the
    appellant's leave was not curtailed as it expired on 30  December  2014
    and therefore  the  appellant  was  clearly  not  prejudiced.   In  the
    appellant's Rule 24 response it is submitted that the  application  was
    for leave to remain outside the Rules.   The judge had  found  that  in
    November 2011 the appellant had more than three years leave  to  remain
    and the respondent should have curtailed that leave and granted 60 days
    leave to enable her to find another college.  She had not been given an
    opportunity to enrol for a new college or university  to  continue  her
    studies.   Accordingly, there was no error of law.

16.  Mr Tarlow adopted the grounds, submitting that the appellant could  not
    bring herself within  the  terms  of  the  policy,  which  specifically
    provided that the 60-day leave letter would only be sent once leave had
    been curtailed. In the present case the appellant's leave  had  expired
    by the effluxion of time and had not been curtailed.

17.  Ms Jones submitted that the judge's decision was clearly open  to  him.
    The appellant had a right of appeal on the basis that the decision  was
    not in accordance with the law as the application and decision preceded
    the coming into  force  of  the  amended  provisions  of  s.84  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She submitted  that  the
    judge could hardly be faulted for relying on a policy explained by  the
    presenting officer at the hearing.  Even if there was any substance  in
    the argument that it was open to the respondent not to grant a  further
    60 days' leave under the policy because leave  had  not  been  formally
    curtailed, it was implicit in the judge's findings that there had  been
    a breach of the common law duty of fairness.

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law

18.  It is not in dispute between the parties  that  in  2014  there  was  a
    policy covering the position of students studying at  a  college  whose
    licence was revoked.  The judge was told that the position was that  if
    the student had more than three months' leave to remain he or she would
    be told of the revocation, curtailment of leave to  remain  would  take
    place and the student would be given 60 days' leave to  enable  him  or
    her to attain a place at another college. This was the only evidence of
    the policy before the judge.  It appears that no written  copy  of  the
    policy was produced at the hearing and indeed none was produced at  the
    hearing before me.  Nonetheless, it  was  conceded  that  there  was  a
    published policy effective at the relevant time.

19.  In Lumba (WL) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC
    12, Lord Dyson at [35] confirmed that an individual has a basic  public
    law right to have his or her case considered under whatever policy  the
    executive sees fit to adopt provided  that  the  adopted  policy  is  a
    lawful exercise of the discretion  conferred  by  statute.  Lord  Dyson
    added that there was a co-relative right  to  know  what  the  existing
    policy was so that he or she could  make  relevant  representations  in
    relation to it.  In the present case the appellant was  found  only  to
    have become aware of the position in relation to her  college  in  June
    2014.  It was her case and the judge accepted that she asked for a  60-
    day letter and then applied for further leave to remain.

20.  The judge noted that some features of  the  appellant's  evidence  were
    unsatisfactory but found that these did not alter  the  fact  that  the
    licence for her college had been revoked in November 2011 and there was
    no evidence that she was given notice of that revocation.  On the basis
    of the evidence and submissions before him,  the  judge  was  therefore
    entitled to find that the respondent had  not  complied  with  her  own
    policy.  He also found that the appellant had been  prejudiced  by  the
    failure to notify her that the college licence had been revoked.

21.  The respondent relies on the fact  that  the  policy  provided  that  a
    student would only be given notice of revocation where he  or  she  had
    more than three months' leave to  remain,  that  leave  would  then  be
    curtailed and the student be given 60 days' further leave.   I  am  not
    satisfied that it is open to the respondent to argue  that  the  policy
    does not apply in circumstances where  leave  has  not  been  curtailed
    following an admitted failure to notify the appellant that her  college
    licence had been revoked at a time when otherwise she fell  within  the
    policy. I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law by finding  that
    the respondent had not complied  with  her  own  policy  and  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law. As the judge  pointed  out
    there were unsatisfactory features in the evidence but  he  took  those
    into account and reached findings properly open to him in a case  which
    very much turned on its own facts.

22.  Even if the judge had accepted the submission that it was not now  open
    to the respondent to grant leave under the policy following the  expiry
    of  the  appellant's  leave  through  effluxion  of  time  rather  than
    curtailment, he would have found  that  there  had  been  a  procedural
    failure by the respondent giving rise  to  unfairness,  so  making  the
    decision not in accordance with the law for that reason  in  accordance
    with the jurisdiction in cases such as Thakur (PBS decision-common  law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151 and Patel (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence-fairness) India [2011] UKUT211.

Decision

23.  In summary, for the reasons I have given, I am not satisfied  that  the
    judge erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:  18 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter





