
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13646/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2016                             |On 4 October 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr farrukh javed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Pal, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Miss H. Dogra, Counsel instructed by Ilford Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cameron sitting at Taylor House on  9
    March 2016) allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue him with a residence  card  under
    the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  as  the
    extended family member ("EFM") of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider the appellant requires  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 16 August  2016  Designated  Judge  Garratt  gave  his  reasons  for
    granting permission to appeal.  In finding that the claimant  had  been
    dependent on his brother while living in Pakistan  on  account  of  his
    brother paying for his school fees it was arguable that the  judge  had
    erred in law in not applying the "essential needs" test.

Discussion

 3. In Ihemedu (OFMs - in meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340  (IAC)  Senior
    Immigration Judge Storey, as he then was, gave the  following  guidance
    which is quoted at sub-paragraph 2 of the head note:

         An important consideration in the context of an OFM/extended family
         member case is that if a  claimant  had  come  to  the  UK  without
         applying for a family permit from abroad ..., this will  mean  that
         the  UK  authorities  have  been  prevented  from  conducting   the
         extensive examination of the  individual's  personal  circumstances
         envisaged by Reg 12(3) and in the course  of  such  an  examination
         check the documentation submitted.  If an applicant chooses not  to
         apply from abroad for a family permit under  Reg  12  of  the  2006
         Regulations, thereby denying the UK authorities an  opportunity  to
         check documentation in the country concerned, he cannot expect  any
         relaxation in the burden of proof that applies to him when  seeking
         to establish an EEA right" (my emphasis).

 4. In the same case, Judge Storey noted  at  paragraph  [4]  that  Article
    10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive stipulated  that  in  cases  falling
    under Article 3(2)(a), which deals with OFMs, applicants  must  produce
    "a document issued by the relevant authority in the country  of  origin
    or country from which  they  are  arriving  certifying  that  they  are
    dependants or members of the household of the union citizen ...".

 5. The same observation was made in Moneke (EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) at paragraph [42]:

         We note further that Article 10(2)(e)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
         contemplates documentary evidence.  Whether dependency  could  ever
         be proved by oral testimony alone is not something that we have  to
         decide in this case, but Article 10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that  the
         responsibility is on the applicant  to  satisfy  the  Secretary  of
         State by cogent evidence that is in part documented  (my  emphasis)
         and can be tested as to whether the level of material support,  its
         duration and its impact upon the applicant combined  together  meet
         the material definition of dependency.

 6. In this case, the claimant entered the UK as a student under the Rules,
    not as an OFM aka EFM under the Regulations 2006. He  did  not  present
    himself as being sponsored by his brother  and  sister-in-law,  but  as
    being self-sufficient in that he  had  sufficient  funds  in  his  bank
    account to meet the costs of his course and to maintain himself. Before
    Judge Cameron, there was no documentary evidence to  show  that  monies
    had been directly remitted to him in Pakistan by his brother and sister-
    in-law, and there was no documentary evidence to show  that  the  money
    which was remitted to his father  had  been  spent  on  the  claimant's
    school fees; or that the money in his bank account  when  applying  for
    entry clearance as a student had  been  provided  by  his  brother  and
    sister-in-law.

 7. In the event, Ms Pal did not seek to develop a case that Judge  Cameron
    had erred in law in allowing the appeal on these facts; and Miss  Dogra
    did not seek to develop the Rule 24 response opposing the appeal on the
    ground that the Judge had given adequate reasons for finding  that  the
    requirement of prior dependency was satisfied. Miss Dogra conceded that
    the claimant did not have a right of appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse to issue him with a residence card as  an  EFM,  following  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).

 8. Accordingly, with the consent of the legal representatives, I find that
    a material error of law is made out on the ground  that  in  retrospect
    the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the claimant's appeal.

 9. So the decision must be set aside and the  claimant's  appeal  must  be
    dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed for  want  of  jurisdiction.


I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 4 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

