
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13736/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 10 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRAY


                                   Between

                               Mr Jubel Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  5  February
    1992.  He appealed the decision of the respondent to refuse him further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge James.  By a
    decision promulgated on 28 October 2014 the judge dismissed the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds.   The  judge
    noted that neither the appellant nor  the  respondent  was  represented
    before her and the appeal was determined upon the papers.

 2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal the  decision
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Before us the appellant was  not  present,  nor
    was  he  represented.   However,  he  did  lodge  a  "submission"  with
    accompanying  documents  which  we  have  taken  into   account.    The
    respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 5 June 2015  submitting  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed herself appropriately.

The Issues

 3. The appellant was last granted leave to study business  management  and
    marketing at an institution called Radcliffe College.  In essence  such
    a  grant  signified  that  the  appellant  was  required  to  follow  a
    particular course with a particular sponsor.  However, in applying  for
    further leave at a later date the evidence produced  by  the  appellant
    was that  he  had  studied  for  an  NQA  higher  diploma  in  business
    administration at another college called London Essex College.

 4. The appellant has argued throughout that he was entitled  to  undertake
    studies that were supplemental to his  studies  at  Radcliffe  College.
    The problem for the appellant with this argument  is  that  apart  from
    bare assertion he has at no time produced any documents or  letters  to
    show that he studied at Radcliffe College at any time  let  alone  that
    his study at London Essex College was supplemental to any study that he
    might have undertaken at Radcliffe College.

 5. It is for the appellant to prove on the balance of  probabilities  that
    all the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met.  The only proven
    course that the appellant studied was  with  London  Essex  College  (a
    legacy sponsor) and he did not have permission to undertake a course of
    study there.  Had the appellant proved to the requisite  standard  that
    his study at London Essex College was supplemental to that of Radcliffe
    College then the outcome could have been different.

 6. As it is and as was set out in the refusal letter and  referred  to  in
    the judge's decision the appellant falls foul of s.50 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. This section can be summarised as
    prohibiting a student from study other than at the institution that the
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies Checking Service records as  the
    student's sponsor.  Without unduly labouring the  point  the  appellant
    has shown only that he studied at an institution other  than  that  for
    which he was granted leave.

 7. His failure to comply with the conditions  attached  to  his  leave  to
    remain led to the subsequent refusal of  his  application  made  on  13
    January 2014.  The judge therefore  concluded  correctly  and  for  the
    reasons given that the appeal before her did not succeed.

The Human Rights Claim

 8. The appellant's human rights claim was wholly unparticularised  as  the
    judge finds in paragraph 18 of the decision.  On the facts  before  her
    it was almost inevitable that the judge would dismiss that claim.

 9. It is unclear whether the bundle referred to in the notice of  decision
    to grant permission  to  appeal  was  before  the  First-tier  Judge  -
    although the judge does refer to further documents  presented  for  the
    purpose of appeal. However, there is nothing of any substance contained
    within that bundle that could possibly have affected the outcome of the
    judge's decision.  The documents produced fail  completely  to  provide
    any evidence other than assertion that the appellant studied  primarily
    at Radcliffe College.  Nothing contained within the submission from the
    appellant to the Upper Tribunal assists him either.

Notice of Decision

In the circumstances we cannot see that any other outcome was possible  than
that the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  would  fail.   Accordingly  the
decision to dismiss this appeal is upheld.

We do not make an anonymity direction.  None  has  been  requested  and  the
circumstances do not appear to warrant the making of one.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
