
.
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13452/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |           Decisions and Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 18th June 2015 and 22nd July 2015  |           On 14th August 2015          |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between


                             MARVIN OMAR HARVEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr. K. Tait, legal representative, Camden Community
                   Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on  19th  March  1975,  is  a  citizen  of
      Jamaica. He entered the United Kingdom illegally on 7th January  2000.
      He married Patricia Doreen Lewis on 27th September 2003 and on 2nd May
      2004 he applied for leave to remain as her  husband.  His  application
      was refused on 7th January 2009 but he appealed  and  his  appeal  was
      allowed by Immigration Judge Stanford on 7th April 2009 on  Article  8
      grounds.  On  17th  February   2010   the   Respondent   granted   him
      discretionary leave to remain until 17th February 2013. He applied  to
      vary his discretionary leave to remain on 11th February 2013.


   2. His application was refused on 28th February 2014 on the basis that on
      2nd July 2003 he had been convicted on three counts  of  possessing  a
      controlled drug with intent  to  supply  and  given  three  concurrent
      sentences of 12 months imprisonment and that on 24th March 2011 he had
      been convicted of possessing a controlled drug and sentenced to a fine
      or one day in prison. As a consequence, the Respondent said  that  she
      was satisfied that it would be undesirable for him to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom  and  found  that  he  did  not  meet  the  suitability
      requirements contained in Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  for
      leave to remain as a partner. She also found that he was not  entitled
      to leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and
      that his removal would not breach Article 8 of the European Convention
      on Human Rights.

   3. His appeal against this decision was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Khan in a determination and reasons promulgated on 13th November
      2014. Permission to appeal against this decision was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge De Haney on 12th January 2015 and  on  24th  April
      2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Latter  and  myself  found  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Khan's determination and reasons had  contained  errors
      of law, that it should be set aside in its entirety and that it should
      be heard de novo by the Upper Tribunal.

   4. The de novo appeal came before me on 18th June  2015.  I  subsequently
      gave directions in order for the Appellant's son's mother to attend to
      give oral evidence and for further evidence to be  obtained  from  his
      son's school. There was then a further hearing on 22nd July 2015.

 Hearings

   5. The Appellant and his wife gave extensive oral evidence at the hearing
      on 18th June 2015. The Appellant's son's mother attended  the  hearing
      on 22nd July 2015 and gave oral evidence. The Appellant's son's mother
      had not attended the first appeal hearing but confirmed at the  second
      hearing that she was recovering from an operation to her foot on  that
      day. The Appellant also produced  a  further  letter  from  his  son's
      school, dated 15th July 2015.

   6. The Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting marriage with his wife and that she was a British  citizen,
      who was present and settled in the United Kingdom. However,  in  order
      to qualify for leave to remain under Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM  of
      the Immigration Rules, the  Appellant  had  to  meet  the  suitability
      requirements  of  Section  S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM.   In   particular,
      paragraph S-LTR.1.1. states that an applicant will be refused  limited
      leave to remain on grounds of suitability  if  any  of  paragraphs  S-
      LTR.1.2. to 1.7 apply. Section S-LTR.1.4 also says that "the  presence
      of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good because
      they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
      sentenced to imprisonment for less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
      months".

   7. It was the Appellant's case that he did not  understand  that  he  had
      been convicted of any offences in 2003, as he had been held on  remand
      and that at the hearing he was  simply  released,  having  been  asked
      whether he wanted to do community service or have  time  served  taken
      into account.  Similarly he said that he did not  understand  that  he
      had been convicted on 24th March 2011, as the Judge had said  that  he
      should not have been brought to court and was released after  spending
      the previous night in a police cell. However, on 17th  June  2015  the
      Respondent provided the Upper Tribunal with a copy of the  Appellant's
      PNC Record. This confirmed that  on  24th  December  2002  he  pleaded
      guilty and  was  convicted  of  possessing  a  Class  B  drug,  namely
      cannabis, on 19th November 2002 and fined �30. It also showed that  on
      2nd July 2003 he pleaded guilty and was convicted of a further offence
      of possessing a Class B drug, an offence of possessing a Class A drug,
      namely cocaine, with intent to supply and an offence of  possessing  a
      Class A drug, namely heroin with intent to supply. These offences were
      also said to have taken place on 19th November 2002.  The record  also
      showed that he was given sentences of 12 months  imprisonment  to  run
      concurrently for these offences.  As this is a record  of  proceedings
      in another court, I cannot go behind the evidence contained in it  and
      find on a balance of probabilities that he was convicted and sentenced
      to 12 months imprisonment.


   8. The Appellant continues  to  assert  that  he  was  not  convicted  of
      possession  with   intent  to  supply  and  his  legal  representative
      asserted at the first  hearing  that  a  12  month  sentence  was  not
      commensurate  with  the  sentencing  guidelines  for  such   offences.
      However, again I am not able to go behind the evidence provided in the
      PNC record, which derives from criminal proceedings which  took  place
      at Middlesex Guildhall Crown  Court.  As  a  consequence,  taking  the
      evidence of the Appellant's convictions into account, I find that  the
      Respondent was correct to find that the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
      suitability requirements contained in Section S-LTR.1.4.  of  Appendix
      FM to the Immigration Rules.

   9. The Respondent also asserted that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the
      suitability requirement contained in paragraph S-LTR.1.5. as he was  a
      persistent offender. However,  the  Appellant's  first  offences  were
      committed on 19th November 2002 and there is  no  record  of  him  re-
      offending until 24th March 2011 when he was sentenced to  one  day  in
      prison. Therefore, I find that paragraph S-LTR.1.5. does not apply  to
      the facts of the Appellant's case.

  10. In addition, the Respondent asserted that the Appellant's  application
      was subject to a mandatory refusal under paragraph 322(1A) because  he
      had made false representations or submitted false information (whether
      or not  material  to  the  application  and  whether  or  not  to  the
      applicant's knowledge) or material facts had not  been  disclosed,  in
      relation to the application. The Appellant answered "No"  to  question
      6.15 on his initial application for leave  to  remain  as  his  wife's
      dependent, dated 2nd May 2004, even though  he  was  asked  "have  you
      received a prison sentence in the UK or elsewhere?".

  11. It was also the Appellant's case that when he  applied  for  leave  to
      remain in 2013 he did not mention that he had been in prison as he had
      not understood that he had been convicted, as opposed to being  placed
      on remand. However, in his oral evidence he confirmed that he had been
      represented by a barrister in the  criminal  court  and  that  he  had
      explained the nature of the proceedings to him. I have also noted that
      he filled in his most recent application for leave only six days after
      his most recent conviction.


  12. I have also taken into account the fact that in his  application  form
      he denied every having used an alias but  in  oral  evidence  admitted
      that he had used an alias when arrested and subsequently convicted  in
      2002 and 2003.   As a consequence, I find that paragraph 322(1A)  also
      served to deprive him  of  a  right  to  leave  to  remain  under  the
      Immigration Rules.

  13. Nevertheless the Appellant also relied on his rights under  Article  8
      of the European Convention on Human Rights. The  need  for  two  stage
      approach whereby Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
      is considered if an appellant is  not  entitled  to  leave  under  the
      Immigration Rules is now  well-established.  (See,  for  example,  the
      cases of R (on the application of Onker Singh Nagre)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  and  Iftikhar
      Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  300
      (Admin) and Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 74.) Therefore, having  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      entitled to leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, I have  moved
      on to consider whether these Rules have fully addressed any family  or
      private life the Appellant may be enjoying in the United  Kingdom  and
      whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
      under the Rules to require the grant of leave to  remain  outside  the
      Rules.  When doing so I have reminded myself of the decision in Beoku-
      Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [20078 UKHL 39  and
      the need to take into account the effect of his removal on the  family
      life rights of other family members with permission to remain  in  the
      United Kingdom.

  14. I have  also  noted  that  at  paragraph  135  of  The  Queen  on  the
      application of  MM  &  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 the Court of Appeal held that where the
      Immigration Rules do not contain a complete code for  the  application
      of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  then  the
      proportionality test in Article 8(2) will  be  more  at  large  albeit
      guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


  15. In addition I have reminded myself of paragraph 17 of R v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 72 where the
      House of Lords found that, when considering Article 8 of the  ECHR,  a
      decision maker should consider:


      (1)         Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
      authority with the        exercise of the applicant's right to respect
      for his private (or as the case        may be) family life?
      (2)         If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
      gravity as           potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
      (3)         If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
      (4)         If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
      society in  the             interests  of  national  security,  public
      safety or the  economic  well-being  of        the  country,  for  the
      prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of       health or
      morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
      (5)          If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
      legitimate public end sought       to be achieved?


  16. The Appellant has been living with his wife, who is a British citizen,
      since 2001       and continues to do so. The Respondent  accepts  that
      they have a genuine and subsisting relationship with each other.


  17. The Appellant also has  a  son,  who  was  born  in  2010,  after  the
      Appellant had an affair with his son's mother. The Appellant's son  is
      a British citizen. The Appellant is no longer in a  relationship  with
      his son's mother but he had regular contact with  his  son  since  his
      birth. The Appellant's son's mother  confirmed  this  in  her  written
      statement  and  there  were  six  photographs   in   the   Appellant's
      supplementary bundle showing him with his son  when  he  was  a  small
      baby.  There were also further photographs of his son as a toddler and
      as he was growing up and he is with his father in three of them.)


  18. In her oral evidence, the  Appellant's  son's  mother  explained  that
      prior to her operation the Appellant would take her  son  to  nursery,
      school or other places if she was not able to do so and  that  he  was
      named as his next of kin at school. She also explained that he  cooked
      for them when necessary but was not too good at cleaning. In addition,
      he explained that in reception class her son had been aggressive  and,
      for example, had told his teacher that he would run her  over  in  his
      sports car until the Appellant intervened and started to take  him  to
      school. In relation to the amount of time the Appellant spent with his
      son, I note that his son's mother made it clear that  she  could  call
      the Appellant any time that she needed help and that he  was  not  his
      babysitter but his  father.  Taking  this  and  the  totality  of  the
      evidence into account, I find that the Appellant is enjoying a  family
      life with his son even though they do not cohabit.


  19. As a consequence, I find that the Appellant's removal will potentially
      breach the Appellant's right to continue a family life with  his  wife
      and son and that this interference will be of such gravity  to  engage
      Article 8(1) for the purposes of the first two sub-graphs of paragraph
      17 of Razgar.


  20. In relation to sub-paragraph (3) of Razgar I have taken  into  account
      the fact that the Appellant is not entitled to leave to remain in  the
      United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules in  order  to  continue  to
      enjoy his family life here and, therefore, his removal would be lawful
      under these Rules. I have also noted that for  the  purposes  of  sub-
      paragraph (4) European case law and Section 117B of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  the  maintenance   of   effective
      immigration control is in the public interest.


  21.  For  the  purposes  of  sub-paragraph   (5)   of   Razgar   and   the
      proportionality of any removal, I have taken into account the  serious
      nature of any conviction for a  drug  offence  and  particularly  ones
      which involved the possession of cocaine and  heroin  with  intent  to
      supply, even if the sentence was relatively short. I have  also  taken
      into account the fact that the Appellant continued to deny  possession
      with intent to supply in his oral  evidence  and  did  not  explicitly
      recognise the possible adverse consequences of his offences.


  22. The Appellant also sought to minimise his use of the alias  of  Dennis
      Hayden in 2003 and said in his oral evidence that he  only  used  this
      name once when he was arrested by the police in 2002. However, the PNC
      record indicates that he used this name throughout the proceedings  in
      2002 and 2003.

  23. In relation to the Appellant's relationship  with  his  wife,  I  have
      taken into account the fact that they have  been  married  and  living
      together in the United Kingdom since 2003.  The  Appellant's  wife  is
      also a qualifying partner for the purposes of Section 117D, as she  is
      a British  citizen.  However,  Section  117B(4)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states that little  weight  should  be
      given to a relationship established at a time when a person is in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully. The Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom
      illegally on 7th January 2000 and  did  not  seek  to  regularise  his
      immigration status  at  that  time  and  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
      illegally when he met and married his wife. He did apply for leave  to
      remain  as  her  partner  on  2nd  May  2004    but  was  not  granted
      discretionary leave to remain for this  purpose  until  17th  February
      2010. Since that time he has had discretionary leave to remain here as
      a partner.


  24. When considering the public interest in the potential removal  of  the
      Appellant for the purposes of  Section  117B(2),  I  have  taken  into
      account the fact that the Appellant is  an  English  speaker  and  is,
      therefore, likely to be less of a burden on the taxpayer and  will  be
      better able to integrate into  society.  However,  I  note  that  this
      cannot be a determinative factor.


  25. Section 117B(3) also states that it is in the public interest, and  in
      particular in the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
      Kingdom, that the Appellant is financially independent because he will
      be less of a burden on  the  taxpayer  and  will  be  better  able  to
      integrate into society. The  Respondent  has  not  asserted  that  the
      Appellant has been relying on benefits to which he  is  not  entitled.
      But in oral evidence both he and his wife confirmed that they were not
      working and had not been working for many years.   His wife  explained
      that they were in part support by members of her family.


  26. Furthermore, the Appellant's wife's son is now 25 years old and is  no
      longer living with her and dependent upon her. She said that  she  has
      regular contact with him and her grand-daughter but there  is  nothing
      to indicate that her grand-daughter's  parents  could  not  adequately
      parent her if the Appellant's wife was living with him in Jamaica. She
      asserted that she could not move to Jamaica as she  was  settled  here
      and her family were here but  in  The  Queen  on  the  application  of
      Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ
      440 the Court of Appeal held that being a  British  citizen,  who  had
      lived here all his life and had a job here did not  give  rise  to  an
      insurmountable obstacle to moving with a partner to live abroad.  This
      is not necessarily the determinative test in assessing their Article 8
      rights but as the Appellant's immigration status in the United Kingdom
      has been precarious it is one to which I must give significant weight.




  27. It was also the Appellant's wife's oral evidence that the  Appellant's
      mother and sister were still living in Jamaica and that they  were  in
      regular contact with them.  When  asked  about  their  situation,  the
      Appellant's wife replied that it was "generally good".  The  Appellant
      had also said that he had to leave Jamaica because he feared  for  his
      life but when asked why he had not claimed asylum he just said that he
      had not understood how to do so  and  has  not  since  made  any  such
      application. Taking this and the totality of the evidence into account
      I find  that  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
      Appellant's family life with his wife for him to be removed  from  the
      United Kingdom.

  28. However, I must also consider the  family  life  which  the  Appellant
      enjoys with his son and when doing  so  take  into  account  that  his
      welfare should be  a  primary  consideration  in  any  proportionality
      assessment. It is very clear from the evidence that his son  enjoys  a
      very close relationship with him and that he is  used  to  his  father
      seeing him and taking him to school on a very  regular  basis.  It  is
      also clear that his mother may struggle emotionally if  the  Appellant
      were not there to assist with his son. Therefore, I find that it would
      not be in his son's best interests to be separated from his father.


  29. I remind myself of the findings I made above in relation to other sub-
      sections of Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002 but note that the Appellant's son is a  British  citizen  and
      that Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 states that where a person is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require his removal if he can show that he is
      in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
      child and it is not reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.


  30. The Appellant has committed offences in the  United  Kingdom  but  the
      letters, dated  30th January 2014 and 27th March  2014,  confirm  that
      having taken  his  convictions  into  account  the  Criminal  Casework
      Directorate decided not to deport the Appellant to Jamaica in all  the
      circumstances of his case. The questionnaire previously  submitted  to
      the Directorate had disclosed that the Appellant had a  young  British
      son in the United Kingdom and also that he had a British wife here and
      that she was not the mother of his son.

  31. The Appellant now relies on the fact that he is  named  on  his  son's
      birth certificate. I accept that  he  was  only  added  to  his  birth
      certificate on 1st May 2015 and that this was  five  years  after  his
      actual date of birth. In her witness statement his son's  mother  said
      that  the  Appellant  had  not  come  with   her   to   register   the



      birth in 2010 as he was busy but she also said that  they  had  always
      intended to amend the birth certificate  but  delayed  and  never  got
      round to it.


  32. She also gave evidence at the second hearing and  explained  that  the
      Appellant likes to drag his feet about taking action and  she  had  to
      keep reminding him. It was also clear that it  was  her  and  not  the
      Appellant who was more motivated in getting  his  name  on  the  birth
      certificate. She candidly explained that she did not have anyone named
      as her father on her own birth certificate and was very keen that  her
      son would have a father on his. Therefore, it would  appear  that  the
      Appellant  had  not  rushed  to  get  his  name  on  his  son's  birth
      certificate as a device to obtain leave to remain here.


  33. In her recent statement, the Appellant's son's mother also  said  that
      the Appellant has never neglected his son and that he is a  supportive
      father, who is involved in every aspect of his life  and  welfare.  In
      her oral evidence, she was more expansive and said that  she  and  the
      Appellant were a  "good  team"  who  worked  together  for  her  son's
      benefit. She later said that the Appellant was the  first  person  she
      would call if her son hurt himself. I have also taken into account the
      fact that in a letter written to the  Criminal  Casework  Directorate,
      dated 16th October 2013, the Appellant asserted that he  saw  his  son
      most weekends and that as  he  got  older  their  relationship  became
      stronger.  He also said that he took him to the park and swimming  and
      that they played football together.

  34. In addition, there was also a letter from [                 ]  School,
      dated 9th June 2015, that confirms that it was aware the Appellant  is
      his son's father. There was also a  second  letter,  dated  15th  July
      2015, which confirmed that the Appellant regularly brought his son  to
      school and also collected him  from  school,  attended  parent/teacher
      consultations and accompanied his son on class trips.  Taking  all  of
      this evidence into account I find on a balance of  probabilities  that
      the Appellant does have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
      son in the United Kingdom.


  35. I have, therefore, considered whether it would be reasonable  for  his
      son to leave the United Kingdom and return to Jamaica with  him.  When
      doing so I have taken into account the fact that the Appellant is  not
      in a relationship with his son's  mother  and  is  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his wife to  whom  he  has  been  married
      since 2003.


  36. In addition, his son's mother was born and brought up here and in oral
      evidence she indicated that  she  had  a  large  family  here  and  no
      connection with Jamaica.  She also made it  very  clear  in  her  oral
      evidence that she was very afraid of living in an area where  violence
      was prevalent and for that reason did not even like living  in  Queens
      Park in London and would certainly not risk taking her son to live  in
      Jamaica. It is also clear from  her  evidence  that  even  though  the
      Appellant plays a significant part in his son's life,  he  lives  with
      his mother and  she  is  his  main  carer.  Therefore,  there  was  no
      realistic possibility of him travelling to Jamaica without his mother.




  37. In addition, the Appellant does not have a profession or trade or much
      work experience and therefore it is not reasonable to expect  that  he
      would be able to support his son and his mother, even if she  were  to
      consent to take her son there.  In  addition,  there  was  nothing  to
      suggest that the Appellant's son's mother would be able to  enter  and
      remain in Jamaica or obtain any employment there in order  to  support
      her son herself.


  38. As a consequence I find on a balance of probabilities  that  it  would
      not be reasonable for the Appellant's son live  in  Jamaica  with  the
      Appellant and that, therefore, if the Appellant were to be removed  to
      Jamaica, this would amount to a disproportionate  breach  of  both  of
      their family life rights as protected by Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.  I also note that the  Appellant  and  his
      son's mother are not in a financial position to even facilitate visits
      to Jamaica and, given his son's age, any attempt to maintain a  family
      life by electronic means would be very difficult.

  39. As a consequence, I find that the Appellant's removal to Jamaica would
      amount to a disproportionate breach of the family life which he enjoys
      with his son.







          Conclusion

    1.    The Appellant's de novo appeal is allowed.




                      [pic]



                                    Date 12th August 2015












Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
