
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13883/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd September 2016                        |On 5th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                             mr pratikkumar [p]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 25th March 2015 to  remove
    him from the UK on the basis that his removal would breach  his  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human rights.  His appeal
    was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fletcher-  Hill  and  the
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the UK lawfully on 4th September 2009 as a student  with  leave
    to remain until 19th April 2011.  His leave to remain was  subsequently
    extended until 2nd May 2014 and again, after a period  of  curtailment,
    until 30th March 2015 as a student. That leave  was  curtailed  on  5th
    December 2014 until 8th  February  2015.   On  5th  February  2015  the
    Appellant submitted an application for further leave to remain  in  the
    UK on the basis of a private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. In the documents submitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  it  was
    claimed that the Appellant now has a partner but it was  conceded  that
    she was not a UK citizen nor settled in the UK so the  Appellant  could
    not succeed on that basis.  The partner made a statement which  was  in
    the Appellant's bundle but the judge  noted  that  she  was  unable  to
    appear in court to give oral evidence because  of  her  unclear  health
    status and ongoing treatment for active Tuberculosis.  The judge  noted
    that at the time of the application  made  on  5th  February  2015  the
    Appellant was not living with his partner  nor  had  he  mentioned  his
    partner in his Grounds of Appeal on 8th May 2015.

 4. The judge found that it had not been established that the Appellant had
    family life with his claimed partner for the  purposes  of  Article  8.
    However she went on to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life and having considered the  issue  of  proportionality  she
    concluded that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant
    enjoying private life in India where his claimed partner  could  return
    as  well.   The  judge  considered  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and concluded that any interference  to
    the Appellant's private life would be proportionate to the Respondent's
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of a fair and  effective  immigration
    control.

Error of Law

 5. There are three grounds put forward by the Appellant in his Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Firstly it is contended that  the  judge
    failed  to  adequately  consider   paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules. In the second ground the Appellant contends that the
    judge erred in failing to consider whether the Appellant had "no  ties"
    to India.  The third ground is that the judge erred in  her  assessment
    of Article 8 in relation to private and family life.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Sellwood accepted that  the  second  ground
    was not arguable as the test in the version of  paragraph  2676ADE  (1)
    (vi) of the Immigration Rules in force at the time of the  hearing  was
    not whether the Appellant could establish that  he  had  "no  ties  "to
    India but whether  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  him
    integrating there.

 7. In relation to the third ground Mr Sellwood submitted  that  the  judge
    made a factual error in  his  finding  at  paragraph  47;  "I  find  no
    evidence has been produced to  show  that  there  is  any  relationship
    between the Appellant and his claimed  partner".   Mr  Norton  accepted
    that this sentence does stand at odds  with  what  the  judge  recorded
    earlier but submitted that he in the context of the whole of  paragraph
    47 this sentence is not fatal or determinative of the judge's  approach
    to the evidence in this case.

 8. Mr Sellwood submitted that the  judge  was  not  willing  to  have  the
    Appellant's partner in the courtroom because of the question as to  her
    medical condition and as to whether the TB that she  suffers  from  was
    active.  I asked Mr Sellwood whether an adjournment had been  requested
    so that further evidence could be obtained to clarify this or to enable
    the Appellant's partner to give evidence and he said that it  had  not.
    In my view it is difficult for the Appellant  to  now  argue  that  the
    judge did not give sufficient weight to  the  Appellant's  relationship
    when the judge had not heard oral evidence from  his  claimed  partner.
    Although it is alleged that the judge refused to allow the  Appellant's
    partner to give oral evidence because of her health status there is  no
    allegation of procedural unfairness and no application was made for  an
    adjournment to seek clarity on her health status or to  enable  her  to
    give oral evidence at a resumed hearing.

 9. Mr Sellwood submitted that the judge had to  consider  the  Appellant's
    partner's witness statements and he also had  before  him  photographs,
    payslips and medical reports relating to her and he submitted that, had
    the judge undertaken a proper assessment of this  evidence,  she  could
    have concluded that there was a  relationship  such  as  to  bring  the
    Appellant within family life under Article 8 and that had this decision
    been made it could have had an impact on proportionality.

10. However I note that the judge set out the Appellant's answers in cross-
    examination about the relationship, in particular  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's partner came to the UK with leave to remain as a spouse and
    that her leave to remain had either ended or was coming to an end  [22-
    26].  The judge noted at paragraph 33 that  it  had  been  accepted  in
    submissions, on the Appellant's behalf, that he could not succeed under
    the Rules as a partner because of the relatively short period that they
    had been living together.  At paragraph 38 it was  noted  that  it  was
    accepted that the photographs submitted in the Appellant's  bundle  are
    "necessarily self serving".

11. Although in the first sentence of paragraph  47  the  judge  said  that
    there was no evidence to show that there was a relationship between the
    Appellant and his claimed partner,  she  did  go  on  to  consider  the
    evidence before her. The judge noted that there was  no  mention  of  a
    relationship in the Appellant's application made in February 2015 or in
    the Grounds of Appeal of May 2015 despite his  current  claim  to  have
    been residing with her at that stage.  The judge also noted that  there
    was no evidence of the Appellant having notified the Home Office  of  a
    change of address even though he now claims to have moved in  with  his
    partner in February 2015.  I therefore accept that the judge has  given
    sufficient  reasons  for  her  finding  that  the  Appellant  had   not
    established that he and his claimed partner  have  family  life  within
    Article 8.

12. It is contended in the first Ground of Appeal that the judge  erred  in
    failing to make findings in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 276ADE(1) states as follows:


        "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
        remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
        of application, the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section
           S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.4. in Appendix
           FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
           imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
           least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
           any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
           lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
           any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
           obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to
           which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

13. The  test  therefore  is  whether  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the Appellant's integration in India.  I accept  that  in
    the findings and reasons section the judge did not, as she was required
    to, firstly consider the Immigration  Rules,  in  particular  paragraph
    276ADE before going on to assess whether there were reasons  to  go  on
    and consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.   Case  law  such  as  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of Esther  Ebun
    Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Article  8
    - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC)  has  established
    that in approaching human rights and Article  8,  before  going  on  to
    consider Article 8 outside of the Rules, a judge  should  look  at  the
    evidence to see if  there  is  anything  which  has  not  already  been
    adequately considered in the context of the Immigration Rules and which
    could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.

14. Whilst Mr Sellwood submitted that the Appellant had  lost  out  by  the
    judge's omission of the first stage I do not accept that the  Appellant
    was prejudiced by this because the judge considered all relevant issues
    in her assessment of Article 8.

15. I find that it is obvious from paragraphs 6 to 13 that  the  judge  was
    aware of the issues to be considered.  It is clear from the submissions
    made that these issues were put to the judge, for example at paragraphs
    37 and 54 (albeit in the context of proportionality  under  Article  8)
    that the judge considered whether or  not  there  were  'insurmountable
    obstacles' to the Appellant integrating in India.  The  judge  set  out
    the reasons in paragraph 54 why she had considered that  the  Appellant
    had not established that he was in  a  relationship  with  his  claimed
    partner and in any event he noted that she is likely to return to India
    where it is open to the parties to continue with  their  friendship  if
    they choose to do so.

16. Given that the judge had not accepted that the  couple  have  a  family
    life within the context of Article 8, it is reasonable that  the  judge
    did not go on to consider a claim from the Appellant  and  his  claimed
    partner that they would have difficulties in India as a result of their
    relationship.  In his witness statement dated  4th  December  2015  the
    Appellant says that their families have not accepted their relationship
    and that, as a result, the couple may  suffer  persecution  from  their
    families.  However in her  witness  statement  of  the  same  date  the
    Appellant's partner does not mention any potential difficulties  simply
    saying that if they returned to India they would be separated and would
    not be able to live a peaceful life together.  However this evidence is
    of limited weight in the  context  of  the  judge's  doubts  about  the
    relationship and the judge's finding that it had not  been  established
    that there was a family life.

17. Mr Sellwood  submitted  that  a  further  factor  was  the  Appellant's
    partner's ill-health.   However  it  is  not  clear  from  the  medical
    evidence submitted to the First-tier Tribunal what the effect of return
    to India would have upon the Appellant's partner's health  and  in  any
    event again the judge did not accept that the relationship had been  as
    described.

18. Whilst the judge erred in her approach  to  Article  8  by  failing  to
    engage with paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi),  the  only  provision  of  the
    Immigration Rules likely to be applicable to the Appellant's appeal,  I
    am satisfied that this is  not  a  material  error  because  the  judge
    addressed the same test as that set out in 276ADE (1) (vi) at paragraph
    54 of the decision in the course of her assessment of  proportionality.
    In light of her findings there,  even  had  she  separately  considered
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi), she would have reached the  same  conclusion
    as  those  reached  at  paragraph  54,  that  is  that  there  are   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant's  reintegration  in  India.
    This was a conclusion open to the judge on the evidence before her.

Notice of Decision


There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall therefore stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 4 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


