
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13901/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8 April 2014                               |on 11 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                WASEEM SHAHZAD
                   (no anonymity order requested or made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mr M Sabir, of MBS, Solicitors, Edinburgh
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  4  March  1974.   On  12
   November 2009 he was granted limited leave  to  enter  the  UK  until  12
   February 2012 as a spouse.  On 9 February 2012 he sought further leave to
   remain in the same capacity.

2) The Secretary  of  State  issued  a  notice  of  decision,  refusing  the
   application, which is headed by reference to paragraphs 284  and  286  of
   the Rules and also paragraphs D-LTRP1.3, R-LTRP(a)2(c), EX.1,  276CE  and
   276ADE(iii) to (vi).

3) The notice of decision was accompanied by a Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
   which  firstly  refuses  the  application  by  reference   to   paragraph
   284(ix)(a) and non-provision of an English Language Test Certificate.  At
   page  2,  the  letter  founds  also  on  failure  to  submit  a  marriage
   certificate.  It goes on to reject the evidence of income by reference to
   Appendix FM and further considers paragraph EX.1 and private  life  under
   paragraphs 276CE and 276ADE.

4) In his notice of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  said
   that he was attaching his "life in  the  UK  test"  and  a  copy  of  the
   marriage certificate, the original of which he would be able  to  produce
   as soon as received from Pakistan.

5) At a hearing before Judge Agnew on 1 November  2013  the  respondent  for
   the first time put in issue whether the appellant could satisfy the Rules
   in respect of  intention  to  live  permanently  with  his  spouse  in  a
   subsisting marriage.  There was evidence of a separation.  The  appellant
   was unrepresented, and the sponsor was not in attendance.  The  case  was
   adjourned.

6) The case next came  before  Judge  Wallace  on  16  December  2013.   The
   appellant was again unrepresented.  The  Presenting  Officer  appears  to
   have taken the line that the case turned on  paragraph  284  and  not  on
   anything in Appendix FM of the Rules.  (Mr Shabir briefly suggested  that
   the case falls under paragraph 287.  Nothing  presently  turns  on  which
   particular part or version of the Rules applies, but this will have to be
   resolved when the case  again  comes  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.)
   Evidence was heard from the appellant, his wife  and  his  father-in-law.
   The respondent's case was put on  3  grounds:  (i)  lack  of  a  language
   certificate;  (ii)  inadequate  evidence  of   maintenance;   and   (iii)
   inadequate evidence  of  intention  to  live  together  in  a  subsisting
   relationship.  The Presenting Officer said  that  the  appellant  had  to
   prove that he met the requirements of  the  Rules  at  the  time  of  the
   application or at the time of the decision, but does  not  seem  to  have
   said which, or if either would do.  (It appears  to  have  been  conceded
   implicitly,  but  inconsistently,  that  the  absence   of   a   marriage
   certificate was cured by its later production.)

7) The appeal was dismissed by  determination  promulgated  on  30  December
   2013.   At  paragraph  33  the  judge  said  that  because  the  language
   certificate came after the application had been  refused,  the  appellant
   could not meet the requirements of paragraph 284.   At  paragraphs  34-39
   the judge pointed out what  she  saw  as  deficiencies  in  the  evidence
   regarding employment, family life, and cohabitation (evidence which  both
   Presenting Officer and judge seem to have thought admissible and relevant
   as at the hearing date).  She then said:

       39. ... The assertions of co-habitation cannot be substantiated.


       40. Looking at the evidence in the round, there is a  question  mark
           over the intention of the appellant and the genuineness  of  his
           intention to pursue a permanent relationship with  this  spouse.
           However, notwithstanding that the appeal has to fail because  of
           the factual circumstances.  The appellant did not and could  not
           meet the requirements of  paragraph  284  at  the  time  of  the
           application.  He did  not  possess  a  language  certificate  as
           required by (ix)(a) and there is a lack of evidence  to  support
           his assertions that he could maintain himself financially.

       41. These factual circumstances could not be met at the time of  the
           application or the decision.  Accordingly, the appeal must fail.


8) The appellant has had  legal  representation  only  since  the  stage  of
   seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  His first ground  of
   appeal is that the judge failed to appreciate that under section 85(4) of
   the 2002 Act, as explained in LS (Post Decision Evidence)  Gambia  [2005]
   Imm AR 310,  the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to  consider  circumstances  in
   existence at the date of the hearing.

9) The point is put thus in Macdonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice,  8th
   ed., at 19.14(8): an appellant able to show that he met the  requirements
   of the Rules at the time of the hearing should succeed on the ground that
   the decision was not in accordance with the Rules, even  if  he  did  not
   qualify at the time of the decision.

10) Mr Mullen submitted that although evidence at  the  hearing  date  might
   shed light on circumstances at an earlier date, it was not sufficient  to
   show that the appellant met the Rules at the hearing date.  Such a matter
   could be resolved only by making a fresh application.  He supported those
   submissions by briefly mentioning two cases (but  not  by  going  to  the
   reports): EA (Section 85 (4) Explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013 and AQ
   (Pakistan) [2011] IMM AR 832.

11) On this point I prefer the analysis in the  note  of  argument  for  the
   appellant at pages 2-7.  EA did not overturn LS.  Nor did  AQ,  which  is
   part of a line of cases arising from the Points  Based  System  and  from
   section 85A of the 2002  Act  (which  does  not  apply  here).   AQ  also
   involved matters raised by way of a section 120 notice.  A case  such  as
   the present is not subject to a "fixed  historic  time  line",  or  to  a
   requirement  to  produce  the  necessary  evidence  with   the   original
   application.  The correct understanding of section 85(4) continues to  be
   as established in LS.

12) The First-tier Tribunal Judge had no useful help on this point from  the
   respondent, but she did not apply her mind clearly to whether she  should
   decide according to  the  circumstances  and  evidence  at  the  time  of
   application, at the time of the respondent's decision, or at the time  of
   the hearing.  The case fell into a muddle, looking at  matters  at  three
   different dates.  This error requires the determination to be set aside.

13) In that light, I can deal more shortly with the  further  grounds.   The
   second ground attacks the findings on the maintenance requirement, partly
   for the same flaw about the relevant date, and partly for what amounts to
   lack of clear reasoning.  I  agree.   The  third  ground  criticises  the
   findings  on  whether  there  is  a  subsisting   marriage.    Mr   Sabir
   realistically accepted that much of this ground amounted to  little  more
   than disagreement on the facts.  Nevertheless, he  submitted  that  there
   was a lack of clear findings, given the way the conclusion  is  expressed
   at paragraph  40  in  terms  of  "a  question  mark".   That  is  a  fair
   observation.  Reading the determination up to that  point  suggests  that
   the judge might  have  found  that  there  was  no  subsisting  marriage.
   However, having wrongly persuaded herself that the appeal failed on other
   grounds, she left the matter unresolved.

14) The fourth ground criticises the determination for  failure  to  mention
   Article 8 or the best interests of the child of the marriage.  It  relies
   on Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 at headnote (2) for a duty on a judge  to
   take such a point "where the issues arise on the  evidence,  irrespective
   of whether the appellants or the  advocates  have  done  so."   Mr  Sabir
   reminded  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  in  the   FtT   was
   unrepresented, and submitted that the judge should have further  explored
   this matter on her own initiative.   I  have  doubts  about  that.    The
   critical phrase is "where the issue arises on the evidence".   There  was
   nothing to suggest how the child's best interests might be served.  There
   is a limit on the duty of a judge to explore, even where an appellant  is
   unrepresented.  I would not have set  aside  the  determination  on  this
   issue alone.

15) As to further procedure, if error of law were to  be  found,  Mr  Mullen
   firstly submitted that the  appeal  should  go  back  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for fresh  hearing.   I  pressed  him  on  the  basis  that  the
   appellant had not applied to introduce any further evidence, so it  might
   be for the Upper Tribunal simply to  substitute  its  own  decision.   Mr
   Mullen modified his position, and said that a further decision  could  be
   made by the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Sabir said that the  appellant  would  be
   satisfied by a fresh decision from the Upper Tribunal.

16) Having considered matters further, I have come to  the  view  that  this
   case does require an  entirely  fresh  hearing.   The  judge  heard  oral
   evidence from three witnesses.  The case might have gone  either  way  on
   the question of a subsisting marriage, a point on which an evaluation  of
   the evidence of the witnesses is critical.  I note also (although  it  is
   not a point raised in the grounds of appeal) that the  judge  accepted  a
   submission from the respondent that the evidence  of  the  third  witness
   (the appellant's father-in-law) was to be disregarded because he admitted
   having conversed  with  the  appellant  after  the  appellant  had  given
   evidence.  That could properly be taken into account  in  evaluating  the
   evidence, but (at least without further explanation) I do  not  think  it
   could be a reason for excluding it  entirely.   Evaluation  of  the  oral
   evidence bore also on the maintenance aspect, so I do not think there  is
   any point by which the appeal can decided one way or the other, so as  to
   avoid a fresh hearing.

17) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of  its
   findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and
   Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
   necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier
   Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Wallace.


                               [pic]
                                10 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
