
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13425/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2016                   |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                Jahangir alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bloomer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  I  Thomas)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 19 March 2015  refusing  his  application
    for variation of leave to enter and deciding to remove him.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Canada born on 5 December 1964.  In  June
    1993 he went through an Islamic ceremony of marriage in Canada with his
    wife who was not present as she had been unable to obtain a passport to
    leave the UK, but she was linked into the ceremony by  telephone.   His
    wife then went to Canada  but  returned  to  the  UK  when  she  became
    pregnant.  The appellant joined her and  there  was  a  civil  marriage
    ceremony on 25 April 1994 in Newcastle-under-Lyme before he returned to
    Canada.  There are two children, a son born on 31  August  1994  and  a
    daughter on 1 July 1998.

3.   In November 1999 the appellant entered the UK  on  a  six  month  visit
    visa and visited again in August 2000.  On 18 December 2003 he  applied
    for leave to remain but his application was refused  and  a  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed.  On 25 July  2008  he  wrote  to  the  respondent
    requesting his passport so that he could  make  a  voluntary  departure
    from the UK.  His next return was on 2 May 2014 with leave to remain as
    a visitor until 2 November 2014.  On 17 October  2014  he  applied  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his marriage.

4.   His application was refused as he was unable to meet  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM as he was in the UK as a visitor.  As he failed to  meet
    the mandatory eligibility requirements, he could not benefit  from  the
    provisions of para EX.1., but in  any  event  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that those requirements were met.  The respondent  considered
    the provisions of para 276ADE(1) of the Rules  but  was  not  satisfied
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Canada if required to leave.  Finally, the  respondent
    found  that  there  were  no  particular   circumstances   constituting
    exceptional circumstances consistent with  the  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life which would justify a further consideration  of
    article 8 outside the Rules.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing of the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    accepted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM and no submissions were made on para 276ADE(1), but in any event the
    judge found that there were no significant obstacles to  the  appellant
    returning to Canada.  He had lived the vast majority of his life  there
    including the period from 2008 to 2014.  The judge went on to  consider
    the position under article 8.  He accepted that as the appellant's wife
    and two children were British citizens resident in the UK and that  the
    decision requiring his return to Canada did interfere with his right to
    family life.  The decision was  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in
    pursuance  of  a  legitimate  aim,  the  furtherance  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom by maintaining immigration control.

6.   This left the question of proportionality.  The judge said  that  there
    was no question but that both the children would remain in the UK  with
    their mother where they have lived all their lives.  At the time of the
    application their son was age 20 and their daughter 16  and  completing
    her full-time education.  They had managed to  visit  their  father  in
    Canada on at least two occasions in recent years  and  there  was  some
    suggestion that the visits could have been more often than  that.   The
    judge commented that there was no reason  why  such  visits  could  not
    continue.

7.   The separation of the appellant and his wife in  2008  had  followed  a
    breakdown in their relationship, but  it  was  rekindled  by  telephone
    conversations in 2009 and  2010  and  the  appellant's  wife  had  also
    visited Canada twice before the appellant returned in  2014.   However,
    the appellant had not lived continuously with his family from  2008  to
    2014 through his own choice.  The judge also found it significant  that
    the appellant had not made an application to enter in early 2014  as  a
    husband but as a visitor.  He commented  that  there  was  very  little
    documentary evidence to support the genuine nature of the  relationship
    between the appellant and  his  wife  in  that  the  tenancy  agreement
    submitted was not in joint names but only named the wife and  children,
    nor were any joint names on documents such as bank statements, the only
    evidence to that effect was electricity and gas top-ups in joint names.



8.   The judge reminded himself that  the  provisions  of  s.  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that  the  maintaining  of
    effective immigration control was in the public interest.   It  was  to
    the appellant's advantage that he  spoke  English  and  the  judge  was
    satisfied that since coming to the UK,  he  had  been  relying  on  his
    wife's full-time income and as such had not been a burden on taxpayers.
     He said that he was aware of the provisions of s. 117B(6) but they did
    not apply in this case: although their daughter was a qualifying child,
    it was not anticipated that the appellant's removal from the  UK  would
    lead to her removal.

9.   The judge was referred to Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  [2008]  UKHL
    40, but said, in the context of the appellant returning  to  Canada  to
    make an entry clearance application to re-join family  members  in  the
    UK, that it must be read in the light of the recent case of R (Chen)  v
    Secretary of State [2015] UKUT 189 where it was found that in all cases
    it would be for the individual to place before the respondent  evidence
    that  temporary  separation  would  interfere  disproportionately  with
    protected rights and it was not enough to rely simply on  the  case  of
    Chikwamba.

10.  At the hearing before the judge the  respondent's  representative  made
    an open invitation to the appellant to  make  such  an  application  on
    return to Canada indicating that they were currently being  dealt  with
    in the space of 60 days.  The judge found  that  in  the  present  case
    temporary   separation   for   this   purpose   would   not   interfere
    disproportionately with the appellant's right to family life.   At  the
    date of application he had been in the UK  for  six  months,  prior  to
    which he had been  absent  through  choice  for  at  least  six  years,
    returning as a visitor because of family illness and not as  a  husband
    making an application on the basis of the  marriage.   The  family  had
    been maintaining ties by  telephone  and  through  visits  which  could
    continue.  In summary, the judge was satisfied that the public interest
    in maintaining immigration control was such as  to  make  the  decision
    proportionate and the appeal was accordingly dismissed.



The Grounds and Submissions

11.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge was wrong to take  the  view
    that s. 117B(6) did not apply  as  it  was  not  anticipated  that  the
    appellant's removal from the UK would lead to her removal.  They  argue
    that it was  not  in  issue  that  he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualified child and that the question was therefore
    whether it would be unreasonable for the child to leave the UK.  If so,
    the public interest did not require his removal.  Permission to  appeal
    was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  grant  setting   out
    succinctly that the judge "arguably  erred  in  his  decision  that  s.
    117B(6) did not apply in circumstances that the British child  did  not
    contemplate leaving the UK".

12.  Mr Bloomer submitted that it was not clear whether in  fact  the  judge
    had found that there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    between the appellant and his daughter.  In [18] the judge appeared  to
    be questioning the genuine  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife.  His current period of residence  was  not  the
    only matter to be taken into account.  He had  lived  in  the  UK  from
    2000/2001 to 2008 and the marriage had been subsisting for over  twenty
    years.  There were therefore a number of other factors not  taken  into
    account which  would  be  in  the  appellant's  favour  when  assessing
    proportionality.  He submitted that the judge had erred in his approach
    to s. 117B(6), in effect depriving it of its intended effect.   It  was
    wrong to say that the sub-section did not apply simply because  it  was
    not contemplated that the relevant child would not leave the UK.   This
    approach meant that there had been no adequate consideration of whether
    it was unreasonable to expect his daughter to leave the UK.

13.  Mr Bates conceded that s. 117B(6) should not  be  interpreted  in  this
    way and in so far as the judge had done so, there was an error of  law,
    but he submitted that it was not material to the outcome of the appeal.
     The assessment of  reasonableness  should  include  the  wider  public
    interest rather than focusing simply  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    child: MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In  the
    light of the appellant's immigration history, his  daughter's  age  and
    the fact that it was open to him  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance on return to Canada, the  judge  had  reached  a  sustainable
    decision.  In any event, if the decision  was  set  aside,  s.  117B(6)
    would no longer have any application as the appellant's daughter was no
    longer under 18.

Assessment of the Issues

14.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  In MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  the  Court
    of Appeal considered how  the  question  of  reasonableness  should  be
    approached.  Although Elias LJ in his  judgment  said  that  free  from
    authority he would favour  the  appellant's  argument  that  the  focus
    should only be on the position of the children and that the conduct and
    immigration history of the parents was relevant  to  the  wider  public
    interest to be weighed in the balance with all  the  relevant,  such  a
    decision would be inconsistent with the judgment of the Court of Appeal
    in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 450 where the Court
    had held that the wider public interest should be taken into account.

15.  It is also important to bear in mind that assessments  of  this  nature
    must be made in the light of what Lewison  LJ  in  EV  (Philippines)  v
    Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 874 described as "real world facts".
     In [58] he said:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world.  If one parent has no right to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

16.  The judge said that there were issues of substance in relation  to  the
    genuine and subsisting nature of the relationship, but this was in  the
    context of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife,
    together with the issue of their  intention  to  live  together.  I  am
    satisfied that it was accepted that there was a continuing relationship
    between the appellant and his daughter, such as to  engage  article  8,
    falling within s.117B(6) and that his removal would interfere with that
    relationship.

17.  I am satisfied that when considering reasonableness  under  s.  117B(6)
    the judge would have been entitled to look at the position as  a  whole
    including the wider public interest considerations. When assessing that
    issue, the reality of the position must be  considered,  including  the
    fact that if the appellant is able to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, any separation will be temporary.  If he is not able to meet the
    requirements of the Rules, the position as to contact will continue  as
    before.  In my view, this is what is behind the judge's comment in [19]
    when he said that he was aware of the provisions of s. 117B(6), but  it
    did not apply in this case.  There is no suggestion of the  appellant's
    daughter being removed as she is a British citizen but nonetheless  the
    judge was looking  at  the  reality  of  the  position.   It  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter to visit  her  father  in
    Canada to maintain the relationship between them as it  existed  before
    the appellant's most recent visit.

18.   I  am  also  satisfied  that  the  judge   reached   a   decision   on
    proportionality properly open to him on the evidence.  In the light  of
    the fact that the appellant had been living in Canada from 2008 to 2014
    and had only returned to the UK as a visitor and not as a  spouse,  and
    taking  into  effect  that  contact  with  his  daughter  had  been  by
    occasional visits and by telephone during that period, the decision  to
    remove the appellant in the knowledge that it was open to him  to  make
    an application for entry clearance in accordance  with  the  rules  was
    clearly proportionate.

19.  In summary, if the judge took the view that s. 117B(6)  did  not  apply
    as such, he erred in law.  However, as I have  attempted  to  indicate,
    the approach to reasonableness in s. 117B(6) is  nuanced  and  must  be
    considered in the  light  of  all  the  facts,  rather  than  taking  a
    simplistic approach that  the  fact  that  one  parent  is  leaving  in
    circumstances where a qualifying child will  be  remaining  in  the  UK
    means that it automatically follows that it is not reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK.  Any error made by the judge in this respect
    is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

20.  Finally,  were  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  and  re-made  it  is
    inevitable that the appeal would fail on article 8 grounds in the light
    of the fact that as the appellant's daughter has now attained  the  age
    of 18 and article 8 assessments must be made at the date  of  decision,
    s. 117B(6) would no longer have any application.  Although  Mr  Bloomer
    submitted that a number of matters favourable to the appellant have not
    been taken into account, such as his previous residence in the UK, I am
    not satisfied that the judge left any relevant matters out  of  account
    in his assessment of proportionality.



Decision

21.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  such  that  its  decision
    should be set aside and  it  follows  that  the  decision  stands.   No
    anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 16 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

