
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13521/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th September 2016                        |On 4th October 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs SAMREEN SADIQ
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Gondal (Counsel instructed by Berkshire Law
Chambers)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I shall refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" who  is  the
       appellant before this Tribunal and to Mrs Sadiq  as  "the  Claimant".
       The Secretary of State appeals a decision and reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Gillespie) ("FTT") promulgated on 7th April  2016  in
       which the Claimant's appeal was allowed under the Partner  rules  and
       outside the rules.

First - tier decision

    2. In a decision and reason the FTT found  that  the  Claimant  met  the
       requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under  Appendix  FM   with
       reference to financial requirements.  The Secretary of State  refused
       the application only on  financial  grounds  and  accepted  that  the
       Claimant met  the  Suitability  and  Eligibility  requirements.   The
       appeal before the FTT turned on the issue of finance. The FTT went on
       to consider EX1 as to insurmountable obstacles  and  found  that  the
       Claimant's husband was a British citizen with a  well  paid  job  and
       that her extended family were settled in the UK,  was  sufficient  to
       meet the test under EX1. The FTT further considered Article 8 in  the
       alternative.

Grounds of application

    3. In grounds of application  for  permission  the  Secretary  of  State
       argued that the FTT erred in law by failing to take into account that
       the Claimant could not meet the Immigration rules because she  failed
       to meet Eligibility requirements as she entered the UK as a  visitor.
       Further that the FTT erred in law by concluding  that  the  test  for
       insurmountable obstacles was met, contrary to the decision of Agyarko
       & others (on the application of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  440.    The
       Court held that a British citizen spouse with a job in the UK was not
       sufficient to meet the insurmountable obstacles test.

    4. In the alternative the FTT found that Article 8 outside of the  Rules
       was engaged on the grounds that the removal  was  a  disproportionate
       interference with private and family life.  The  Secretary  of  State
       contended that this too amounted to an error in law by the FTT  which
       failed to consider the existence of compelling circumstances  outside
       of the Rules following SS (Congo) and failed to properly approach the
       issue of proportionality and take into account  the  public  interest
       factors (Rajendran (s.117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC).

Permission

    5. Permission was granted by FTJ Page on 30th August 2016 on the grounds
       settled.  By  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  the  FTT  had
       effectively allowed the Claimant to circumvent the Immigration  rules
       via the partner route under Appendix FM.  The FTT  had  not  set  out
       factors which rendered the circumstances compelling nor  not  catered
       for in the Rules. The test for insurmountable obstacles was not met.

Rule 24 response 15.9.2016

  6. The Claimant opposed the appeal and contended  that  the  FTT  made  a
       lawful decision.   New  evidence  was  produced  of  medical  records
       confirming the Claimant's pregnancy with a due date of 14.1.2017.  Mr
       Norton had no objection to the new evidence being admitted.





Error of law hearing
Submissions

  7. Mr Norton expanded on the grounds of application. Mr Norton  submitted
       that the FTT failed to consider the Claimant's immigration status  as
       a visitor, and she was not eligible to make an application under  the
       partner route.  There was no challenge to the FTT  finding  that  the
       Claimant met the financial requirements. It  was  accepted  that  the
       Claimant could now make a new application outside of the rules on the
       basis of her pregnancy. Mr Norton confirmed that an  out  of  country
       application could take any time from 2 - 6 months.

  8. Mr Gondal submitted that the Secretary of State had not relied on  the
       eligibility criteria in the refusal letter, indeed the letter  stated
       that it was accepted that the Claimant met the Eligibility rules  for
       the partner route.  The FTT had not considered those  issues  and  it
       would be unfair to raise it now.  The Claimant entered the UK on  two
       occasions as a visitor and then after making her application  outside
       of the rules she married.  She then made an application as a  spouse.
       She was unable to return  to  Pakistan  because  she  had  previously
       suffered psychologically and self harmed.   She  was  now  vulnerable
       because of the pregnancy and needed the support of  the  sponsor  and
       her family.  The child, when born, would be a British Citizen.

  9. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion and decision

  10.    I find that there was a material error of law in the decision  and
       reasons of the FTT.  It appears  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
       (wrongly) accepted in  the  refusal  letter  that  the  Claimant  was
       eligible under the Partner rules, this was not in fact correct as she
       entered the UK as a visitor which precluded her  from  making  an  in
       country application as a spouse.  Further more I find  that  the  FTT
       erred in law by failing to follow SS(Congo) guidance  in  that  there
       was no consideration of the  existence  of  compelling  circumstances
       outside of the rules and/or that the facts as found were  capable  of
       amounting  to  compelling   circumstances   or   a   disproportionate
       interference or that they met the test  of  insurmountable  obstacles
       under EX 1 (Agyarko).  I allow the appeal of the Secretary  of  State
       and set aside the decision and reasons save  that  the  findings  are
       preserved in terms of  the  financial  evidence  and  the  Claimant's
       psychological state in Pakistan.

Re making the decision

  11.    I have taken into account that the Claimant is now nearly 7 months
       into her pregnancy and that the baby is due to  be  born  in  January
       2017.  I  accept  that  the  Claimant  is  vulnerable;  her  credible
       evidence that she had self harmed in the past  was  accepted  by  the
       FTT.  I find that the Claimant is not able to meet the Partner  Rules
       as she entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  and  fails  the  Eligibility
       requirements and so EX 1 considerations are not relevant.

  12.    I am satisfied that there are compelling circumstances not catered
       for by the Rules which justify me considering Article  8  outside  of
       the Rules (SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  CIV  387).   The  Claimant  is  a
       vulnerable person and she is now pregnant.  A return to  Pakistan  at
       this stage of her pregnancy would be extremely unsettling and she has
       no supportive family in Pakistan and  her  isolated  situation  there
       previously led to her self harming.  I take the view that her private
       and family interests outweigh the public interests.  Having regard to
       section 117 public interest  factors  (Rajendran)  I  find  that  the
       Claimant speaks English, there are no concerns about finance  as  her
       husband is working and earning, and there is now an unborn  child  to
       be considered.  They met and married at a time  when  the  Claimant's
       immigration  status  was  precarious  but  not   unlawful   and   the
       circumstances then were such that she could have returned to Pakistan
       to make an out of country application and there  would  have  been  a
       short period of separation.  In my view the  fact  of  the  pregnancy
       outweighs the public interest  in  maintaining  fair  and  consistent
       immigration controls in this instance (R (on the application of Chen)
       v SSHD IJR 2015 UKUT 189 (IAC).  Accordingly I find that Article 8 is
       engaged; the Claimant has established a family life in the UK,  there
       would be an interference with that family life as the Claimant  would
       be required to return to Pakistan where she has no close  family  and
       to a situation where she has harmed herself, and which would  not  be
       proportionate having regard to the public  interest  factors  in  the
       light of the fact that she is a vulnerable woman in the later  stages
       of pregnancy.  There are compelling circumstances such that there  is
       no public interest justification for requiring the Claimant to return
       to Pakistan to make and out of country application.

Decision

  13.    I find an error of law. The FTT decision is set aside save for the
       preserved findings.

       I remake the decision outside of the Rules under Article 8 and  allow
       the appeal.


                               Signed                     Date 30.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER

                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 30.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


