
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13715/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 May 2015                                |On 26 June 2015               |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                   t l b l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn Made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person accompanied by her husband

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal arises out of a challenge to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eban who for reasons given in her decision promulgated 9
    January 2015 allowed the appeal by the respondent (whom we shall  refer
    to as the claimant) against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 28 February  2014  refusing  her  application  for  a  derivative
    residence card as the primary  carer  of  T,  a  British  citizen  born
    September 2013.

 2. The Secretary of State had refused the application on the basis  of  an
    insufficiency of evidence to demonstrate that  T  would  be  unable  to
    remain in the United Kingdom or the European  Economic  Area  were  she
    forced to move.  The claimant had not provided evidence why T's father,
    the claimant's husband, R L, was not in a position to care for T if she
    were forced to leave the UK.  He is a British citizen.  The  respondent
    considered, based  on  the  indication  that  the  family  were  living
    together, that the parents had assumed joint care and responsibility of
    T and were both involved in her day-to-day decisions.  Mr L was however
    an "exempt person" because of his citizenship and thus the claimant did
    not satisfy Regulation 15A(7) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

 3. The Secretary of State also observed that the claimant had  stated  she
    wished to rely on family or private  life  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.  The  decision
    referred to the relevant Immigration Rules and  in  order  for  such  a
    matter to be considered the claimant was required to  make  a  separate
    "charged application" using the appropriate application  form  (FLR(M))
    etc.

 4. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  were
    also addressed  and  it  was  explained  that  T's  position  had  been
    considered in the  light  of  the  statutory  provision,  s.11  of  the
    Children's Act 2004 and the  Supreme  Court  ruling  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4.

 5. The decision includes the observation that the decision not to issue  a
    derivative residence card did not require the  claimant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom if she could otherwise demonstrate that she had a  right
    to reside under the Regulations.

 6. By way of background, the couple had married in the United  Kingdom  in
    2003 and then travelled to the United States of  America  where  T  was
    born.  The family returned to the  United  Kingdom  in  2011  and  have
    remained here as a family unit since then.

 7. The judge heard evidence from the claimant and  her  husband  who  were
    unrepresented.  She observed  the  evidence  that  Mr  L  suffers  from
    depression as well as other health issues and as a result was unable to
    work. T is at school and is in year 5. Her behaviour  is  described  as
    extremely challenging and she has been diagnosed with  ADHD.   She  has
    been expelled from schools in the United Kingdom. Neither the  claimant
    nor Mr L can cope with T for any more than a very short time  on  their
    own and they work together as a team with her.  All important decisions
    are made jointly.

 8. The judge approached the task before  her  with  the  observation  that
    there had been no indication that the respondent had sought in any  way
    to assess the effect of the decision under the appeal on  T's  welfare.
    She concluded at [8]:

         "... I consider that this is one of the extremely rare cases where,
         notwithstanding that the burden is on the appellant, the respondent
         should have satisfied herself that she was informed about T's  best
         interests.  Information is missing from the papers before me, which
         means that I  am  unable  to  reach  decision  on  whether  if  the
         appellant had to leave the UK, T would be  unable  to  continue  to
         reside in the UK."

 9. The judge continued at [9]:

         "It follows that the respondent's decision is  flawed  because  she
         did not give any appropriate consideration to T's welfare.  Clearly
         once the respondent makes inquiries of the appellant and Mr L about
         their circumstances and those of T, it will  be  incumbent  on  the
         appellant to provide whatever information the  respondent  requires
         ..."

    She then set out the nature of the material she considered the claimant
    should provide.

10. Without more, the judge allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the  law  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had given no proper consideration  to  s.55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

11. The challenge to that decision is two-fold.  As to  the  first,  it  is
    argued that, on the evidence produced, it is clear that T could  remain
    in the United Kingdom with her father who is an "exempt person" for the
    purposes of the Regulations.  There was no reason why s.55 or Article 8
    should have prevented the appeal being dismissed.

12. The second ground is that in respect of s.55 and Article  8  the  judge
    ought to have been able to decide the matter including consideration of
    T's best interests.

13. We heard submissions from Mr Whitwell and brief  observations  from  Mr
    and Mrs L.  Thereafter we announced that the appeal by the Secretary of
    State was allowed; the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    set aside which we remade and dismissed the appeal against the decision
    under the Regulations.  We urged Mr and Mrs L to take legal  advice  in
    respect of her position with particular reference to Article 8 and  the
    Secretary of State's policy on the parents of British citizen children.



14. Our reasons for finding error are as follows. The judge was required to
    decide the correctness of the refusal by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    issue  a  derivative  residence  card.   She  failed  to  do   so   and
    impermissibly by considering s.55, appears to  have  misunderstood  the
    approach she was required to take and the relevance of  this  statutory
    provision to the decision under appeal.

15. Regulation 15A of the Regulations provides, so far as  is  relevant  to
    the facts of this case:

         "15A.  Derivative Right of Residence

         (1)  A person ('P') who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
             the criteria in ... (4A) ... of this Regulation is entitled to
             a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for so long
             as P satisfied the relevant criteria.

         (2) - (4) ...

         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

             (a)  P is the primary carer of a British citizen (the relevant
                  'British citizen');

             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; and

             (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
                  the UK or in another EEA  State  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave.

         (5) ...

         (6)  For the purpose of  this Regulation -

             (a) ...

             (b) ...

             (c)  An 'exempt person'" is a person -

                  (i)  who has a right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as
                       the  result  of  any  other   provisions   of   these
                       Regulations;

                  (ii)     has a right of abode in  the  United  Kingdom  by
                       virtue of Section 2 of the 1971 Act;

                  (iii) ...

                  (iv) ...

          (7)     P is to be regarded  as  a  'primary  carers'  of  another
             person if

             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
             person; and

             (b)  P -

                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                      person's care, or

                  (ii)      shares  equally  the  responsibility  for   that
                      person's care with one other person  who  is  not  an
                      exempt person

         7A.  Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
             by virtue of paragraph (7(b)(ii)) the  criteria  in  paragraph
             2(b)(iii), 4(b) and 4A(c) shall be  considered  on  the  basis
             that both P and the person with whom  care  responsibility  is
             shared would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7(B) - (9) ..."

16. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with  the  CJEU's  ruling  in
    Ruiz Zambrano v ONE [2012] EUECJC-34-09 where it was held:

         "(i)     Article 20 of the TFEU 'precludes national measures  which
             have the effect of depriving citizens of the European Union of
             the genuine enjoyment of the substance of rights conferred  by
             virtue of their status as  citizens  of  the  European  Union'
             (paragraph 42); and

         (ii)     A refusal to grant a right of residence to a third country
             national with dependent minor children  in  the  Member  State
             where those children are nationals  and  reside  has  such  an
             effect (paragraph 43) because 'it must be assumed that such  a
             refusal would  lead  to  a  situation  where  those  children,
             citizens of the  European  Union,  would  have  to  leave  the
             territory of the European Union in order  to  accompany  their
             parents'."

17. The scope of the principle in Zambrano was considered in detail by  the
    Court of Appeal in Harrison v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 where Elias  LJ
    held at [63] that the Zambrano principle would not apply  except  where
    the EU citizen is effectively forced to leave the country of the EU.

18. Vos LJ considered the applicable  principles  where  there  is  another
    relative able to care for the child in Hines v Lambeth [2014] EWCA  Civ
    660 at [21] to [23]:
         "21.     Accordingly, in my judgment, the judge was right, applying
             Harrison, to conclude  as  he  did  in  paragraph  21  of  his
             judgment  that  the   complainant   was   only   entitled   to
             accommodation if Brandon would  be  effectively  compelled  to
             leave the United Kingdom if she left. He  was  also  right  to
             point out that what amounts to circumstances of compulsion may
             differ from case to case. As Elias LJ  said:  'to  the  extent
             that the quality or standard of life [of the EU citizen]  will
             be seriously impaired by excluding the non EU  national,  that
             is likely in practice  to  infringe  the  right  of  residence
             itself because it will effectively compel the  EU  citizen  to
             give up residence and travel with the non-EU national'.
         22.  In my judgment, however, the welfare of the  child  cannot  be
             the paramount  consideration  because  that  would  be  flatly
             inconsistent with the statutory  test  which  is  whether  the
             child would be unable to reside in the UK if the mother  left.
             It will, in normal circumstances, be contrary to the interests
             of a child for one of its parent carers, whether  the  primary
             carer or not, to be taken away from  him  or  her.   It  would
             certainly be contrary to Article 24(3) of the Charter.  But Mr
             Berry  shied  away  from  contending  that   the   Immigration
             Regulations were inconsistent with EU law or that they  should
             be read down so as to comply with it.
         23.  I have no doubt that  the  test  applicable  under  Regulation
             15A(4A)(c)  is  clear  and  can  be   given   effect   without
             contravening EU law.  The reviewer has to consider the welfare
             of the British citizen child  and  the  extent  to  which  the
             quality or standard of his life will be impaired if the non-EU
             citizen is required to leave.  This is all for the purpose  of
             answering the question whether the child would, as a matter of
             practicality, be unable to remain in the UK.  This requires  a
             consideration, amongst other things, of the impact  which  the
             removal of the primary carer would have on the child, and  the
             alternative care available for the child."

19. Thus it emerges from that decision (1) the test in 15A(4A)(c) does  not
    contravene EU law and furthermore the welfare of the  child  cannot  be
    the paramount consideration.

20. In our view, the judge erred by failing to make any decision on whether
    the claimant satisfied the criteria in 15A(4A) and  furthermore  failed
    to make any findings on the evidence given.  The judge was required  to
    reach a decision on that evidence despite her  view  on  its  adequacy.
    The second error relates to the judge's understanding of  the  role  of
    s.55 of the 2009 Act.   In observing  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was flawed because there had been no appropriate consideration
    of T's welfare, the judge was in effect posing the wrong question.

21. We explained at the hearing that  we  considered  these  errors  to  be
    material  and set aside the decision.

22. As to its remaking, there is no dispute that Mr Harrison is  an  exempt
    person by virtue of his nationality and thus right of abode.  In  order
    to be regarded as a "primary carer" it is incumbent upon  the  claimant
    to demonstrate her undisputed relationship  to  T  but  also  that  she
    shares equally the responsibility for T's care with one   other  person
    who is not an exempt person (reg.15A(7)).

23. It is not the claimant's case that she has primary  responsibility  for
    T's care. Even though the judge reached no conclusion on the  evidence,
    the case put was one of shared responsibility.  Mr L  therefore  has  a
    role in T's upbringing and although  that evidence was of the  claimant
    and Mr L finding it difficult to cope, we are not  persuaded  that  the
    claimant  has  been   able  to   establish   that   she   has   primary
    responsibility for T's care by virtue of those circumstances.

24. Accordingly the claimant is unable to bring herself within the criteria
    in reg.15A(4A) and thus recognition of a derivative right of residence.



25. The grounds of appeal to the FtT relied on Article 8 and  s.55  of  the
    2009 Act.  We have no  doubt that it is in the best interests of T that
    both parents should remain together.  But as we  have  observed  above,
    those interests are not paramount. The question  to  be  asked  is  not
    where the best interests lie but whether the departure of the  claimant
    from the United Kingdom would result in an inability for T to  continue
    to reside in the United Kingdom.

26. Turning to Article 8, t is clear that the best interests are a  primary
    consideration  in  assessing  the  proportionality   of   any   further
    interference.  However, in our view Article 8 is not engaged by  virtue
    of the Secretary of State's decision.  That decision did not result  in
    the claimant no longer having leave to remain  and  thus  resulting  in
    criminal presence. Accordingly the principles in JM v SSHD [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1402 are not applicable.

27. The claimant was invited in the decision to make application should she
    consider that any future removal would  interfere  with  her  right  to
    private and family life under Article 8.  That option remains  open  to
    her.  We urge the claimant to take legal advice.

28. By way of conclusion, therefore, we set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal for error of law.  We remake the decision  by  dismissing
    the appeal.

Signed



Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  child  T  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

