
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/13962/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 PAVEL KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Mr Chohan, instructed by Syed Shaheen solicitors
Mr Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 22nd May  1990.  He
was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on 23rd September  2009  as  a
Tier 4 (General) Migrant. He made a further application for leave to  remain
on the same basis on 28th December 2011 but this was refused due to  a  lack
of funds. On 25th October 2013, the Appellant applied for a  residence  card
on the basis of his relationship with  Ms.  Suborna  Suborna,  a  Portuguese
national born on 4  August  1993.  This  application  was  refused  on  18th
February 2014 although the Respondent accepted that the  relationship  is  a
genuine one but the Appellant had not adduced sufficient  evidence  to  show
that they were in a durable relationship as they had not lived together  for
2 years. The Appellant appealed against this decision.

2.    His appeal came before First Tier Tribunal Judge  Morris  for  hearing
on 21st October 2014. In a decision promulgated on  5th  December  2014  she
dismissed the appeal. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on
15th  December  2015  supported  by  grounds  of  appeal  drafted   by   the
Appellant's solicitors. This application was refused on 28th  January  2015.
A renewed application for permission to appeal was  made  on  18th  February
2015. The grounds of appeal were drafted by counsel and asserted that  First
Tier Tribunal Judge Morris had materially erred in law:

    (i)    in failing to make any findings or take  into  account  relevant
    considerations applying the correct test as to whether the couple  were
    in a "durable relationship."

    (ii)   in failing to consider whether the couple  had  been  cohabiting
    since February 2013 and were continuing to cohabit;

    (iii)  in failing to consider  or  make  any  findings  in  respect  of
    whether or not the Sponsor's previous marriage had  permanently  broken
    down;

    (iv)   in failing to consider  whether  the  couple  intended  to  live
    together permanently.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  on
12th May 2015 who stated: "I am just persuaded that the grounds  in  support
of this renewed application demonstrate that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
may have made an error of law in failing to give adequate  reasons  for  his
findings on material matters and arguably failed to adequately  if  at  all,
address matters potentially of material relevance (see  grounds  (2)(3)  and
(4)) and raises arguable issues as to whether he was thus  entitled  in  law
to reach the conclusions he did for the reasons given."

Hearing

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Chohan sought to rely on the  grounds  of
appeal and helpfully took me through the evidence  as  to  the  relationship
between the Appellant and the Sponsor in the Appellant's bundle.  Mr  Norton
sought to defend the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Morris.

5.    After hearing submissions I stated that I found that  the  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge had made a material error of law and announced  my  decision,
reserving the reasons for the written decision. I also  indicated  that  the
appeal would be remitted back to the First Tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de
novo because findings of fact  would  be  required  in  the  light  of  oral
evidence from the Appellant and his Sponsor.

Error of law

6.    I consider that First Tier Tribunal Judge Morris materially  erred  in
law in her approach to the appeal. As the  Respondent's  refusal  letter  of
18th February 2014, the Respondent's guidance in the form  of  the  European
Casework Instructions, Chapter 5 and the grounds of  appeal  in  support  of
the renewed application for permission to appeal make clear,  assessment  of
whether or not there is a durable relationship pursuant to  regulation  8(5)
of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 requires not only cohabitation  in
a relationship akin to marriage for  2  years  but  also  an  assessment  of
whether the  parties  intend  to  live  together  permanently,  whether  any
previous marriage/relationship has broken down and that the parties are  not
related by birth. However, the First Tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  analyse
the facts of this Appellant's case from  this  perspective.  In  particular,
she failed to make any finding as to:

    (i)    the length of the relationship;

    (ii)   the length of cohabitation: the evidence before her was that the
    couple had cohabited since February 2013;

    (iii)  whether the parties were still cohabiting;

    (iv)   whether the Sponsor's marriage had broken down, despite the fact
    that there was evidence before her on  this  issue,  including  a  non-
    molestation Order against the Sponsor's former  husband  and  her  oral
    evidence as to the fact that she had been forced into marriage with her
    cousin in Bangladesh;

    (v)    whether the couple intended to live together permanently.

7.    The Judge's findings, at [12] focus  instead  on  the  detail  of  the
case: at 12(i) the Judge found the Sponsor's explanation  as  to  a  gap  in
Facebook records between March and September 2011 lacked  clarity  and  that
the  evidence  was  undermined  by  the  fact  that  the  records  are   not
translated; at (ii) she found the telephone records  of  limited  assistance
as there is nothing to link the telephone calls made by the Sponsor  to  the
Appellant; at (iii) in terms of the registration of a notice of marriage  in
October 2013, however it was evident that the parties were aware  that  they
were not able to marry yet; at (iv) the  evidence  that  both  parties  were
unaware of the whereabouts of the Sponsor's former husband  is  contradicted
by a letter of 25th October 2013 from the Sponsor's solicitors stating  "she
was forced to marry a stranger" when she  was  forced  to  marry  her  first
cousin and that he left the United Kingdom after the  issuing  of  the  non-
molestation Order; at (v) the Sponsor and Appellant knew very  little  about
the Non-Molestation Order  which casts doubt on the exact  position  between
the Sponsor and her husband.  She  further  stated:  "Whilst  it  is  not  a
requirement of the 2006 regulations that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were
married to each other or that the Sponsor had been through a formal  divorce
process ... it is reasonable to expect the parties to produce some  evidence
that they both intended to live together permanently and that  the  previous
relationship or marriage (if any) of either of then had broken down."

8.    I now address these findings. The grounds of appeal  at  [10]  asserts
that in respect of 12(i), the Judge failed  to  address  the  relevant  time
period - the couple had been living together the majority of  the  time  and
their level of facebook contact in 2011 and 2012 was not  relevant  and  the
same applied to the phone records at 12(ii). I consider that this ground  of
appeal  has  merit.  Whilst  the  couple  first  met  in  March   2011   the
relationship was  then  interrupted  by  reason  of  the  Sponsor's  parents
forcing her to marry her first cousin in  December  2011.  The  Sponsor  and
Appellant were then in  clandestine  contact  until  the  Sponsor's  husband
arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2013 when that  relationship  broke
down due to domestic violence and the Sponsor commenced cohabiting with  the
Appellant shortly afterwards. Therefore, the key issue before the Judge  was
the nature  of  the  relationship  since  February  2013  and  the  couple's
intentions. I agree that the previous contact and  nature  of  that  contact
prior to February 2013 is of marginal relevance  to  the  issues  the  Judge
needed to decide.

9.    In respect of 12(iii) I consider that [17] of the  grounds  of  appeal
has merit in that, even if the parties were aware that they would be  unable
to marry at that time, the fact that they registered a  notice  of  marriage
in October 2013 is relevant to their intention to marry, which  is  evidence
that can properly be  taken  into  account  when  considering  whether  they
intended to live together permanently. Whilst the Judge was  aware  of  this
requirement, as she refers to it at 12(v) she entirely failed  to  take  the
notice of marriage into account in  the  correct  context.  12(iv)  and  (v)
essentially concern the non-molestation Order  made  against  the  Sponsor's
husband. Grounds  [14]-[16]  assert  that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in
failing to give due weight to the fact that a family Court  Judge  had  seen
fit on the basis of the  evidence  to  make  this  Order,  which  was  clear
evidence that the Sponsor's marriage had broken down and instead  the  Judge
erroneously focused on the fact that the Sponsor did not know  when  it  was
due to expire. I consider that this ground of appeal also has merit for  the
reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.

10.   Overall, I consider that the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
correctly direct herself in respect of the questions she needed  to  answer,
which I have set out at [6] above.  Had  she  viewed  the  evidence  of  the
Sponsor and Appellant in  the  correct  context,  this  could  have  made  a
material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusion

11.   For the reasons set out above I find that First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Morris erred materially in law in dismissing the appeal  and  that  decision
is set aside. In light of the fact that the Judge did  not  conduct  a  full
fact finding  exercise  in  respect  of  the  issues  she  was  required  to
determine, there will need to  be  a  further  hearing  in  order  that  the
Appellant and the Sponsor can give oral evidence. I remit the appeal  for  a
hearing de novo on all issues by the First Tier Tribunal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

11th November 2015
