
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2015                          |On 20 April 2015                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            USMAN PETER THOMPSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K A Williams, Legal Representative, William
                    Hortor Law and Mediation
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a 44 year old citizen of  Nigeria  who  has  appealed,
    with permission, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R  J
    N B Morris, who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22  December  2014,
    dismissed his appeal against the appellant's  application  for  further
    leave to remain as a partner, as a parent, and by virtue of  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, at [23] and  [24]  of  her
    decision, found that the appellant did not share  a  relationship  with
    his wife and children in the UK and she gave  brief  reasons  for  that
    finding.  She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

2.   The ground seeking permission to appeal complained,  essentially,  that
    the judge had failed to engage in any way  or  otherwise  consider  the
    documentary and other evidence that the appellant has been playing  and
    continues to play the role of father to his two daughters (now aged  13
    and 9) and has always lived at the same address with them.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A  D  Baker  on  9
    February 2015 and the matter thus came before me.

3.   At the commencement of the  hearing  Mr  Tarlow,  for  the  respondent,
    conceded that he could not argue against the grounds seeking permission
    to appeal.  It was clear  that  there  had  been  substantial  evidence
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife was continuing and that they were living at  the
    same address.  He conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  must
    be set aside.

4.   I therefore directed that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  be  set
    aside and that no part of it be preserved.

5.   There then followed submissions as to whether  I  should  hear  further
    evidence with a view  to  remaking  the  decision  (as  argued  by  the
    appellant) or whether the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.  I noted, however, that the  appellant's
    wife had not given any evidence nor made any witness statement  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It seems to me that her  oral  evidence,  and  an
    appropriate assessment of it, will doubtless assist the Tribunal in its
    decision as to whether this appeal  should  ultimately  be  allowed  or
    dismissed.  I  therefore  decided  to  remit  the  appeal  for  a  full
    rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross (before any  judge
    other than Mrs R J N B Morris).

Notice of Decision

6.   It having been agreed by both parties that the decision by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained an error of law, I set aside that  decision  in
    its entirety.  The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing before any judge (other than Mrs R J N B Morris).


Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
17 April 2015

