
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/13485/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2015                             |On 23 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                hau thi pham
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms E King of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilsher promulgated on 28 November 2014 allowing the appeal of  Ms  Hau
    Thi Pham against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 28  February  2014  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   Whilst before us the Secretary of State for the Home Department is  the
    appellant and Ms Pham is the respondent, for the  sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal we shall  refer  to
    Ms Pham as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

3.   The Appellant is a national of Vietnam born on 2  February  1960.   She
    arrived in the  UK  clandestinely  in  2004.   She  took  no  steps  to
    regularise her immigration status until she made an application in July
    2013 which was initially rejected for failure to  pay  the  appropriate
    fee.  A subsequent application was accepted as duly made on 4  December
    2013, but was refused by the Respondent on 22  January  2014,  and  the
    decision to remove the Appellant was made in consequence on 28 February
    2014.

4.   The Appellant's application was based  primarily  on  her  relationship
    with her daughter, Thuy Phuong Thi Nguyen (date of  birth  18  February
    1989) and her granddaughter, Megan (date of birth 18 January 2008).

5.   The Appellant appealed to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons  set
    out in his determination.

6.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 15 January 2015.

7.   The Appellant has filed a Rule 24  response  settled  by  Ms  King  and
    dated 18 February 2015.

Consideration

8.   At paragraph 9 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  it  is  recorded
    that before the First-tier Tribunal "the  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    argue that any of the  facts  alleged  by  the  appellant  or  her  two
    witnesses were untrue".  The Secretary of State's case is  set  out  at
    paragraph 9 of the decision as being one essentially arguing  that  the
    circumstances did not warrant the Appellant being allowed to remain  in
    the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8 where she  did  not  otherwise
    qualify to remain under the Immigration Rules.

9.    To  a  very  significant  extent  the  Respondent's   representative's
    acknowledgement of the primary facts being as advanced in the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, undermines those aspects of the grounds
    of challenge to this Tribunal which seek to  re-open  issues  of  fact.
    For example: at paragraph 1(b) of the Respondent's grounds  in  support
    of the application for permission to appeal, issue is  taken  with  the
    factual circumstances surrounding the care of Megan and the  extent  to
    which Megan's father might undertake care obligations; and at paragraph
    2(c) of the Respondent's grounds criticism is made of the absence of up-
    to-date corroborative medical evidence.

10.  Be that as it may, for  the  present  purposes  it  is  unnecessary  to
    rehearse the entire factual history which is set out in some detail  at
    paragraphs 9 onwards in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is
    sufficient to emphasise certain of the salient features  that  informed
    the  outcome  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    In
    particular the Judge has noted the unusual family history in  that  the
    Appellant whilst on a business trip was injured in a car  accident  and
    in those circumstances became stranded in China.  When she was able  to
    return to Vietnam she learned that her mother,  who  had  been  looking
    after her daughter, had passed away and that the daughter had been sent
    to the United Kingdom.  That was in 2004.   It  is  in  consequence  of
    those circumstances that the Appellant herself  made  her  way  to  the
    United Kingdom hoping to  be  able  to  locate  and  reunite  with  her
    daughter.  It was not until 2009 that the Appellant was  able  to  find
    her daughter.  After that she became unwell, suffering from high  blood
    pressure and headaches and indeed there is a history of surgery for  an
    aneurism.  The Appellant in due course moved in with her  daughter  who
    had by that  time,  in  January  2008,  herself  had  a  daughter,  the
    Appellant's granddaughter. The Appellant's daughter  and  granddaughter
    are both British citizens.  The Appellant is  also  in  a  relationship
    with a gentleman who is a British citizen.

11.  We note that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  to  the
    applicable law including those aspects of the  Immigration  Rules  that
    might possibly be engaged in a case of this sort (see the  decision  at
    paragraphs 4 and  5);  also  to  Article  8  and  recent  jurisprudence
    (paragraphs 6 and 7); and to Part 5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the Immigration  Act  2014  -  indeed
    setting out section 117B (paragraph 7); as well as case law relevant to
    the existence of family life between adults (paragraph 8).  Further, at
    paragraph 14 the Judge set out the five questions in the  Razgar  test,
    and also reminded himself of the significance  of  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in  respect  of  children
    together with the decisions in Beoku-Betts and ZH (Tanzania).   In  our
    judgment those self-directions do not disclose any misunderstanding of,
    or misdirection on, the applicable legal principles -  and  we  do  not
    understand the Respondent to contend otherwise.

12.  From paragraph 15 of the decision the Judge evaluates  the  nature  and
    the quality of family life, necessarily taking the primary  facts  that
    were undisputed as his starting point.  Paragraphs 15 and  16  seek  to
    answer the first and second of the  Razgar  questions,  and  do  so  in
    particular with reference to  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
    granddaughter, and the Appellant's relationship with her own  daughter.
    The Judge also gives consideration to the Appellant's relationship with
    her partner, but rejects that as not one that can avail  the  Appellant
    in the context of Article 8.

13.  At paragraph 17 the Judge determines that the removal of the  Appellant
    would constitute an interference with  the  family  life  that  he  has
    identified in the preceding paragraphs, and then goes on to answer  the
    third and fourth Razgar questions uncontroversially.

14.  From paragraph 19 the Judge embarks upon an  evaluation  of  the  fifth
    Razgar question, that of proportionality.

15.  At paragraph  19  the  Judge  identifies  "important  factors  pointing
    against the Appellant".  Although there  is  no  express  reference  to
    section 117B of Part 5A of the 2002 Act at  paragraph  19,  as  already
    noted the Judge had directed himself to section 117B at paragraph 7  of
    his decision.  He also makes reference at paragraph 14 to  the  factors
    set out in section 117B  and  their  importance  as  'public  interest'
    considerations.  Although there is no express reference to section 117B
    at paragraph 19, in our judgment the Judge essays a successful traverse
    of the relevant factors within that paragraph.

16.  Thereafter the Judge sets out  his  conclusions  at  paragraph  20  and
    determines  that   the   Appellant's   removal   would   constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with her Article 8 rights.  In  doing  so
    he  had  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  both  the   Appellant's
    granddaughter and the Appellant's daughter.  We note in particular  the
    following:

         "For these reasons I have concluded that it would be in  her  [that
         is Megan's] best interests for  the  Appellant  to  be  allowed  to
         remain in the UK and that it would be disproportionate  to  require
         her [that is the Appellant] to leave because  of  the  damage  this
         would cause to the overall family unit and Megan's  best  interests
         which outweighs the public  interest  considerations  that  I  have
         given careful consideration which are set out above."

17.  We pause to note there that  it  is  clear  the  Judge  is  not  simply
    deciding this case by reference  to  Megan's  best  interests,  but  is
    having regard to the overall family unit which necessarily includes the
    relationship between the Appellant  and  her  daughter  which  was  the
    subject of some detailed analysis in the body of the decision.

18.  The Respondent's challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is essentially in four parts: that the Judge erred in his  approach  to
    each of the best interests of the child, the medical circumstances, the
    public interest, and also in respect of Article 8  -  although  perhaps
    this latter ground is more by the way of  summation  of  the  preceding
    grounds.

19.  So far as the best interests of the  child  is  concerned,  as  already
    noted to some extent the grounds seek to argue  matters  of  fact  that
    were the subject of agreement before the  First-tier  Tribunal.    More
    fundamentally however it seems to us that the ground in this regard  is
    wrongly premised in as much as it proceeds on the basis that the  Judge
    allowed the appeal solely by reference to the best interests of  Megan.
    We reject that premise: as already identified the Judge has had  regard
    to all relevant factors in the round and has not determined  this  case
    by reference to any single factor.

20.  For essentially the same reason we  reject  the  observations  made  at
    paragraph 3(b) of the grounds in respect of the best interests  of  the
    child having being considered by the Judge as "a trump card".

21.  As regards the challenge in respect  of  the  medical  evidence,  again
    this rests to some extent on an attempt to challenge those matters that
    were the subject of agreement before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  this
    context what was pertinent was  not  so  much  the  continuing  medical
    treatment that the Appellant was undergoing, but  the  assistance  with
    care and attention that she was receiving from her daughter.  This  was
    not a 'medical case' in the sense that it was argued that the Appellant
    could not access medical treatment  in  her  own  country;  rather  the
    medical circumstances were advanced as an  element  of  the  dependency
    between mother and daughter and the care provided by Ms  Nguyen  as  an
    important aspect of the family life shared between mother and daughter.
     To that extent the absence  of  any  up-to-date  medical  evidence  in
    respect of underlying conditions that were accepted is  not  pertinent,
    and we find no substance to this particular ground of challenge.

22.  In respect of the public interest, the Respondent  has  identified  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's references to the Appellant as being  in  a
    joint parental role in respect of Megan as a matter not  germane  to  a
    consideration of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act as amended.

23.  We observe that the Judge reminded himself that a grandparent  did  not
    meet  the  definition  of  a  'parent'  within  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 14 of the determination).  However the Judge identified that
    the statutory provisions  relevant  in  this  case  embodied  the  best
    interests of  the  child,  and  that  a  grandparental  relationship  -
    particularly with cohabitation over a lengthy period and acting in loco
    parentis - could be relevant to a consideration of best interests.

24.  At paragraph 20 the Judge referred to the Appellant having  "adopted  a
    joint parental role in the life of Megan"  which  had  "been  sustained
    over the past five years", was within the home, and was one  "borne  of
    genuine love and affection", adding that the Appellant "has essentially
    been there for Megan for all of her living memory".

25.  If there is any criticism to be made of  this  particular  decision  it
    does seem to us to be potentially in this area.  It  is  not  the  case
    that the Appellant can have, as it were, the direct benefit of  section
    117B(6) because the sub-section is not directly engaged: the  Appellant
    is not a parent and so does not have a parental relationship.   However
    it seems to us that on the unusual facts of this  case  the  Judge  was
    entitled to accord some weight to the close  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Megan as a relevant matter in the overall considerations.
     In this context  we  remind  ourselves  that  section  117B  does  not
    constitute a complete and exhaustive list of relevant  factors  in  any
    Article 8 appeal.

26.  In all of the circumstances therefore we also  reject  this  aspect  of
    the Respondent's challenge.

27.  The only remaining point that is raised by the Respondent is  that  the
    Judge was wrong to equate  the  unusual  circumstances  of  the  family
    history with the concept of 'exceptionality'.  We accept that 'unusual'
    is not inevitably congruent with 'exceptional'.  However,  neither  are
    the  concepts  mutually  exclusive:  something  unusual  may  also   be
    exceptional.  In  our  judgement  there  is  no  particular  weight  or
    substance to the challenge  made  in  this  regard  given  the  overall
    careful  consideration  of  all  relevant  facts  and  the  appropriate
    identification and emphasis by the Judge on the facts as he found  them
    as to the nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter - particularly in circumstances where  that  relationship  had
    been severed at an earlier stage for  circumstances  beyond  either  of
    their control and had only relatively recently been  resurrected.  This
    was an unusual feature, and in the particular circumstances it was open
    to the Judge to conclude that something exceptional arose in respect of
    the mutual family life.

28.  For all these reasons we do not  accept  that  there  is  any  material
    error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
    Respondent's challenge is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  no  material
    error of law and stands.

30.  No anonymity order is sought or made.


    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 17 March 2015.



Signed        Date: 20 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


