
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 January 2015                             |On 15 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                           MS KAVITHA THIYAGARAJAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr J Chipperfield of counsel instructed by
    Thames Chambers
    For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 13 November
         1984. She has been given permission to appeal the determination  of
         First-Tier Tribunal Judge Jackson ("the FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her
         appeal against the respondent's decision of  17  February  2014  to
         refuse to grant her further leave to remain in the UK as  a  victim
         of domestic violence under the provisions of paragraph 289A of  the
         Immigration Rules.


      2. The appellant entered the UK on 15 November 2011 with  valid  entry
         clearance  as  a  spouse  until  3  February  2014.  She  made  the
         application for indefinite leave to remain as a victim of  domestic
         violence on 27 January 2014.


      3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant had been subjected
         to domestic violence or that she met the requirements of the Rules.
         The respondent also concluded that the appellant  did  not  succeed
         under the Article 8 human rights provisions set out  in  the  Rules
         and there were no exceptional  circumstances  which  might  justify
         allowing  her  to  remain  exceptionally  outside  the  Article   8
         provisions of the Rules.


      4. The appellant  appealed  and  the  FTTJ  heard  her  appeal  on  22
         September 2014. Both parties were represented.  Oral  evidence  was
         given by the appellant and her sister.  The  FTTJ  found  that  the
         appellant had not been the victim of domestic abuse.  As  a  result
         the question of whether the marriage had  broken  down  because  of
         domestic violence was academic but the FTTJ found that even if  she
         had accepted that the appellant was a victim of domestic abuse  her
         marriage had not broken down as a result of this. There had been no
         appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds. The  FTTJ  dismissed  the
         appeal.


      5. The appellant applied for and was  granted  permission  to  appeal.
         There are three grounds of appeal which argue that the  FTTJ  erred
         in law. Firstly, by refusing to grant an adjournment to enable  the
         appellant to argue that she had been persecuted in  Sri  Lanka  and
         had made a claim  both  for  asylum  and  Article  3  human  rights
         protection or in the  alternative  by  failing  to  consider  these
         grounds. Secondly, by failing to give proper consideration  to  the
         evidence in relation to the complaints which the appellant had made
         to the police and by giving weight to the fact that  the  appellant
         had not provided supporting evidence from a GP or a women's support
         organisation. Thirdly,  when  concluding  that  the  appellant  had
         failed to establish that  her  marriage  had  broken  down  due  to
         domestic violence by placing weight on the fact that the  appellant
         had not raised the issue during the course of divorce proceedings.


      6. I have been provided with Patel and others v SSHD [2013]  UK  SC72,
         SH  (Afghanistan)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284,  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and LA  (para  289A):  causes  of
         breakdown) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00019.


      7. Mr Chipperfield relied on the grounds of appeal. The refusal letter
         contained a notice under S120 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 and a one stop warning requiring the  appellant  to
         inform the respondent of any reasons why she thought she should  be
         allowed to stay in the UK. He said that she had raised  asylum  and
         Article 3 issues both in paragraph 29 of her grounds of  appeal  to
         the First-Tier Tribunal and also in paragraph 25 to 27 her  witness
         statement dated 19 September 2014. Both of these  were  before  the
         FTTJ and, he submitted, should have persuaded her that  there  were
         asylum  and  Article  3  human  rights  grounds  which  had  to  be
         considered. In reply to my question, he  accepted  that  there  had
         been nothing in the appellant's claim before the  respondent  which
         raised such issues and that as a result they had not been addressed
         in the reasons for refusal letter. He argued  that  the  course  of
         action which the  FTTJ  should  have  adopted  was  to  direct  the
         respondent to address these grounds and for the appellant to have a
         full  interview  followed  by  proper  consideration  and  a  fresh
         decision from the respondent.


      8. In  relation  to  the  second  and  third  grounds  of  appeal,  Mr
         Chipperfield relied on his grounds of appeal. He  took  me  through
         the documents relating to the appellant's complaints to the  police
         all of which are contained in the respondent's bundle.  Victims  of
         domestic violence often had good cultural and other reasons for not
         going to the police either at all or until  late  in  the  day.  He
         relied on  Ishtiaq  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  386  in  particular
         paragraphs 16, 17, 30 and 41.


      9. As to the third ground of appeal, Mr Chipperfield relied on LA,  in
         particular the headnote. If I found that there was an error of  law
         in relation to the first ground of appeal I was asked to remake the
         decision and to send the asylum and Article 3 claims  back  to  the
         respondent for full consideration. If I  found  errors  of  law  in
         relation to the second and/or third grounds I was asked to send the
         appeal back to the First-Tier Tribunal to be re-determined  without
         preserving any findings of fact or credibility.


     10. In relation to the first ground of appeal, Ms Pal conceded that the
         FTTJ erred in law and should have adjourned or  given  a  direction
         for the respondent to consider the asylum and Article 3 claims.


     11. She submitted that second and  third  grounds  were  no  more  than
         disagreements with conclusions properly reached by the FTTJ on  the
         evidence. There had  been  proper  consideration  of  the  evidence
         relating to the complaints made by the appellant to the police.  It
         had been more than a year from the date of the separation from  her
         husband before she complained. There were  inconsistencies  between
         the evidence of the  appellant  and  her  sister  which  were  also
         properly taken into account. There was no error of law.


     12. I reserved my determination.


     13. Ms Pal concedes and I find that the FTTJ erred  in  law  by  either
         failing to  adjourn  to  enable  the  respondent  to  consider  the
         appellant's asylum and Article 3 human rights claims  or  to  admit
         them and determine what should be done, preferably by directing the
         respondent to consider them. It was an error  not  to  accept  that
         such claims had been made and needed to be dealt with. Whilst these
         issues had not been raised with the respondent either at  the  time
         of the application or prior to the  decision,  the  respondent  had
         issued a s120 notice and if the  appellant  had  not  raised  these
         claims in her grounds of appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  she
         would have been at risk of having them rejected had  she  attempted
         to do so as a fresh claim after the appeal decision from the  FTTJ.
         It was unfortunate that neither in the grounds of  appeal  nor  her
         statement did the appellant referred to either "asylum" or "Article
         3" in terms but nevertheless I find that it was sufficiently  clear
         that these grounds  were  being  raised.  There  was  reference  to
         "asylum" and "international protection" in  the  skeleton  argument
         before the FTTJ.


     14. The documentary evidence as to the complaints made by the appellant
         to the police is  referred  to  in  paragraph  7.  The  appellant's
         written evidence about this is set out in paragraph 22 and her oral
         evidence, including why she did not go to the police earlier, is in
         paragraph 25. The FTTJ contrasts this with the  witness  statements
         referred to  in  paragraph  25  and  the  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant's sister in paragraphs 33. The  FTTJ  did  not  say  that
         further supporting documentary evidence was required  and  she  was
         entitled  to  take  into  account  and  give  what  I  find  to  be
         appropriate weight to the fact that the appellant had not contacted
         her GP or any women's support organisation. Whilst it is correct to
         say that supporting documentary evidence is not always required  in
         domestic violence cases I find that the  FTTJ  did  make  a  proper
         assessment of the material before her and  that  which  might  have
         been but was not provided. No inappropriate weight was given to any
         of these factors.


     15. As to the third ground the FTTJ was correct to state  that  in  the
         light of her finding that there had not been domestic violence then
         the appellant could not show that  her  marriage  had  broken  down
         because of domestic violence. In paragraph 46 the FTTJ gave  proper
         consideration to  the  appellant's  position  in  relation  to  the
         divorce proceedings and her explanation as to why she had not  made
         any counterclaim in relation to the reasons for  the  breakdown  of
         the marriage. This was one of the factors which she was entitled to
         take into account  and  I  am  not  persuaded  that  it  was  given
         inappropriate weight.


     16. I find that the second and third grounds of appeal are no more than
         disagreements with conclusions properly reached by the FTTJ on  all
         the evidence and do not disclose any error of law.


     17. Before the FTTJ the appellant did not pursue her claim on Article 8
         human rights grounds.


     18. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and I can  see
         no good reason to do so.


     19. I uphold the FTTJ's decision to dismiss the appeal under  paragraph
         289A of the Immigration Rules. Having found that the FTTJ erred  in
         law by rejecting the application to consider the appellant's claims
         on  asylum  and  Article  3  human  rights  grounds  I  allow   the
         appellant's appeal to the extent agreed  by  both  representatives,
         that these claims must go back to the respondent for  investigation
         and a fresh decision.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 10 January 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
