
IAC-AH-DN/VP/SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13328/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th March 2015                   |On 13th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Mr pradeep
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bhusan Kumar Sharma (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malins, promulgated on 7th November 2014, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 6th October 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mr Pradeep.  The Appellant subsequently applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 22nd  July
    1980.  He appealed against a decision of the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State dated 4th March 2014, refusing him leave to remain in the UK,  on
    the basis of his Article 8 application on grounds  of  a  private  life
    established by virtue of his working at The Laxmi Narayan Temple  as  a
    priest from 24th January 2012 until 22nd February 2013,  as  a  Tier  4
    Temporary Worker (Religious) Migrant under the points-based system.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence how the Appellant provided day-to-day services
    in the temple for the  benefit  of  its  devotees.   There  was  strong
    support from the executive committee and the president of  the  temple.
    The chairman, Mr Premchand Sondhi,  also  gave  evidence,  as  did  the
    Appellant himself.  The list of duties that the Appellant performed was
    set out in detail by the judge at page 4  of  the  determination.   The
    evidence that Mr Pradeep, the Appellant, gave  was  that  he  had  been
    unable to apply for another visa  under  Tier  5  because  there  is  a
    maximum period allowed which he had already completed.  Prior to coming
    to the UK, he had been  a  priest  in  a  temple  in  India,  but  also
    undertook private work for clients.  He went on to say that, "remaining
    in India, are Mr Pradeep's mother, father, wife and two  children.   He
    has once visited them, since  2010"  (paragraph  7).   The  judge  also
    observed how the Appellant was happy to return  to  India.   The  judge
    quotes verbatim the evidence of  the  Appellant  that,  "when  my  visa
    expired I was happy to go back, but the temple committee were not  able
    to find a replacement: they said as they couldn't find  a  replacement,
    should I stay otherwise the temple would have to close down" (paragraph
    7).  The Appellant had a wife and two children aged 7 years and 5 years
    in India and he missed them very much.  (Paragraph 7).

 4. When Mr Sondhi, the temple chairman, gave evidence, he  explained  that
    the temple had four licences for the purposes of  bringing  priests  to
    the UK for services of the temple.  They had used two of these licences
    so far.  One was for the Appellant, another was for a Mr Dividi, who is
    also a full-time priest  at  the  temple.   The  temple  had  now  made
    application for a further two licences to the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    in New Delhi but these had been refused (paragraph 8).  The submissions
    made by the respective parties were also noted by the judge.  The judge
    observed that Mr Lumb, for the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted
    that the only avenue now open to the Appellant in these  circumstances,
    had he completed the permitted Tier 5 leave, was an  application  under
    Article 8, but in relation to this, he was unable to meet the Rules  as
    he has been in the UK for three years and not twenty, and the  majority
    of his life is in India, where he had substantial ties.

 5. Mr Sharma, appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the
    temple was a charitable organisation.  They needed him very badly.  The
    Appellant was providing specific services that were indispensible.   If
    these services are not provided in accordance with the  script  of  the
    book "this would bring bad luck upon the community  as  a  whole"  (see
    page 6, paragraph 9).

 6. The judge found all the witnesses appearing before him to be  credible.
    With respect to the Appellant he was clear that the  Appellant  was  "a
    straightforward  honest  and  credible  witness  and  accept  all   his
    evidence".  With respect to Mr Sondhi, the judge was equally clear that
    he was "a witness of truth and a man anxious to serve his community  to
    his utmost, in relation to the temple" (paragraph 11).

 7. However, in applying the law, the judge held that the  Appellant  could
    not succeed under Article 8.  He had only been in the UK for two and  a
    half years.  He had used up the maximum  leave  allowed  to  a  Tier  5
    Migrant as a temporary religious worker.  The judge observed that, "the
    very name of the category unequivocally states that the residence is to
    be transitory".  The Appellant's entire family, including his two young
    children are in India and that "their need for their father  cannot  be
    overstated".  The evidence by the  Appellant  himself  was  that  other
    people could perform those  functions   and  preside  over  the  temple
    services "and he told me that he was 'happy to go back'".  Furthermore,
    the temple does have a second priest also and there was no evidence  of
    any inadequacy on his part.

 8. But most critically, the judge was clear that  there  was  no  evidence
    that it will  ultimately  prove  actually  impossible  to  replace  the
    Appellant, "given that there was another priest in place before he came
    and there is another  there  now.   Furthermore,  the  temple  has  two
    licences remaining to enable them to make fresh appointments  and  more
    have been sought ..." (see paragraph 10(g)).

 9. The judge held that the Appellant had not been able to demonstrate that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration in  India.
    In fact the contrary was the position.  His entire  family  was  there.
    They would welcome him back there.  He now had a new global  experience
    and would be able to get employment.   The  Appellant  could  not  come
    within the ambit of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Furthermore, as far  as  the
    Appellant's private life was concerned this was  developed  within  the
    temple and that

         "there was no evidence of the Appellant having private life outside
         the temple walls.  His address is that of the temple, which appears
         even to supply his food.  His command of English was such, that  he
         used an interpreter at the hearing.  The Appellant  has  unilateral
         private life in the UK ...". (Paragraph 13).

10. The judge ended by saying that in this  case  it  was  the  Appellant's
    private life and its protection which was being considered and not  the
    welfare of the temple community.  In these circumstances it was for the
    Appellant  to  show  that  there  were  "exceptional"  or  "compelling"
    circumstances, and this the Appellant had not been able to do.

11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. Extensive Grounds of Appeal were submitted by Mr Sharma  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  These are structured in terms of a "factual summary"  and  a
    "summary Grounds of Appeal" and  they  draw  attention  to  established
    cases on Article 8 such as Huang [2007], as well as Razgar [2004],  and
    the case of PR (Sri Lanka) [2011].  It is unnecessary  for  me  to  set
    these out in full.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  on  8th  January  2015,
    permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on the basis that  the
    judge had failed to apply the relevant criteria in Razgar and to  carry
    out the appropriate proportionality exercise.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 30th March 2015, Mr Sharma, appearing  once
    again for the Appellant, relied upon his Grounds of  Appeal.   He  said
    that the judge had already found at paragraph 11 of  the  determination
    that the Appellant was a "straightforward honest and credible  witness"
    and that he had accepted all his evidence.  He had  also  accepted  the
    evidence of Mr  Sondhi.   Once  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    provided  a  remarkable   service   to   the   community,   which   was
    indispensible, it was a short step to  say  that  he  had  developed  a
    "private life" with that community, because the  private  life  can  be
    developed both within the temple  in  relation  to  the  devotees  that
    attend upon the priest, as well as outside the temple, when the  priest
    goes  out  to  the  devotees'  homes   to   perform   services   there.
    Accordingly, the judge had erred in failing to give due regard  to  the
    Appellant's private life.

14. For her part, Ms Kenney submitted that it was  not  relevant  that  the
    judge had found the Appellant  and  Mr  Sondhi  to  be  credible.   The
    important question was whether the decision was disproportionate to the
    Appellant's Article 8  rights.   None  had  been  put  forward  in  any
    meaningful sense.  Accordingly, the only question was  whether  he  had
    significant obstacles to his integration in India and the  judge  found
    that the contrary was the position because he had a family there and  a
    range of contacts (see paragraph 13).

15. Secondly, the very nature of the Tier 5  points-based  system  stay  in
    this country was that the Appellant was  here  as  a  temporary  worker
    (religious) migrant.  The expectation always was that he  would  return
    back to India.  One could not subvert the  basis  of  the  grant  of  a
    temporary stay by claiming thereafter a right to  remain  here  on  the
    basis of Article 8 rights.  The period since the expiry of the visa had
    led to the Appellant acquiring rights, such as they were, in a  fashion
    where his status was "precarious".  This would not count in his favour.



16.  Third,  the  public  interest  considerations  were  all  against  the
    Appellant.  He did not speak English as the judge found.  He was  happy
    to return back to India, as the judge also found (see paragraph 12(e)).
     His rights were developed specifically in the context of working as  a
    priest,  in  a  temporary  capacity,   at   the   temple.    In   these
    circumstances, the Razgar analysis would have been of no avail  to  the
    Appellant.  He was bound to have failed.  Any error was not a  material
    error.

17. In reply, Mr Sharma submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  a  remarkable
    priest providing a highly important service to the community.   He  had
    private life rights created both within the temple, as well as  outside
    it, when he was dealing with devotees coming to the temple.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

19. First and foremost, the Appellant entered the UK on the  basis  of  the
    grant of leave as a Tier 5 Temporary Worker  (Religious)  Migrant.   He
    did not have an expectation to remain here beyond the duration of  that
    visa.  It was perverse ordinarily to circumvent the  Immigration  Rules
    by  acquiring  a  right  to  remain  which  is  otherwise  specifically
    restricted under the Immigration Rules.  In this  case,  the  Appellant
    himself was entirely happy to return back to India (see paragraph 7  at
    page 5 and see paragraph 12(e)).  It  was  the  temple  community  that
    required him to stay.  The case,  however,  is  not  about  the  temple
    community, it is about the Appellant's own rights.  If  it  were  about
    the temple community, the judge was perfectly clear in concluding  that
    there is a second priest  in  situ  "who  is  competent  to  share  the
    presiding duties at the temple with the Appellant".   The  judge  found
    that other licences were in place to procure the entry of other priests
    in a lawful manner.  If it was not about the temple community but about
    the Appellant himself, then he had to show what Article rights he  had.
    This cannot simply be a matter of statement.  It must be  demonstrated.



20. Second, there was no evidence before the judge apart from the  evidence
    of Mr Premchand Sondhi, and he did not refer to the Appellant's Article
    8 rights in any meaningful sense.  The Appellant himself was content to
    go back, and missed his two children, and his family back in India.  He
    was, as the judge found, unable to show why his  return  would  violate
    his Article 8 rights.  It is well established  that  ordinarily  it  is
    perfectly possible to retain such rights through the  modern  means  of
    communication and this must certainly be the case here where these  are
    not his family members, but  members  of  the  community  that  he  has
    served, so that any connections that he had developed in the course  of
    his work, could be  maintained  through  telephone,  Skype,  and  other
    internet  facilities.   Nor,  was  the  Appellant  able  to  show   any
    "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances  that  took  his  situation
    outside the normal Rules of consideration.  The case  of  Razgar  would
    have been of value provided that something  had  been  put  forward  on
    which to graft, as a question of fact, the "Razgar considerations".  It
    was not.  The appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        7th April 2015
