
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13265/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 January 2014                              |On 22 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Ahmed Zeidan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Kings Court Chambers,
Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ahmed Zeidan, was born on 26 September  1982  and  is  a
    male citizen of Israel.  The appellant appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent dated 3 April 2013  to  refuse  to
    vary his leave to remain.

 2. The appellant had applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence (paragraph 276 of HC 395).   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant had been absent from the United Kingdom for a  total
    period that exceeded that permitted by the Rules.  It  is  accepted  by
    both parties that the appellant was able to show, at the  date  of  the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  27  September  2013,  the
    appellant  had  accrued  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in
    accordance with the Rules and not withstanding his  absences  from  the
    United Kingdom.  I was assisted by Mr Slatter's very  helpful  skeleton
    argument and note that Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, agreed with  the
    contents of that document.  I shall, therefore, record briefly  that  I
    also agreed with the interpretation of the Immigration Rules set out in
    the skeleton  argument  which  cites  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  EA
    (Section 85(4) explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013 at [7]:

    It is thus not open to an appellant to argue simply that, on  the  date
    of the hearing, he meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He
    can succeed only if he shows that the decision that was  made  was  one
    which was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.  Section  85(4)
    allows him to show that by reference to evidence of matters  postdating
    the decision itself, and it may well be that the  effect  is  that  the
    question for the Tribunal in an in-country case is whether the decision
    can be justified as a correct one at the date of the hearing. But  that
    does not mean that the Tribunal  is  the  primary  decision-maker.  The
    Tribunal's task remains  that  of  hearing  appeals  against  decisions
    actually made. The correct interpretation of  s85(4)  is  perhaps  best
    indicated by saying that the appellant cannot succeed by  showing  that
    he would be granted leave if he made an application on the date of  the
    hearing: he can succeed only by showing that he would be granted  leave
    if he made, on the date of the hearing, the same  application  as  that
    which resulted in the decision under appeal. The  subsection  does  not
    permit an appellant to change his case under the Immigration Rules  for
    being allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.  (That  is,  of  course,
    without prejudice to the fact that  s84(1)  may  allow  the  appeal  to
    succeed on different grounds entirely.)

 3. The parties do not dispute that the  appellant  could  succeed  in  his
    application by proving ten years' continuous legal residence as at  the
    date of the hearing.

 4. I agree also with Mr Slatter that the effect of GK  (Long  residence  -
    immigration history) Lebanon [2008] UKAIT 00011 (at [23]-[24]) is  that
    I am not in a position to allow the appeal outright but to remit it  to
    the Secretary of State for further consideration  of  the  requirements
    imposed by paragraph 276C of HC 395:

    The question arises, however, what follows from this  finding.  At  the
    hearing the parties appeared to be of the view that if I was  satisfied
    the appellant met the relevant requirements of the 10  year  continuous
    lawful residence rule (as contained in paras 276A-B),  I  should  allow
    the appeal outright. However, the relevant rules also include para 276C
    which is in discretionary terms:

    "276C. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence  in
    the United Kingdom may be granted provided that the Secretary of  State
    is satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 276B is met."

    Accordingly, since the respondent has yet to exercise that  discretion,
    I consider I can only allow the appeal (under s.86(3)(a)  of  the  2002
    Act) insofar as I think that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law (including immigration rules).

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17  October
    2013 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal is  allowed
    to the limited extent that it is outstanding before  the  Secretary  of
    State to make a decision under paragraph 276C of the Immigration Rules.






Signed                              Date 16 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


