

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13345/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 21 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between

                            ANNE DARLINGTON-BOMS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant did not appear and was unrepresented.  Having  considered
    all  of  the  papers,  the  uninformative  Rule  24  response  and  the
    submissions of Mrs O'Brien, I decide as follows.
 2. I record, at this juncture, that the Appellant is aged 35 years and  is
    the mother of 'S' the relevant EEA national, who is aged 9, having been
    born on 16th December 2004.   While  both  parents  and  child  are  of
    Nigerian origin, 'S' holds both British and  Irish  nationality.   This
    appeal originates in a decision on behalf of the Secretary of State for
    the Home  Department  (hereinafter  "the  Respondent"),  made  on  25th
    February  2013,   whereby  the  application  of  Anne   Darlington-Boms
    (hereinafter "the Appellant") for a residence card which  would  enable
    her to enter and  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  refused.   The
    Appellant's appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal ("the FtT") was dismissed
    in a determination promulgated on 5th July 2013.

 3.  The  Respondent's  refusal  decision  rehearsed,  firstly,  that   the
    application for a residence card had been made on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant is the parent of an EEA  national  child  who  claims  to  be
    exercising Treaty rights as a self-sufficient person as defined in  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter "the
    EEA Regulations").  The  application  was  said  to  be  based  on  the
    decision of the CJEU in Chen (Case C-200/02).  Next, reference was made
    to the derivative  residence  provisions  inserted,  by  amendment,  in
    Regulation 15A(2). The kernel of the Respondent's decision is found  in
    the following passage:

         "The evidence fails to demonstrate that 'S'  has  sufficient  funds
         that would be sustainable over a period of time during their period
         of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  and  comprehensive  sickness
         insurance cover in the United Kingdom.  Based  upon  these  factors
         the Secretary of State does  not  consider  that  you  satisfy  the
         requirements   of   .......................    Regulation    15A(2)
         ........."

     This became the focus of  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  FtT  which
contended, inter alia:
         "...... The SSHD failed  to  properly  evaluate  all  the  evidence
         presented with the application ..............  The father  of   'S'
         .......... is a petroleum engineer  and  works  on  oil  rigs.   As
         evidence of [the daughter's] self sufficiency we submitted his wage
         slips, bank statements and contract of  employment  ...............
         since the arrival of 'S' .................  and her mother  in  the
         UK the father has continued to support them from his income without
         recourse to public funds ....................  the mother has up to
         date comprehensive sickness insurance ..........."

 4. In a compact determination,  made  on  paper,  the  FtT  dismissed  the
    ensuing appeal in the following terms:

         "It seems to me, however, that the difficulty of the matter is that
         a child who is supported by her father is a dependant on her father
         rather than being a self sufficient person. I do not consider  that
         it has been shown that 'S' meets the criteria to be classified as a
         self sufficient person ........"

    The grant of permission to appeal to this Tribunal  recorded  that  the
    FtT  had,  arguably,  erred  in  law  having  regard  particularly   to
    regulation 4(1)(c)(i) of the EEA Regulations.
 5. The provisions of regulation 15A of the 2006 Regulations are  assembled
    under the  heading  "Derivative  Right  of  Residence".   The  material
    elements are the following:

         "(1) A person (P) who is not  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom  as  a  result  of  any  other  provision   of   these
             Regulations and who satisfies the criteria in  paragraph  (2),
             (3), (4) or (5) of this Regulation is entitled to a derivative
             right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  for  as  long  as  P
             satisfies the relevant criteria.


          2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -


              a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national .... and


              b) The relevant EEA national -


                    i) is under the age of 18;


                   ii)  is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a   self
                       sufficient person; and

                  iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if  P
                       were required to leave."


    The  remaining  provisions  of  regulation  15A  do   not   arise   for
    consideration in  the  present  context.   The  term  "self  sufficient
    person" is defined in regulation 4(1) as:


         "....   A person who has -


              (i)  sufficient resources not to become a burden on the social
                 assistance system of the United Kingdom during  his  period
                 of residence ; and


              (ii)     comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
    Kingdom."

    Thus, in the Appellant's application for a derivative  residence  card,
    it was incumbent  on  the  Respondent  to  address  and  determine  two
    questions:


    (i)  Does 'S' have sufficient resources not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the United Kingdom during her period of
         residence here?


      ii) Does 'S' have  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the
          United Kingdom?


    In the refusal letter, it was  simply  stated  -  without  particulars,
    elaboration or reasoning - that the evidence failed to demonstrate that
    'S' satisfied either of these requirements.

 6. Strikingly, the determination of the FtT also did not address either of
    these requirements.  Rather, as the relevant passage (reproduced above)
    demonstrates, the Judge applied a quite different test not contained in
    the statutory regime.  A clear error of law  is  thus  established.  It
    consists of a  combination  of  a  failure  to  apply  the  appropriate
    statutory tests, an ensuing failure to make the necessary findings  and
    conclusions and the espousal of an incorrect test. The  materiality  of
    these inter-related errors is indisputable, as they were germane to the
    Judge's decision.  Accordingly, the FtT determination must be set aside
    and remade.

DECISION

 7. I decide as follows:

        i)    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of  the
           FTT is set aside.


       ii)    A properly made first instance decision, taking into  account
           fully the analysis above, is plainly desirable.  Accordingly,  I
           remit the case to a freshly constituted First-tier Tribunal.

      iii)    The Appellant should be notified that an oral  hearing,  with
           representation if possible, is desirable.


                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Dated:  20  January 2014



