
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13605/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 17 February 2014                           |on 19 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          ARINZE UZONWANNE AKUBELEM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Burns, promulgated on  19  November  2013,  dismissing  his  appeal
   against refusal of a residence card.

2) The respondent refused the appellant's application on 7 April 2013  under
   Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
   because the appellant failed to show that  his  EEA  family  member  (his
   mother-in-law, an Italian citizen) is economically active in the UK as  a
   self-employed person.

3) The appellant categorises the errors of law in his grounds of  appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal as failure to consider material evidence, taking  into
   consideration irrelevant factors, and failing to give  adequate  reasons.
   In substance, his complaints are that the judge failed to see  the  nexus
   between evidence of his  mother-in-law's  registration  as  a  trader  on
   Amazon, and the records of Amazon transactions produced;  and  failed  to
   give proper recognition to a letter  from  accountants,  to  evidence  of
   payment  of  National  Insurance  contributions;  and  to   evidence   of
   registration with HMRC.  Mr Ndubuisi  submitted  that  the  determination
   should be set aside and that further  evidence  should  be  admitted  for
   purposes of a fresh decision.  It was not argued  that  further  evidence
   was admissible to show error of law.

4) I was not persuaded  that  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  are
   defective.  The reasons given at paragraph 21 of the determination are to
   be read along  with  the  submissions  for  the  respondent  recorded  at
   paragraph 17 and 18, which the  judge  accepted.   Although  Mr  Ndubuisi
   (whose firm were not the  representatives  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
   strenuously insisted that the registration of the appellant's mother as a
   seller on Amazon at Item G of the respondent's bundle was linked  to  the
   record of transactions at page H1-H5, the only common documentary link is
   that all the pages were printed off on 4 September 2012.   There  was  no
   evidence from the appellant's mother-in-law, written or oral.  The  judge
   found the "accountant's letter" dated 9  July  2012  in  the  appellant's
   bundle in the FtT an unimpressive document.  He was entitled  to  do  so,
   and he gave sensible reasons.  It  does  not  explain  what  professional
   qualifications the company has, and it reflects no more than  information
   said to have been provided by the appellant's mother-in-law.

5) Mr Ndubuisi referred to  the  application  form  at  7.4  which  requires
   provision of  at  least  one  of  three  documents  -  invoices/receipts;
   accountant's letter, and business bank statements.  He submitted that the
   appellant had provided not one but  all  three,  and  his  appeal  should
   therefore have succeeded.  That submission I think is  misconceived.   To
   provide an item of evidence of the nature  required  does  not  guarantee
   that the substance of the  application  will  be  held  as  proved.   The
   evidence has to stand up to reasonable scrutiny.   Mr  Ndubuisi  referred
   also to evidence that the sponsor has  a  PayPal  account,  but  that  in
   itself proves nothing.

6) I prefer the submission for the respondent  that  the  appellant  made  a
   poorly supported application, and that the additional evidence  presented
   in the First-tier Tribunal made his case little better.   The  judge  was
   entitled to find that he had failed to discharge the burden of proof upon
   him.  No error of law is disclosed.

7) I do accept the observation from Mr Ndubuisi  that  the  judge  may  have
   gone rather far in describing the application as "a bogus construct".  It
   was sufficient to find that the appellant failed to establish his case.

8) The appellant's remedy, as the Presenting Officer  pointed  out,  if  his
   sponsor's economic activity is genuinely as  he  claims,  is  to  make  a
   further, properly supported application.

9) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The determination of  the
   First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                18 February 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
