
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13219/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2014                           |On 4 April 2014              |
|Prepared 28 February 2014                     |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               ms akua afriyie

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on  2  September  1949,  applied
    for leave to remain as the dependant  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights whom she asserted was her son.

2.   Her application was refused, the notice  of  refusal  emphasising  that
    the only evidence of the relationship between her and her  claimed  son
    was a birth certificate which had been issued long after his birth  and
    that, in Ghana, a birth certificate could be  obtained  merely  on  the
    assertions of those applying for the birth certificate.

3.   The appellant's appeal against refusal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal  Pirotta  and  dismissed.   The  judge  referred  to  her
    concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the  birth  certificate  and  in
    particular to discrepancies in the  background  printing  and  spelling
    mistakes therein.  She noted that the appellant had not  considered  it
    relevant to apply for a DNA test to show the relationship  between  her
    and her son.

4.   The appellant appealed the  decision.   In  her  application  she  made
    various allegations about the conduct of the judge  and  in  particular
    the fact that she herself had been excluded from the hearing during the
    evidence given by her son.

5.   Although permission  was  refused  in  the  First-tier,  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul.

6.   At the  hearing,  Mr  Melvin  asserted  that  the  judge  had  properly
    considered all the evidence before her and  had  reached  a  conclusion
    which was fully open to her on the evidence.  The  appellant's  conduct
    at the appeal was such that the decision of the judge  to  exclude  the
    appellant was not inappropriate.

7.   We  note  from  the  determination  that  the  judge  did  exclude  the
    appellant from the hearing because she appeared  to  be  prompting  the
    second witness and did not desist when told to do so by the judge.

8.   We consider that the fact that the  appellant  was  excluded  from  the
    hearing might well give the appearance that the hearing was  not  fair,
    and we have decided that, in all the circumstances, it  is  appropriate
    that the appeal should be heard afresh.   We  also  consider  that,  in
    accordance with Practice Direction 7.2 of the  Practice  Directions  of
    the Senior President of Tribunals, it is appropriate that  this  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier for the hearing afresh.

9.   We therefore allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that  it  is
    remitted to the First-tier.

10.  We would add that the appellant must be aware that once she  has  given
    evidence and while the supporting witness is giving evidence  she  must
    not interrupt the proceedings, let alone appear to be prompting him  to
    give appropriate answers.  She should also be aware that for her appeal
    to succeed she would have to produce evidence which, on the balance  of
    probabilities, showed that she is the mother of her claimed son.



Directions

1.   This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  afresh
    and that no findings are preserved.  The hearing  will  take  place  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham, on 15 May 2014.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

