
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/13807/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                               irfan ali khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, instructed by Adam Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan who appealed to a judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 26 March  2015
    to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  8  February  2004  with
    entry clearance as a student.  He was granted further periods of  leave
    until an application for leave to remain under Article 8,  made  on  10
    February 2012, was refused  on  28  June  2013  and  that  refusal  was
    maintained after reconsideration on 19 August  2014.   He  applied  for
    leave to remain under Article 8 on 19 January 2015 and that application
    was refused on 26 March 2015.

3.   The application was made on the basis of seeking  leave  to  remain  on
    account of his private life.  He was not  working.   He  had  not  been
    convicted of any criminal offences.  He had siblings in  Pakistan.   It
    was said on his behalf that he had made many friends and had  developed
    strong social ties in the United Kingdom since his arrival in 2004  and
    he was also actively contributing to the economy after he finished  his
    studies.  He had passed the requisite tests in knowledge of English and
    life in the United Kingdom.

4.   The respondent refused his application on the basis  that  the  grounds
    on which he had applied for leave to remain were  not  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules and she was not satisfied that his circumstances were
    sufficiently compelling to justify  a  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on an exceptional basis outside the Immigration Rules.   He  did
    not qualify for leave to remain on the basis of family life because  he
    did not claim to have a partner or child in the United Kingdom.  He did
    not qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of HC395 on  the
    basis of his private life because  he  had  not  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for long enough and the respondent was not satisfied that there
    were any very significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan if
    he returned there.  He had lived there for 22 years previously and  had
    his  siblings  there.   It  was  not  accepted  that  there  were   any
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with his right  to  respect
    for his private and family life, warranted a grant of leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.

5.   The judge heard evidence and came to conclusions on  it.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant's brothers and sisters had disowned  him  and
    excluded him from his family property.  The reasons for  this  are  set
    out in some detail at paragraph 34 of the decision.  In the alternative
    if he had severed his ties with his immediate family he was of  an  age
    where he was old and mature enough to be able  to  settle  in  Pakistan
    without the need for family support and he had friends  in  the  United
    Kingdom who had supported him here and who could provide for him again.
     No credible objective  evidence  had  been  provided  to  support  the
    appellant's claim that he would have difficulties in finding employment
    in Pakistan.  The claim was considered under paragraph 276ADE  and  the
    judge noted that the appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom long
    enough to qualify for leave to remain on the basis of the length of his
    residence in the United Kingdom.  He was not satisfied that there  were
    any very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
    society into Pakistan given that he had lived there until 2004 and  was
    familiar with the way of life there and the language.

6.   The judge said that he then turned to Article 8  outside  the  confines
    of the Immigration Rules.  The real question in his  view  was  whether
    removal in the interests of enforcing immigration control  would  be  a
    proportionate interference with the appellant's private life.  Although
    the appellant might prefer to stay in the United Kingdom and  may  have
    made a number of friends here, Article 8 did not give him  a  right  to
    decide that he would enjoy private life here.  His  wishes  had  to  be
    balanced against the public interest in enforcing immigration  control.
    The  judge  noted  the  terms  of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  appellant  had  established  his
    private life at a time when his right to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    was precarious and as a consequence little weight should be attached to
    that private life.  He was young enough to be able to rebuild a private
    life for himself in Pakistan by finding employment there, resuming  old
    friendships there and making new  friendships  there  also.   He  could
    resume contact with his old friends in Pakistan and  make  new  friends
    there and keep in touch with his friends that he had made in the United
    Kingdom.  The fact that he spoke English was not a factor militating in
    his favour.  His good character similarly  was  said  to  carry  little
    weight.  Although he had been in the United Kingdom for  almost  twelve
    years, he had been here illegally for over four years and  should  have
    returned to Pakistan before his last leave  expired.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed under Article 8.

7.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had not referred to the existence of circumstances which
    would justify a consideration of whether there would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules and that it was arguable that  the  judge's
    failure to identify those circumstances which had implicitly been found
    to exist rendered the foundation of the proportionality exercise unsafe
    given the uncertainty arising as to the degree of  weight  attached  to
    the unexpressed circumstances leading to  a  consideration  of  whether
    there would be a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules, set against the
    weight attached to the other  factors  referred  to  by  the  judge  in
    carrying out the proportionality exercise.

8.   Mr Khan argued that the judge had erred in law  in  failing  to  state,
    when going outside the Rules looking at Article  8,  what  factors  had
    been considered in coming to that view.  The error was material because
    those factors were not specified and  the  weight  given  to  them  was
    unclear as to whether or not they outweighed the public interest.

9.   In his submissions Mr Duffy relied on the Rule 24 response.  He  argued
    that the grounds were simply attempts to reargue the case.   Article  8
    had been considered outside the Rules and nothing had  been  identified
    that the judge had not considered.  The judge had adopted  a  belt  and
    braces approach which was unnecessary but in doing so that could not be
    said to be a material error of law.

10.  By way of reply Mr Khan argued that it was a question of  the  exercise
    of  discretion  and  whether  the  proportionality  exercise  had  been
    properly carried out and that was unclear and one could not be sure  as
    to the judge's approach to proportionality.

11.  I reserved my determination.

12.  The essence of the challenge to the judge's decision, as argued  by  Mr
    Khan and encapsulated at ground 5, is that the judge  in  going  on  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  and  conducting  the
    assessment of proportionality must be taken to have accepted that there
    were compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules.  In failing to explain what he found those to be or why he found
    them to be outweighed by the public interest it was impossible for  the
    Tribunal to understand his reasoning.  It was also argued that  he  had
    failed adequately to consider such matters as the amount  of  time  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom,  the  changes  to  the  Rules
    which might otherwise have enabled him to make an  alternative  Tier  4
    application, the fact that he had been a generally law-abiding  person,
    had not tried to work illegally or make a dishonest application on  the
    basis of a  sham  marriage  and  had  explained  the  family  pressures
    contributing to his decision to remain in 2011.

13.  I agree with Mr Duffy and the points made in the Rule 24 response.   In
    essence what the judge appears to have done is  to  decide  the  matter
    outside the Rules on an alternative basis, although it  is  clear  from
    his conclusions that the appeal could not succeed under the  Rules  and
    that conclusion was clearly a correct one.   The  appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE for the reasons  given  by
    the judge.  As a consequence  it  was  unnecessary  for  the  judge  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules and I agree with Mr Duffy that  it
    must be the case as a consequence that there is no materiality  to  any
    error in that regard.  But in any event if  consideration  outside  the
    Rules had as such been necessary, it is  perfectly  sound.   The  judge
    took into account the relevant matters referred to in the  grounds  and
    in submissions and came to proper conclusions on them in the context of
    the evaluation that he was making.  His decision cannot be said  to  be
    marred by a failure to identify what compelling  circumstances  existed
    that merited a consideration of the situation outside the Rules.   What
    the judge  had  to  say  from  paragraph  38  onwards  was  essentially
    irrelevant in light of his proper  findings  in  respect  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  What he said taken on its own could not be said to amount to a
    failure to give a proper consideration to  proportionality.   Had  that
    been a relevant issue, it  was  addressed  perfectly  properly  in  the
    course of those paragraphs.  Accordingly, I find no error of law in the
    judge's  decision  and  his  conclusion  dismissing   the   appeal   is
    maintained.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

