
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13107/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                   |On 1 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane, Counsel instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).
     She has permission to challenge  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) Judge Watson who in a decision sent on 4 September 2015 dismissed
    her appeal against a decision made by the respondent on 16  March  2015
    refusing her application for ILR as a victim of domestic  violence  and
    stating that she was to be removed by way of directions.

2.   It is unnecessary for me to set out the grounds in full  because  I  am
    satisfied that the judge materially erred in law.

3.   The first respect in which the judge erred was not one  for  which  she
    bears any responsibility since it consists in the fact that there was a
    document which the appellant's solicitors had sent  to  the  respondent
    with the application but which the respondent failed to include in  the
    bundle of documents sent by the respondent for appeal  purposes.   This
    was a letter from  the  appellant's  GP,  Dr  Monica  Green,  dated  19
    February 2015.  The appellant in  her  application  form  made  express
    reference to this letter.  The respondent's letter of refusal does  not
    refer to this letter.

4.   It is settled law that error of law by  way  of  procedural  unfairness
    can arise even when there is no fault on the part of the judge: see  MM
    (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).  In my judgment that
    is precisely what has occurred here.  As explained in  MM,  it  is  not
    enough that there has been an error  of  fact:  it  must  be  one  that
    "might" have made a difference: see paragraph 17.  In  the  appellant's
    case, I am entirely satisfied  that  this  letter  might  have  made  a
    difference because (as will become clear  when  I  address  the  second
    reason for setting aside the decision) the judge  considered  that  the
    appellant's account of being the victim of domestic violence lacked any
    independent corroboration. The doctor's letter  was  corroborative:  it
    noted that the appellant reported domestic violence on 2  January  2015
    and on 22 January 2015.  The note in it  as  regards  the  consultation
    makes reference to the appellant being attacked with a belt and  broom.
    Further, the doctor's letter was one of two documents  which  the  Home
    Office  application  form  specifies  as  being  required;   hence   by
    submitting it the appellant had in fact discharged this requirement  of
    the form; and this may well have influenced the position of the HOPO at
    the hearing had he or she been apprised of this fact.

5.   It is true that the appellant's  solicitors  should  have  spotted  the
    lacuna in the respondent's appeal bundle and taken steps to provide  it
    themselves.  However, this failure was not the appellant's fault and  I
    am satisfied, having perused the witness statement from  Mr  Bircumshaw
    dated 15 July 2016, that the omission was not an act of bad faith.

6.   The second reason for  finding  the  judge's  decision  legally  flawed
    concerns her assessment of the evidence from the  Panaghar  Safe  House
    dated 27 February 2015.  Although the judge did take this letter/report
    into account, she erroneously understood it  to  be  "entirely  reliant
    upon  the  appellant's  own  credibility"  (paragraph  14)  and   later
    concluded  erroneously  that  "there  is  no  evidence  save  for   her
    statement" (paragraph 18).  It is clear  from  the  letter/report  that
    this refuge completed a CAADA Risk Identification  Checklist  form  and
    found that "she is subject to domestic abuse  with  coercion,  threats,
    intimidation and extreme physical mental abuse".  Mr  Mills  makes  the
    valid point that this form  seems  to  set  a  very  low  threshold  of
    believability, as almost all of it is simply a recording  of  what  the
    woman concerned says to the refuge caseworker.  But (and this is  where
    the judge went wrong), the form clearly does require the refuge to also
    give its  own  assessment  of  risk  and  in  this  case  the  refuge's
    assessment was that she was a victim of domestic violence.  At the very
    least  that  assessment  should  have  been  weighed  in  the  balance,
    especially as the respondent's own application form only specifies that
    an applicant provides evidence from a refuge, which the  appellant  had
    done.

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and the decision must be set aside.  Given that the judge's  errors
    turned on the assessment of credibility, I see no  alternative  to  the
    case being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal not before Judge Watson.



Direction

8.   In light of the fact that (i) the respondent  in  her  decision  letter
    does not address the refuge letter/report; but that (ii)  the  HOPO  at
    the hearing before the FtT maintained that the appellant had not  shown
    she had been the subject  of  abuse,  I  direct  that  the  appellant's
    representative seek and obtain a report from an independent  specialist
    on domestic violence that addresses whether or not  the  appellant  has
    been the victim of domestic violence.  The report is to be provided  to
    the First tier Tribunal with a copy to the respondent by end  of  March
    2017.  The First-tier Tribunal is not to  list  the  case  for  hearing
    before 7 April 2017.

9.   For the above reasons:

    The judge materially erred in law;

    Her decision is set aside;

    The case is remitted to the  FtT  (not  before  Judge  Watson)  with  a
    direction set out in para 8;

    The case will not be listed for hearing before 7 April 2017.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
