

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13137/2014
                                                               IA/13373/2014
                                                               IA/13374/2014
                                                               IA/13375/2014
                                                               IA/13372/2014
                                                               IA/13376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 19 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              CELLOU DIALLO (1)
                            FATOUMATA DIALLO (2)
                           ALPHA OUMAR DIALLO (3)
                          ELHADJ MAMADOU DIALLO (4)
                              AMADOU DIALLO (5)
                             TAHIROU DIALLO (6)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Fursden Knapper
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing we announced that the First-tier Tribunal was
    without jurisdiction to determine the appeals that were before  it  and
    therefore its decision and reasons statement was legally flawed and had
    to be set aside.  This statement contains our reasons.

 2. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coleman, promulgated on 12 November 2014,  on  two  main
    grounds, as confirmed by Mr Wilding, who not only presented the  appeal
    on behalf of the Secretary of State, but who also settled the grounds.

 3. The first ground is that  once  the  judge  had  found  that  the  lead
    appellant  was  unable  to  provide  evidence  of  his  claimed  French
    nationality,  she  was  without  jurisdiction  because  none   of   the
    appellants could meet the provisions of regulations 26(2) or  26(3)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  second
    ground of appeal is that Judge Coleman  erred  in  law  by  considering
    whether the appellants were entitled to benefit from article 8  of  the
    human rights convention.

 4. We decided that the first ground is made out and therefore  could  make
    no findings in relation to the second ground because we too are without
    jurisdiction. Our reasons for finding that we have no jurisdiction  are
    as follow.

 5. Judge Coleman made a clear finding that the lead appellant  had  failed
    to establish that he remained a French  national  and  her  finding  is
    unchallenged.  Indeed,  in  answer  to  our  enquiries,  Ms  Rutherford
    admitted that on the basis of the evidence presented to the  First-tier
    Tribunal no other  conclusion  was  open  to  her.   When  pressed,  Ms
    Rutherford admitted that in pure legal terms her clients had no  rights
    of appeal. Her  argument  centred  on  the  premise  that  because  the
    Secretary of State had failed to raise the issue of jurisdiction in the
    First-tier Tribunal it was too late to do so now.

 6. We disagree. Ms Rutherford sought to rely on  two  judgments  from  the
    Court of Appeal but in our view neither supports  her  contention.   In
    Anwar and another v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1275, guidance was given as to
    the constitutive and adjudicative functions  of  a  tribunal.   In  our
    view, the question of whether the lead appellant was a French  national
    was an issue that had to be resolved to determine whether there was  an
    appeal at all, that is, whether the constitutive function of the First-
    tier Tribunal was engaged.  As  we  reminded  the  parties,  a  similar
    approach had been necessary in the recent past in  relation  to  family
    visitor  appeals  where  the  relationship  had  to  be  identified  to
    determine whether there was an appeal.

 7. In R (Nirula) v FtT(IAC) and another [2012] EWCA Civ 1436, the Court of
    Appeal commented at the end of paragraph 32.

         "If a tribunal gives a decision  without  anybody  considering  the
         jurisdictional position, the decision may be precarious but ... the
         decision stands until set aside.  It will  become  less  precarious
         once the time for applying for permission to appeal has expired."

    It is clear from this passage, particularly in the context where it  is
    to be found, that the Court of Appeal did not restrict consideration of
    jurisdiction  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Court   of   Appeal
    identified that a tribunal's decision might  stand  even  though  there
    were no jurisdiction if no jurisdictional  issue  were  pursued.    But
    such a decision would be precarious and if the  issue  of  jurisdiction
    were raised before the period for applying for permission to appeal had
    ended, then the issue would need to be considered.

 8. In light of the above, we conclude that Judge Coleman was  right  first
    to reach a  decision  on  whether  the  lead  appellant  was  a  French
    national.  However, she erred in failing to consider  the  effect  that
    finding had on her jurisdiction.    As a matter  of  law,  she  had  no
    jurisdiction.

 9. Although not raised by the parties, because we  recognise  the  serious
    consequence of finding there is no jurisdiction, we have considered for
    ourselves whether the restrictions on the right of appeal in regulation
    26 comply with the procedural safeguards  in  the  Citizen's  Directive
    (2004/38/EC).

10. It is trite EU law that only a  Union  citizen  and  certain  of  their
    relatives can benefit from the free movement  provisions  enshrined  in
    article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.   In
    these appeals none of the appellants is shown to be a Union citizen and
    therefore none can be a relative of such a person.  It  is  from  these
    fundamental principles that the rights of free movement  and  residence
    that are described in  the  Citizen's  Directive  are  transposed  into
    British law by the 2006 Regulations. The administrative requirements to
    establish that a person seeking to benefit from  these  provisions  are
    set out in article 8 of the Citizen's Directive and it  is  these  that
    regulation 26 transposes.  They include the requirement  to  produce  a
    valid identity card or passport as proof of EEA nationality.

11. We are satisfied, therefore, that  the  restriction  on  the  right  of
    appeal complies with EU law.

12. Of course, it remains open to the appellants to make fresh applications
    if evidence  of  the  French  nationality  of  the  lead  appellant  is
    obtained.   Alternatively,  it  is  open  to  the  appellants  to  make
    applications to the Secretary of State under the immigration rules  and
    the human rights convention.  In relation  to  this  alternative,  both
    representatives asked us to comment about what standing Judge Coleman's
    findings with regard to the appellants' private and family life  rights
    might have.  We decline to do so other than to point out  the  obvious:
    they are judicial observations which appear to be well reasoned.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  because
the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error on a point of law.

We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and remake it to  find  that
there is no jurisdiction.



Signed        Date

Judge McCarthy, Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
