
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14017/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2014                             |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                               mr hasham butt

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In a determination promulgated  on  9  June  2014,  I  found  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this case contained an error  of
    law and fell to  be  set  aside.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse to vary his leave  was  dismissed  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  in  November  2013.   The  Secretary  of  State   made
    favourable findings regarding the points claimed by  the  appellant  in
    the attributes and  maintenance  (funds)  categories  but  refused  his
    application on the sole basis that paragraph 322(1A) of the  rules  was
    made out, as false representations were made in his application.

2.   In answer to question  J18  in  the  application  form,  the  appellant
    ticked a box indicating that he had never previously been refused entry
    clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  In
    the notice of decision which followed,  the  Secretary  of  State  drew
    attention to at least three earlier occasions on  which  the  appellant
    was refused leave to remain, the most recent on 29 September 2011.   In
    his evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  accepted  that
    the answer he gave to question J18 - "no" -  was  incorrect.   He  said
    that he thought  the  question  was  directed  at  decisions  by  Entry
    Clearance Officers to refuse entry outside the United Kingdom.  He  had
    never been refused an application of this type in the past.  The  forms
    used in his earlier applications for leave were all completed  for  him
    by his lawyer or an agent of the college where he was studying  at  the
    time.

3.   The judge drew an inference that  the  appellant  gave  his  answer  to
    question J18 dishonestly on the  basis  that  the  earlier  application
    forms contained questions  equivalent  to,  or  at  least  similar  to,
    question J18.  On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  the  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer at the "error of  law"  hearing  (Mr  Deller)
    said that J18 in fact appeared only in the most recent application form
    and that there was no question equivalent to it in the  earlier  forms,
    although there were questions regarding illegal  entry  and  deception.
    He said that it  was  likely  that  a  set  of  the  application  forms
    completed by the appellant would be with the Home Office and that  they
    might be  made  available  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  re-making  the
    decision.

4.   Mr Tufan was able to hand up copies of four earlier  application  forms
    and I am very grateful to him for locating them.   The  three  earliest
    included questions at pages 20 and  21  regarding  staying  beyond  the
    period of a person's leave, working without permission,  illegal  entry
    to the United Kingdom, the use of deception in applications and removal
    or deportation from the United Kingdom.  The form which led to  refusal
    of leave in September 2011 included  questions  on  page  12  regarding
    staying on beyond  a  period  of  leave,  working  without  permission,
    illegal entry and the use of deception in applications seeking leave to
    enter or remain and, as with the earlier forms, removal or deportation.
     It is, therefore, readily apparent that Mr Deller was correct  in  his
    submission to the Upper Tribunal at  the  error  of  law  hearing  that
    question J18 was rather different.

5.   In re-making the decision, in issue between the parties is whether  the
    ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) is made out.  If it  is,  the
    appeal falls to be dismissed.  If it is not, the appellant succeeds and
    he may then rely  on  the  favourable  findings  already  made  by  the
    Secretary of State regarding the substantive requirements of the rules.

6.   Mr Coleman submitted that the  evidence  showed  that  the  appellant's
    answer to question J18 was simply a genuine mistake.  He was a  man  of
    good character and there was nothing in his past to suggest dishonesty.
     The appellant had nothing to gain by concealing the past  refusals  as
    they were all readily available to the Secretary  of  State.   Question
    J18 did not appear  in  the  previous  application  forms  and  so  the
    appellant could not have had any knowledge of a similar  question  when
    he applied for leave previously.  It was clear from Re B  at  paragraph
    62, the Opinion of Lord Hoffman, that the more serious the  allegation,
    the stronger the evidence required to make it out.  It  was  improbable
    that the appellant would have lied about something which would gain him
    nothing.  He could have mentioned  the  earlier  refusals  without  any
    difficulty being caused thereby.  There was no evidence  of  dishonesty
    and the answer to J18 simply showed a mistake.

7.   The appellant's oral evidence was recorded by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraphs 8  and  9  of  his  determination.   The  appellant
    offered an explanation for the mistake.  At paragraph 4 of the  witness
    statement he made, which was before the First-tier  Tribunal,  he  made
    clear that he did not intend to deceive.  In the  absence  of  evidence
    enabling an inference to be drawn that the appellant had  answered  the
    same or a similar question in the past differently,  the  Secretary  of
    State's case fell away.

8.   Supporting the appellant's explanation and case were  question  J16  in
    the current form,  where  he  had  answered  "no"  in  the  context  of
    deception used in earlier applications and the first part  of  question
    J18, which was clearly directed to entry clearance or leave  to  enter.
    This supported the appellant's explanation that he thought that he  was
    being asked about applications from abroad.

9.   Mr Tufan said that the burden of proof clearly fell  on  the  Secretary
    of State in this context but the  standard  of  proof  was  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities, as was made clear in Re B.  The Secretary  of
    State was able to show dishonesty because  J18  was  a  straightforward
    question.  It was difficult for the appellant to argue that he did  not
    understand it.  He was an educated man.  A straightforward  answer  was
    required.  The appellant was refused leave on several occasions in  the
    past and it was no answer  to  say  that  the  application  forms  were
    completed by lawyers or advisors.  After all,  the  appellant  received
    notice of the refusals from the Secretary of State and so he  was  well
    aware of the outcome.  He was required to give a straightforward answer
    but failed to do so.

10.  In a brief response, Mr Coleman said that had the  appellant  given  no
    explanation and provided no evidence in support  of  his  case,  things
    would have been very different.  However, he was able to  rely  on  his
    good character  and  he  had  spoken  to  the  issue  and  provided  an
    explanation.  The Secretary of State was required  to  show  dishonesty
    and she was unable to do so, in the context of the new  question  which
    appeared in the current form, at J18.


Findings and Conclusions

11.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the Secretary  of  State  to  show
    that the ground of refusal under paragraph  322(1A)  is  made  out:  JC
    (China) [2005] UKAIT 0312.  The standard of proof is that of a  balance
    of probabilities (Re B)  but  cogent  evidence  will  be  required:  NA
    (Cambridge College of Learning) [2009] UKAIT  00031.

12.  There has been no need to hear  evidence  in  re-making  the  decision.
    The appellant was able to put his case before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and his oral evidence was summarised at  paragraphs  8  and  9  of  the
    determination.  Mr Coleman drew  attention  to  the  witness  statement
    which was before the judge, and the appellant's denial  there  that  he
    had used deception.

13.  With the benefit  of  the  four  application  forms  completed  by  the
    appellant on earlier occasions, provided by Mr Tufan,  a  full  picture
    has emerged.  Question J18 in the current  form,  which  the  appellant
    answered inaccurately, does not appear in the  earlier  forms  although
    there are  questions  concerning  overstaying,  deception  and  related
    matters.  It is not in issue that the earlier forms were all  completed
    correctly and honestly.  The appellant said that lawyers  and  advisors
    completed those forms but, as Mr Tufan submitted, this is neither  here
    nor there.  He signed the individual forms and was well  aware  of  the
    earlier refusals of leave.

14.  The  critical  question  is  whether  the  straightforward  answer  the
    appellant gave  to  J18  is  sufficient,  when  weighed  with  all  the
    evidence, to enable an inference to be drawn that he  gave  his  answer
    dishonestly.  It is relevant, in this context,  that  the  other  forms
    were answered correctly, albeit on the appellant's behalf.  A series of
    honestly and accurately completed forms tends to  suggest  that  it  is
    less likely that the appellant would seek to introduce dishonesty in  a
    form completed subsequently.  After all,  he  was  well  aware  of  the
    adverse outcomes in the earlier applications and he  would  have  known
    that the Secretary of State, having  made  those  decisions,  was  also
    aware of them.  He had  nothing  to  gain  by  answering  the  question
    dishonestly.

15.  Relevant also is the explanation he has  given.   He  thought  J18  was
    directed to applications from abroad.  The question itself does provide
    some support for this explanation as it asks whether an  applicant  has
    ever been refused entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain in
    the UK, a natural reading of those words suggesting that the first  two
    types of application are made abroad.  The form  also  shows  that  the
    appellant was required to disclose aspects of his  immigration  history
    and that he did so, accurately.  Questions J4 to J13  required  him  to
    give details  of  his  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom,  including  the
    reference number of his visa.  At N4 and  N5,  he  disclosed  his  most
    recent grant of leave, as a Tier 4  student.   The  appellant  was  not
    seeking to conceal or disguise these aspects and he  would  have  known
    that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  have  readily  identified   any
    inaccuracies (as she did, in fact) from her own records.

16.  An assessment is required in the light of all of the evidence.   Taking
    into account the appellant's immigration  history,  the  earlier  forms
    completed without error  and  the  extent  of  the  disclosure  of  the
    appellant's immigration history in the most recent application, I  find
    that cogent evidence of dishonesty has not been  shown  in  this  case.
    The Secretary of State has  not  discharged  the  burden  upon  her  of
    showing that it is more likely than not that the appellant answered J18
    dishonestly, rather than merely answering the question inaccurately and
    mistakenly.

17.  I find that the ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) has not  been
    made out.  That is the  sole  issue  requiring  determination  and  the
    appeal is allowed.

DECISION

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, having been set aside, is  re-
    made as follows: the appeal is allowed.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed:                                      Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


FEE AWARD

By section 12(4) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,  in  re-
making a decision, the Upper Tribunal may make any decision which the First-
tier Tribunal could make if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-making  the
decision.  This includes the making of fee awards.  As the appeal  has  been
allowed, I make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid or  is
payable in these proceedings.





Signed:                                      Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
