
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14686/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd December, 2014                         |On 17th December 2014        |
|Signed 16th December, 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                dinah Mclarty
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel of Counsel instructed by Mohammed & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  to
    whom I shall refer as, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Ghana, born on 18th April, 1958.

The Respondent's Immigration History

3.   The respondent claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 14th  May,
    2001, with six months' leave to enter as a visitor.  The passport which
    the respondent used to enter the  United  Kingdom  has  been  lost  and
    reported to the police.  The claimant was able to trace  details  of  a
    visit visa granted to the respondent valid from 26th March, 2001  until
    26th September, 2001.  The claimant accepted that  the  respondent  has
    demonstrated continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom  since  June
    2001, the claimed date of entry.

4.   On 10th September, 2012 the respondent applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain as a spouse.  That application was  rejected  on  27th  October,
    2012, because no fee had been submitted.   A  further  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a spouse was made by  the  respondent  on
    28th March 2013 and that application was also rejected on  19th  April,
    2013, because no fee  had  been  paid  and  the  application  form  was
    incomplete.  On 11th May, 2013 the respondent submitted an  application
    to the claimant for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
    a bereaved partner.

5.   Since there was no  evidence  within  the  claimant's  records  of  the
    respondent ever having had lawful leave to remain since the  expiry  of
    her leave to enter as a visitor, the claimant considered the respondent
    to be an overstayer.

6.   On 6th March, 2014, the claimant wrote to the respondent  refusing  the
    respondent's application for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as a bereaved partner and serving on her  notice  IS151A.   The
    claimant did not believe that refusing the respondent's application for
    leave would place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under
    section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  and  gave  directions  for  the
    appellant's removal under Section 10A of Schedule 2 of the  Immigration
    Act 1971.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

7.   The respondent appealed this decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik  in  Manchester
    on 16th July, 2014.  The judge noted that the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph BPILR.1.1(d) and having  noted  that  the
    respondent had spent the majority of her adult life in Ghana, concluded
    that the respondent did not meet paragraph 276ADE.  Having set out  the
    requirements of EX.1 the  judge  noted  that  the  respondent  and  her
    partner intended to marry and that they  had  been  together  for  just
    under eight years.  She was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  and  her
    partner were in a  loving  and  committed  relationship  and  that  the
    respondent was involved in the life of the child of  her  partner  with
    whom she lives.  The child was 15 years of age and about  to  take  her
    examinations.  In paragraph 28 of  her  determination  the  judge  said
    this:

         "The [respondent's] partner and his child  cannot  be  required  to
         return to Ghana with the [respondent] as they are British citizens;
         there is no evidence before me that they have ever  been  to  Ghana
         and they are not of Ghanaian origin.  In these circumstances  I  do
         not find that it would be reasonable or in the  best  interests  of
         the child to expect them to leave the UK at  this  point  in  their
         lives  to  live  in  Ghana  and  I  find  that   there   would   be
         insurmountable obstacles to the family life  they  share  with  the
         [respondent] continuing in Ghana, as it was  the  evidence  of  the
         [respondent] and  the  other  witnesses  that  she  has  no  family
         remaining there and consequently no family support.  She  has  been
         absent from Ghana since 2001.  As such the [respondent] her partner
         and his child would be required to live in a country in which there
         is no evidence that they have  a  home,  jobs  or  family  support.
         Further it was the evidence of the  [respondent]  and  her  partner
         that  there  had  been   previous   proceedings   to   enable   the
         [respondent's] partner's  child  to  reside  with  him,  which  the
         [respondent] says she did before the [respondent] and  Mr  Cunliffe
         became partners; but that the child  still  has  supervised  access
         with her mother.  I find that this would not  be  possible  if  the
         child was to live in Ghana or it would at the very  least  severely
         restrict what access could take place between  the  child  and  her
         mother from such distance."

     The judge went on to find that it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
    three of them to continue their family life in Ghana, nor would  it  be
    in the best interests of the child to go to Ghana with  the  respondent
    and the child's father.  She found that it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the respondent's partner to go to Ghana without  the  child  and
    for these reasons found that the exception  in  EX.1  applied  in  this
    case.

8.   The claimant challenged the decision on the basis that Section EX.1  is
    not  freestanding  and  that  if  the  respondent  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules,  then  compelling  circumstances
    had to be established for the  purposes  of  Article  8.   The  grounds
    suggest that the Tribunal failed to provide adequate  reasons  why  the
    respondent's circumstances are either  compelling  or  exceptional  and
    that there was no reason why the respondent should not return to  Ghana
    to seek entry clearance, given her failure to regularise her stay  and,
    "her blatant disregard for immigration law".

9.   Ms Johnstone relied on Sabir (Appendix  FM  -  EX.1  not  freestanding)
    [2014] UKUT 0063 (IAC) and suggested  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the public interest, the fact that the respondent cannot  meet
    the requirements of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    proportionality involved in the respondent returning to Ghana to  apply
    for leave to return to the United Kingdom.  For  the  respondent,  Miss
    Patel suggested that under EX.1(b) which the judge had considered,  the
    exception at E-LTRP.2.2 was applicable and the case of Sabir  fails  to
    take account of this.   There  are  insurmountable  obstacles  in  this
    appeal in that the respondent's partner's  daughter  cannot  leave  the
    jurisdiction because her mother has a contact order.

10.  When the judge heard this case Section 19 of the Immigration  Act  2014
    was not in force.   As  a  result  the  judge  has  not  mentioned  the
    eligibility or suitability requirements.

11.  Counsel suggested that this should be considered outside the  Rules  in
    accordance with MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  Counsel agreed  that
    there was no further evidence which needed to  be  called  and  that  I
    could correct the determination.  She accepted that  Section  117B  was
    relevant and told me that the determination contains all  the  relevant
    evidence.  She submitted that it would be  disproportionate  to  remove
    the respondent and for her to apply for  entry  clearance.   Responding
    briefly Ms Johnstone reminded me that the respondent's partner's  child
    lived with her father on their own before the  respondent  joined  him.
    So  far  as  EX.1(B)  was  concerned  it  was  for  the  respondent  to
    demonstrate that here were insurmountable obstacles to family life with
    her partner  continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom.   Ms  Johnstone
    suggested that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  and  that  the
    respondent could make an application as a spouse.

12.  It is accepted that the respondent cannot meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Ms Patel urged me to find that there was  no  error
    in the determination but it is clear to me from Sabir  that  the  judge
    did err in treating Section  EX.1  as  freestanding.   What  the  judge
    should have done is to go  on  and  consider  whether  there  were  any
    compelling exceptional circumstances outwith the Immigration Rules such
    as would permit the judge to allow the appeal under Article 8.

13.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The respondent
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the claimant will interfere with it.  If he does so, it
    is for the claimant to show that the decision is in accordance with the
    law, that it is one of the legitimate purposes set out in Article  8(2)
    in this case for the  economic  well-being  of  the  country,  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others, and  that  it  is  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

14.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"
14.  I am satisfied that the respondent does enjoy a family  life  with  her
    husband and the respondent's decision does amount  to  an  interference
    with it.  I believe that such interference does  have  consequences  of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8;  the
    threshold for which is not especially high (see  paragraph  28  of  the
    judgement of Sedley LJ in AG (Eritrea) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 801).
15.  In the leading case of Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11,  [2007]  2AC  167  Lord
    Bingham said at paragraph 20:
           "In an article 8 case where this question [i.e. the question  of
           proportionality] is  reached,  the  ultimate  question  for  the
           appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal of  leave
           to enter or remain, in  circumstances  where  the  life  of  the
           family cannot reasonably be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,
           taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour  of
           the refusal, prejudices to the family life of the applicant in a
           manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
           fundamental right protected by article 8. If the answer to  this
           question  is  affirmative,  the  refusal  is  unlawful  and  the
           authority must so decide."
16.  The interference is in accordance with the law and is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the economic well-being of the country  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others; the question is whether or not interference  is
    proportionate.  I have to bear in mind in considering the  respondent's
    Article 8 appeal the fact that there is only one family life  and  that
    it is necessary to look at the family as a whole  and  to  regard  each
    affected family member as a fiction (see  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39). I must also have  regard
    to the best interests children in the way required by paragraph  29  of
    the  judgements  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.   There  are   no
    considerations inherently more significant that the best  interests  of
    the children although in this appeal the respondent  herself  does  not
    have any.  However, I  do  have  to  consider  the  respondent's  step-
    daughter with whom the respondent's husband has a contact order.
17.  If the respondent were to return to  Ghana  and  make  application  for
    entry clearance that would inevitably cause her and  her  husband  some
    temporary hardship.  It is likely that her application would have to be
    referred to London and that may  cause  delay.   However,  her  husband
    could of course visit her in Ghana as often  as  he  chose  to  in  the
    interim, without causing very much disturbance  to  his  contact  order
    with  his  daughter  and  any  delay  in  processing  the  respondent's
    application would be likely  to  involve  weeks  and  possibly  months,
    rather than years.  I do not believe that  it  would  unduly  harsh  on
    either the respondent or her  British  husband  in  the  circumstances.
    Whilst I accept that the respondent's husband's daughter will miss  the
    respondent, I do not believe that the respondent's  absence  will  have
    any long term or  lasting  adverse  affect  on  her  and  certainly  no
    evidence has been offered to suggest otherwise.
18.  The respondent has been in the United Kingdom without leave  since  her
    six month visa expired in 2001.  I believe that it  would  be  entirely
    proportionate to expect the respondent to  return  to  Ghana  and  make
    application for entry clearance in the normal way.   I  have  concluded
    therefore that there are no compelling exceptional circumstances  which
    would  permit  me  to  allow  the  respondent's  appeal   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.
19.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  I set aside the decision.  My  decision  is  that  the
    respondent's appeal be dismissed.


     Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
