
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14459/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2016                  |On 16 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                              NOMAN AHMED KHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by A-R Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rastogi  promulgated  on  8  January  2016.  The  appellant,   who   is
    represented today by Mr Khan,  neither  appeared  nor  was  represented
    before the First-tier Tribunal. He is a citizen of Pakistan born on  11
    January 1984 and had applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student on 20 July 2014.  There is an  error  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    decision  in  that  it  refers  to  the  notice  from  the  immigration
    department as being dated 4 September 2013 whereas it was  in  fact  31
    March 2015.  It is accepted by both representatives that  this  is  the
    correct date and that nothing turns on the typographical error  in  the
    determination.

2.   What appears to be the  case  is  that  an  earlier  student  visa  was
    granted to appellant  on  the  basis  that  he  was  to  study  at  the
    Birmingham Education Academy.  The current application was refused  was
    on the basis that the appellant claimed he would  be  studying  at  ISA
    Education (for which he did not have a CAS). Further, in breach of  the
    terms of his previous visa he had not in  fact  been  studying  at  the
    Birmingham Education Academy, but at ISA Education.

3.   The judge considered the matter fully and came to the  conclusion  that
    the appeal must fail in consequence of both the absence of  a  CAS  and
    also the breach of the previous visa.

4.   The substantive ground upon which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted
    turned on an allegation that the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to  have
    followed her standing policy and sent what is called a "60 day  letter"
    to the appellant informing him that the  licence  for  the  institution
    where  he  was  studying  had  been  revoked  and  affording  him   the
    opportunity of securing another CAS.

5.   It is  clear  having  considered  the  evidence,  and  is  very  fairly
    conceded by Mr Khan on his client's behalf,  that  notwithstanding  the
    allegation made in the  appellant's  witness  statement  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that  the  licence  for  the  Birmingham  Education
    Academy was  revoked  and  it  follows  that  there  was  therefore  no
    requirement upon the Secretary of State to issue a 60 day letter.

6.   In order for any appeal to succeed in the Upper Tribunal, what must  be
    demonstrated is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Having listened with care to the submissions made by  Mr
    Khan, I am not persuaded that there is an error of law in the  way  the
    First-tier Judge dealt with this matter and in the  circumstances  this
    appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

Appeal must be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     16 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

