
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/14705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8th May 2015                          |On 18th June 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Stephen Mwanza
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lay, Counsel instructed by


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Mr Stephen Mwanza date of birth 8th December 1983 is  a
    citizen of Zambia.  Having considered all the circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [SSHD]  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oakley
    promulgated on 23rd December 2014 whereby the judge allowed Mr Mwanza's
    [the Respondent herein], appeal against the decisions of the SSHD dated
    14th March 2014. The decisions by the SSHD refused  Mr  Mwanza  further
    leave to remain in the UK and determined to remove him from the UK.

 3. Mr Mwanza was seeking leave on the basis of ten years lawful residence.
    Before me it was agreed between the parties that  the  sole  matter  in
    issue was whether Judge Oakley had addressed his mind to the period  of
    31st October 2005 to 2nd  March  2006  and  made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant had lawful leave for that period of time, whether  by  reason
    of a concession or otherwise.

 4. Whilst a number of other issues had  been  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, those were no longer being pursued  by  the  SSHD  and  it  was
    accepted that judge had not  made  a  material  error  of  law  in  his
    assessment of whether the appellant  had  lawful  leave  save  for  the
    period of the 31st October 2005 to 2nd March 2006.  It  is  the  SSHD's
    case that there was a break in the lawful leave of Mr  Mwanza  of  more
    than 125 days.

 5. The Home Office Policy Guidance on Long Residence permits breaks in the
    lawfulness of the residence for up  to  28  days  but  not  for  longer
    periods.

 6. On behalf of Mr Mwanza it was submitted that by reference to paragraphs
    3 and 31 of the decision it had been accepted that  the  appellant  had
    had leave from 21 October 2003 until he lodged his  application  on  18
    July 2013. Mr Mwanza's representative, who  had  been  present  at  the
    First-tier hearing, stated that it had  been  conceded  by  the  SSHD's
    representative at that hearing that Mr Mwanza had had valid  leave  for
    that period of time. There is no  reference  to  a  concession  in  the
    decision. Nor does there appear to be any reference to a concession  in
    the notes of evidence.

 7. In paragraph 3 of the decision the judge refers to the decision of  the
    SSHD and states that it was acknowledged in the Letter of Refusal  that
    Mr Mwanza had leave throughout. The Refusal  Letter  clearly  does  not
    accept that the appellant had lawful leave between  31st  October  2005
    and 2nd March 2006. The details in the letter of refusal are on page  3
    of 7.

 8. The chronology according to the Reasons for Refusal Letter was that the
    appellant had been granted leave on 24 November 2004 as a  student  and
    that leave was a valid until 31 October 2005. However the appellant did
    not make a further application until 16 December 2005 by which time his
    leave had already expired. Once his leave had expired  he  was  without
    leave until further leave was granted, which was on 2nd March 2006.

 9. Mr Mwanza's representative submitted  that  the  full  history  of  the
    applications  had  been  before  the   First-tier   Judge   and   after
    consideration of that full history it had been conceded by  the  SSHD's
    representative that Mr Mwanza had had leave during the period  of  time
    indicated. Nowhere does such a concession appear in the decision.

10. Such a concession has not been acknowledged within the decision nor  in
    the notes of evidence. Rather Judge Oakley had referred to  the  letter
    of refusal as if it had been accepted that that period was  covered  by
    lawful residence. That is not what the letter of refusal states.

11. If a concession was made  then  I  am  not  going  to  go  behind  that
    concession but that it is a matter to be  clarified  by  Judge  Oakley.
    Judge Oakley can confirm whether such a concession  was  made.  If  the
    concession was made them there is no ground upon which  Judge  Oakley's
    decision can be challenged further. If the concession was  never  made,
    there is still an issue to be decided whether or not there was a  break
    in the continuity of lawful leave.

12. This appeal is to be considered further by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oakley, who  has:-

         To address the issue of whether a concession was made or whether he
         has found that the Appellant had lawful leave between 31st  October
         2005 and 2nd March 2006 and had not  contrary  to  the  HO  refusal
         letter overstayed for any period in 2005/2006.

         And to clarify the basis of such finding namely whether there was a
         concession by the Home Office Presenting Officer to that effect  or
         whether there was any other basis for so finding.

13. I allow the appeal to the limited extent that there is an issue of fact
    which the judge may or may not have decided and it is for Judge  Oakley
    to make clear as set out above whether that  issue  of  fact  has  been
    decided and on what basis it was decided.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
