
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14416/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2013                             |On 11 February 2014.         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MS ANGELA WANGESHI GATHERU

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent to this appeal, Ms Gatheru, is  a  Kenyan  national  who
    was born in November 1975.   In  February  2013  she  made  a  combined
    application  for  leave  to  remain  in  this  country  as  a  Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based  system  and  for   a
    biometric residence permit.  The decision was made on 20 April 2013 and
    her application was refused.  Essentially, the refusal was based upon a
    failure to produce some of the documents which were needed in order  to
    comply with the somewhat detailed appendices to the relevant Rules  and
    also there was a failure to comply with the  provision  of  a  document
    which was an original as opposed to a copy and a failure  to  sign  all
    the pages of another.  We will come to full details in a moment.

2.   The respondent herself has a contract with a firm  of  solicitors,  she
    having qualifications  in  California  which  are  recognised  in  this
    country and that contract was produced.  However, it ought to have been
    signed on every page and it was not and that was one  of  the  failures
    which was relied on.  It was not contended at any stage that  this  was
    other than a genuine application in the sense that the contract  was  a
    genuine contract and it simply needed to be authenticated  in  the  way
    that was required by the particular Rule.  She qualified on  the  basis
    of the necessary financial requirements.  We do not  need  to  go  into
    those in any way at this stage.

3.   She failed to provide an original document which  ought  to  have  been
    provided in relation to the qualification certificate.  Again,  it  was
    not contended and never has been contended that,  albeit  the  original
    was not produced, it was not a genuine  qualification.   There  was  an
    error there.

4.   Perhaps the most substantial error relied on was a failure  to  produce
    what is described as advertising or marketing material in the  form  of
    personal registration with a trades body, in this case  of  course  the
    Law society which regulates solicitors.  The existence of the  contract
    and the other material indicated on its face that she did  qualify  and
    she  would  be  able  to  produce  that  material  to   establish   the
    qualification if she had been asked to do so.

5.   Now it is true that applicants for  leave  to  remain  are  told  quite
    clearly that it is up to them to produce  all  the  material  that  the
    Rules require.  This can be somewhat complicated but there  is  a  good
    reason why these requirements  are  there  because  there  are  a  very
    substantial number of these applications which have to be dealt with by
    the relevant Immigration Officer and it makes his or her task that much
    more  difficult  if  all  the  relevant  material  is   not   produced.
    Accordingly, there is no ground at all to  criticise  the  requirements
    which are set out  in  detail  in  the  Rules.   However,  it  must  be
    recognised that there are going to  be  cases  where  there  have  been
    omissions  which  are  accidental  and  which  are   perhaps   somewhat
    insubstantial.  The circumstances of this case indicate that this looks
    like a thoroughly genuine application and the omissions which have been
    identified could be cured.  And so it is  that  at  the  material  time
    there was in being what  is  described  as  an  evidential  flexibility
    policy.  I am told that there was a policy which  existed  until  March
    2013 and indeed was considered  in  a  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in
    Rodriguez v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  decided  in
    October 2012, promulgated  in  January  of  this  year  by  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey and Judge Spencer.  We are told that that particular decision
    is  under  appeal  but  we  do  not  think  it  is  necessary  in   the
    circumstances to go into it.  We are content to rely upon the existence
    of the policy as at April 2013.  In fact that policy apparently  lasted
    for two months because in May it was abolished and  we  are  told  that
    there is now no substantial flexibility policy in being.   However,  we
    have to approach the matter on the basis of the situation as it existed
    in April 2013.

6.   When the matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  appeal  the
    appellant as she then was had produced all the necessary material which
    should be permitted.  This led the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  decide
    that she did qualify.  Unfortunately  that  decision  was  contrary  to
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act in that it was the production  of  material
    which was  not  produced  before  the  decision  maker  and  which  was
    therefore not admissible in the circumstances on appeal.   Accordingly,
    for that reason alone the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law.

7.   However, as we will make clear, that omission does  not  mean  that  we
    are bound to allow the appeal and remit the matter.  The fact  is  that
    the decision maker in this case did not purport to have regard  to  the
    evidential  flexibility  policy  at  all.   It  is  to  be  noted  that
    incorporated into that policy is an  indication  as  to  the  documents
    which it might be appropriate to request in relation  to  the  relevant
    application and in all cases missing academic certificates and evidence
    that is copied instead of an original are possible candidates.  So  far
    as entrepreneurs are concerned missing information  from  the  required
    document is again a candidate as is evidence that is copied instead  of
    an original.  Now so far as not signing every page of the  contract  is
    concerned, that clearly on the face of it would be covered  by  missing
    information from a required document and the  failure  to  provide  the
    original document is clearly covered in both of the documents to  which
    reference  is  there  made.   However,  the  obtaining  of   additional
    information is dealt with in the policy in this way.  It said that  the
    decision maker must only  request  additional  information  in  certain
    circumstances which would lead to the approval of the  application  and
    before requesting any additional evidence the decision maker must  have
    sufficient reason to believe the information exists.  Then examples are
    given which are said to include, but not to be limited to, missing bank
    statements from a series; evidence that shows  specific  qualifications
    have been provided before,  for  example  in  a  previous  application;
    evidence detailed on  a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  or
    Certificate of Sponsorship is missing; name deposits on bank statements
    from an employer who had no wage slips provided and  then  it  is  said
    "for  more  information  see  related  link  -  evidential  flexibility
    documents which it may be appropriate to request for each Tier."  Those
    are the documents to which we have already referred.

8.   So far as the missing advertising material  etc.  is  concerned  it  is
    argued by Mr Jarvis that the omission is not one which  could  properly
    be regarded as falling within the ambit of the  evidential  flexibility
    policy because it was substantial evidence that was required.  However,
    it was clear on the face of it from the contract  with  the  solicitors
    that she was likely to be, and indeed would have to be a member  of  or
    approved by the  Law  Society  in  order  to  practise  in  a  firm  of
    solicitors in this country.  Accordingly, it  was  highly  likely  that
    this was an error which  was  capable  of  being  dealt  with  and  the
    necessary documentation could be, as indeed it subsequently  has,  been
    provided.  It seems to us that on the facts of this case and we make it
    clear that we are concerned only with  the  facts  of  this  case,  the
    missing material was such as could properly and  should  properly  have
    fallen within  the  flexibility  policy  and  so  it  would  have  been
    necessary for the decision maker before rejecting  the  application  to
    have requested the missing documentation.  Two of them, that is the not
    signing every page and not providing the original, without  doubt  fell
    within the policy.  There is as we have said in argument in relation to
    the other missing material but for reasons we have  indicated  we  take
    the view that it did fall on the face of it within the  policy  and  at
    the very least there should have been consideration given to whether  a
    request for further information was  appropriate.   Since  it  was  not
    considered and since any sensible decision would have led to a  request
    for the further information we are satisfied that the original decision
    by the Secretary of State was wrong.

9.   It is now accepted based upon the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    which have not been challenged  that  the  respondent  to  this  appeal
    qualifies.  In those circumstances in our judgment there is no need  to
    remit this matter.  What the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have done
    was to base his decision as we have done on the failure to have  regard
    to the flexibility policy.  If he had done that having  regard  to  the
    material that was produced he would  inevitably  have  found  that  the
    appeal would be allowed.  That being so we approach it in the way  that
    he should have approached it and in the way which in  our  judgment  is
    the correct way and reach the conclusion that the  respondent's  appeal
    against the original decision was  one  which  should  have  succeeded.
    Accordingly, and for those reasons, we dismiss the Secretary of State's
    appeal in this case.






Signed   pp                             Dated:  10 February 2014

Dictated as an extempore judgement by
Mr Justice Collins
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal on 2 October 2013


