
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14617/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 October 2016                           |On 24 October 2016             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr SOHAIL BASHIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr R. Benton, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Afako sitting at Taylor  House  on  8
    April 2016) allowing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse to issue  him  with  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the extended family member
    ("EFM" or "OFM") of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 September 2016  Judge  Saffer  granted  permission  because  Sala
    (EFMS: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) decided that  there  is
    no right of appeal for an EFM. He  added  that  "all  grounds"  may  be
    argued.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to decide whether an error  of  law  was  made
    out, I heard argument on Sala and on the main ground of appeal advanced
    in the permission application, which was that the judge  had  erred  in
    law in finding that the claimant was an EFM as the judge had not made a
    finding on whether his brother had acquired his EAA nationality  before
    the claimant arrived in the UK as a student.

 4. Mr Benton applied for the hearing to be adjourned on two  grounds.  The
    first was that it remained to be seen whether Sala would be  upheld  by
    the Court of Appeal. The second was that he wished to persuade the Home
    Office that the refusal was flawed. I refused to grant  an  adjournment
    as Mr Bramble was content to pursue his error of law challenge  on  the
    merits, and he submitted that I was not bound to follow Sala.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

Prior Dependency on an EEA National

 5. In Ihemedu (OFMs - in meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340  (IAC)  Senior
    Immigration Judge Storey, as he then was, gave the  following  guidance
    which is quoted at sub-paragraph 2 of the head note:

         An important consideration in the context of an OFM/extended family
         member case is that if a  claimant  had  come  to  the  UK  without
         applying for a family permit from abroad ..., this will  mean  that
         the  UK  authorities  have  been  prevented  from  conducting   the
         extensive examination of the  individual's  personal  circumstances
         envisaged by Reg 12(3) and in the course  of  such  an  examination
         check the documentation submitted.  If an applicant chooses not  to
         apply from abroad for a family permit under  Reg  12  of  the  2006
         Regulations, thereby denying the UK authorities an  opportunity  to
         check documentation in the country concerned, he cannot expect  any
         relaxation in the burden of proof that applies to him when  seeking
         to establish an EEA right" (my emphasis).

 6. In the same case, Judge Storey noted  at  paragraph  [4]  that  Article
    10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive stipulated  that  in  cases  falling
    under Article 3(2)(a), which deals with OFMs, applicants  must  produce
    "a document issued by the relevant authority in the country  of  origin
    or country from which  they  are  arriving  certifying  that  they  are
    dependants or members of the household of the union citizen ...".

 7. The same observation was made in Moneke (EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) at paragraph [42]:

         We note further that Article 10(2)(e)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
         contemplates documentary evidence.  Whether dependency  could  ever
         be proved by oral testimony alone is not something that we have  to
         decide in this case, but Article 10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that  the
         responsibility is on the applicant  to  satisfy  the  Secretary  of
         State by cogent evidence that is in part documented  (my  emphasis)
         and can be tested as to whether the level of material support,  its
         duration and its impact upon the applicant combined  together  meet
         the  material definition of dependency.

 8. Moneke also affirmed the following at paragraph [40]:

         ii   In either case the dependency of membership of  the  household
             must be on a person who is an EEA  national  at  the  material
             time. Thus  dependency  or  membership  of  a  household  that
             preceded the sponsor becoming an EEA  national  would  not  be
             sufficient.

 9. As submitted by Mr Bramble, Judge Afako clearly misdirected himself  in
    law on the issue of prior  dependency/membership  of  a  household.  At
    paragraph [7] he said that the critical evidential question was whether
    the claimant and his brother were "once  again"  members  of  the  same
    household as they were in Pakistan. This was the  wrong  question.  The
    right question was whether,  prior  to  his  arrival  in  the  UK,  the
    claimant had been dependent on a family member (i.e. his  brother)  who
    had acquired status as an EEA national.

10. The judge failed to make a finding on when the brother became an  Irish
    national, and so there was no evidential basis for the finding that the
    claimant met the requirement of either prior dependency  on,  or  prior
    membership of the household of, an EEA national.

11. So the decision is vitiated by a material error of law,  such  that  it
    must be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

12. The evidence presented by Mr Benton pursuant to Rule 15(2A) shows  that
    the brother acquired Irish, and hence EEA, nationality  on  21  October
    2013. This was long after the claimant entered the UK as a student.

13. It is clear from Regulation 8(2)(a) that in order to qualify as an  EFM
    the claimant needed to have resided in a country "other than the United
    Kingdom" when either a dependent upon his EEA  national  sponsor  or  a
    member of his household.

14. The claimant does not satisfy this requirement. So  the  claimant  does
    not qualify as an EFM, and there is no prospect whatsoever of his legal
    representatives persuading the Secretary of  State  that  the  decision
    appealed against is flawed.

15. Mr Benton urged me to consider  the  corresponding  provisions  in  the
    Citizen's Directive. But  these  do  not  avail  the  claimant,  as  is
    apparent from paragraphs 5 to 7 above.

Right of Appeal?

16. The ratio decidendi of Sala is that a decision taken by  the  Secretary
    of State "in the exercise of her discretion" not to issue an EFM with a
    residence card is not an appealable decision under the EEA  Regulations
    2006.  But the respondent did not purport to exercise discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) and the parties proceeded on  a  common  understanding
    that what was in issue in this appeal  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
    anterior decision not to recognise the claimant as an EFM.

17. The Tribunal in Sala held that such a decision  is  not  an  appealable
    decision as it does not meet the  definition  of  an  EEA  decision  in
    Regulation 2(1) which  is  that  the  decision  "concerns"  a  person's
    entitlement to be issued with a residence card, whereas deciding that a
    person is not an EFM is not a decision which concerns  his  entitlement
    to be issued with a residence card. It seems to me that the contrary is
    arguable, and that the rationale for the decision is in  conflict  with
    some of the reasoning of the Tribunal in earlier cases such as Moneke.

18. The contrary argument has the merit of not driving  the  claimant  from
    the judgment seat, and as I am able to decide  this  appeal  in  a  way
    which reaches the same outcome (dismissal), I decline to follow Sala.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by a material error  of
law and accordingly the decision is set aside and the following decision  is
substituted: this appeal under the Regulations 2006 is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson           24 October 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson           24 October 2016
