
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14885/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 January 2014                             |On 16 January 2014           |
|Prepared 8 January 2014                       |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          ms ngozi blessing udemba

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ronald Layne, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                    Harrison Morgan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant made an  application  for  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  on  24  December
    2011 on the basis that she had married an EEA national, Mr Linhart, who
    was exercising Treaty rights in Britain.   The  marriage  was  a  proxy
    marriage which had been conducted in Nigeria.

2.   The application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  the  basis
    that the marriage was not valid as it had been carried out by proxy and
    the marriage certificate produced by the appellant  was  therefore  not
    considered to be evidence  that  the  appellant  and  Mr  Linhart  were
    related as  claimed.   The  application  was  therefore  refused  under
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

3.   The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Murray and allowed in a determination promulgated  on  23
    October 2012.

4.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal and the  matter
    then came before me on 8 October 2013.  Having heard  submissions  from
    both parties, I decided that there were material errors of law  in  the
    decision of Judge Murray and gave my reasons in  a  decision  dated  21
    October 2013, at the end of which I set out directions for the  further
    conduct of the appeal.

5.   I wrote as follows:-

         "1.  The Secretary of State, with permission,  appeals,  against  a
             decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray who  in  a
             determination promulgated  on  23  October  2012  allowed  the
             appeal of Ms Ngozi Blessing Udemba against a decision  of  the
             Secretary of State to refuse to  issue  a  residence  card  as
             confirmation of her right to remain in Britain as  the  spouse
             of an EEA national.


         2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before  me  I
             will for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent  as
             she was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.   Similarly
             although Ms Ngozi Blessing Udemba is the respondent before  me
             I will again for  ease  of  reference  refer  to  her  as  the
             appellant as she  was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant entered Britain in September 2009 with leave  to
             remain as a student until January 2012.  Her  application  for
             the residence card was made on 24 December 2011.   In  support
             of her application she provided the Czech passport of Jaroslav
             Linhart, a Czech national, a  document  relating  to  her  own
             divorce in Nigeria, wage slips of Mr Linhart, a bank statement
             and photographs as well as  a  Nigerian  marriage  certificate
             which indicated that she and Mr Linhart had been  married,  by
             proxy, in Nigeria.


         4.   The application was refused,  the  writer  of  the  letter  of
             refusal stating that:-


                  'UKBA is aware that paragraph 24.23  of  the  COIS  Report
                  Nigeria states that:


                      "The  United  States  State  Department   Reciprocity
                      Schedule,  in  an   undated   section   on   marriage
                      certificates in the country accessed  on  17  October
                      2011, recorded that:


                           '...both parties to the marriage technically must
                           be physically present at the same  location  with
                           witnesses to  sign  certain  marriage  documents,
                           proxy marriages have ceased to be valid but still
                           occur'.


                      You  have  submitted  a  marriage  certificate  which
                      states that you were married  to  your  EEA  national
                      sponsor in Nigeria on 15 November 2011.  Whilst is it
                      noted that this is a customary  marriage  certificate
                      it is also noted that this has  been carried  out  by
                      proxy.   For  this  reason  UKBA  cannot  accept  the
                      marriage   certificate   as    evidence    of    your
                      relationship.  On that  basis  your  application  has
                      been refused under Regulation 7  of  the  Immigration
                      (EEA) Regulations 2006."'


              The notice of immigration decision stated that:-

                  'You have applied for a residence card as confirmation  of
                  a right of residence  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
                  national who is a qualified person, but you have failed to
                  produce satisfactory evidence  that  you  are  related  as
                  claimed to an EEA national.   Your  application  has  also
                  been considered under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Act.
                  After careful consideration of your case we are  satisfied
                  that this decision does not represent a breach of  Article
                  8 of your human rights.


                  You do not have a basis of  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
                  2006.'


         5.   It is of note that the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  relies  on
             only one issue: that is that the marriage could not  be  valid
             as it was a proxy marriage.


         6.   I would comment that there does not appear to be any  evidence
             from Mr Linhart although, of course, wage slips were  produced
             and he may have signed the  declaration  at  the  end  of  the
             application.


         7.   There is an 'affidavit of  confirmation  of  marriage  between
             Jaroslav Linhart and Ngozi Blessing Udemba' which claims to be
             made by Mrs  Linhortova  and  Mrs  Etoniru  in  Enugu  Central
             Government area of Enegu State in Nigeria and states that  'we
             are legitimate parent of Jaroslav Linhart and  Ngozi  Blessing
             Udemba'.  The affidavit goes on to say  that  'their  marriage
             was celebrated in our presence and that of  concerned  members
             from the families of both spouses who witnessed the payment of
             full dowry'.  There is no  evidence  that  that  assertion  is
             correct - there is nothing to indicate that Mrs Linhortova was
             present in Nigeria  let  alone  that  the  'families  of  both
             spouses had witnessed the payment of the full dowry there'.


         8.   The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray
             at Newport in October 2012.  It appears  to  have  been  dealt
             with on the papers by Judge Murray and therefore there was  no
             evidence from either Mr  Linhart  or  the  appellant  and  the
             appellant was not subjected to cross-examination.  The reality
             is that there has never been any appearance by Mr Linhart.


         9.   The judge had to deal with the issues before her  taking  into
             account the reasons given by the respondent for  refusing  the
             application as well as the  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  on
             behalf of the appellant.  The grounds  of  appeal  before  her
             stated that human rights and the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
             2006 had not been properly considered, pointing out  that  the
             Secretary of State  had  based  the  reasons  for  refusal  on
             paragraph 24.23 of the COIS Report in  Nigeria  which  was  in
             relation to the  Nigerian  Civil  Marriage  Act  and  not  the
             Customary Marriage Act and that the appellant had conducted  a
             customary rather than a registry marriage with her husband and
             had  produced  a  customary  marriage  certificate  under  the
             Nigerian Marriage Act 1990.  They asserted that  the  Nigerian
             COI Report indicated that  a  marriage  was  valid  where  two
             parties had agreed to enter into the union and that  could  be
             done through either civil customary court or a licensed  place
             of worship.  The grounds refer to the Nigerian COI Report of 6
             April 2011 which stated at paragraph 24.19 that:

                  'In an e-mail from the British High Commission in Abuja to
                  the UKBA of December 2008 states "although proxy marriages
                  are not recognised  under  Nigerian  civil  law  they  are
                  allowed under customary law".'


             The grounds went on to state:-


                  '8.  It is submitted that appellant's  Customary  Marriage
                      to his wife is  derived  from  paragraph  35  of  the
                      Marriage Act of Nigerian Native Law and Custom.


                  9.   The appellant confirms that both her and her  husband
                      were not physically present at their wedding  however
                      they were both  represented  by  their  close  family
                      relatives in accordance with the  Customary  Marriage
                      Act  'proxy'.   The  Customary  Marriage  Certificate
                      submitted is valid.


                  10.  It is  submitted  that  under  the  Marriage  Act  of
                      Nigerian Native Law and Custom, the  parties  to  the
                      marriage need not be present at the ceremony and  can
                      be represented by their family members.  See attached
                      Customary Marriage Certificate and Affidavit.'


             The grounds then dealt with the issue of  the  rights  of  the
             appellant and her husband under Article 8 of the ECHR.


         10.  The judge considered the evidence before her before stating in
             paragraphs 12 onwards:-

                  '12. According to Regulation 7 of the  EEA  Regulations  a
                      spouse is a family member for  the  purposes  of  the
                      Regulations.  The only further definition  of  spouse
                      in the EEA Regulations is  that  the  word  does  not
                      include  a  party  to  a  marriage   of   convenience
                      (Regulation 2).


                  13.  A marriage is formally valid when it is celebrated in
                      accordance with the form required  or  recognised  as
                      sufficient by the law of the  country  in  which  the
                      marriage is celebrated (see Dicey  &  Morris  on  The
                      Conflict of  Laws,  Sweet  and  Maxwell  2006).   The
                      Respondent's IDIs  state  at  Chapter  8,  section  1
                      paragraph 3.1 that  where  the  law  of  the  country
                      requires a ceremony, and a ceremony takes place  with
                      the participation of a proxy in  that  country,  then
                      the country where the marriage is celebrated  is  the
                      country in  which  the  marriage  occurred,  not  the
                      country from which the proxy  was  appointed  by  the
                      sponsor.  In the case of CB  (Validity  of  marriage:
                      proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKIAT   00080   the
                      Tribunal  held  that  there  was  no   exception   in
                      immigration   cases   to   the   rule   of    private
                      international law that the validity of a marriage  is
                      governed by the lex  loci  celebrations  and  on  the
                      authority of Apt v Apt [1948] P 83 there is no reason
                      in public policy  to  deny  recognition  to  a  proxy
                      marriage.


                  14.  According to the Respondent's  SET  3.18  which  also
                      deals with marriages  by  proxy,  marriage  by  proxy
                      should be considered as having been celebrated in the
                      country in which the ceremony  took  place.   If  the
                      first two questions in SET 3.4 are  answered  in  the
                      affirmative and the last in  the  negative  then  the
                      marriage will be valid.  Those three  questions  are:
                      is the marriage one  recognised  in  the  country  in
                      which it took place; was the actual marriage properly
                      executed so as to satisfy the requirements of the law
                      of the country in which it took place and  was  there
                      anything in the law  of  either  party's  country  of
                      domicile which  restricted  his  or  her  freedom  to
                      marry?


                  15.  The Appellant has provided evidence  in  relation  to
                      the validity of  proxy  marriages  in  Nigeria.   The
                      Appellant's submissions at page 4 of the  Appellant's
                      bundle state that the Nigerian Marriage  Act  chapter
                      218 (submitted) and the Nigerian COI  Service  Report
                      indicate that a marriage is valid  when  two  parties
                      have agreed to enter into the Union and this  can  be
                      done through either a Civil,  Customary  Court  or  a
                      licensed place of worship.


                  16.   The  Appellant  has  produced  a  section  from  the
                      Nigerian Marriage  Act  at  page  17  of  her  appeal
                      bundle.  There is no prohibition under  that  Act  on
                      customary marriages.  According to  the  Respondent's
                      COIR paragraph 24.19  produced  at  the  end  of  the
                      Appellant's bundle, in an email from the British High
                      Commission in Abuda to the UKBA of 1 December 2008 it
                      was stated that: "...Although proxy marriages are not
                      recognised under Nigerian civil law, they are allowed
                      under  customary  law".   I  am  satisfied  on   this
                      evidence that a  proxy  marriage  is  valid  for  the
                      purposes of Nigerian customary law.  The first of the
                      three questions  in  the  IDIs  is  therefore  to  be
                      answered  in  the  affirmative  as  the  marriage  is
                      recognised in the country in which it took place.


                  17.  The Appellant has produced a certificate of customary
                      marriage at page 14 of the Appellant's bundle.  It is
                      issued by the Federal Republic of Nigeria and stamped
                      by a district registry.  I am satisfied  that  it  is
                      properly executed so  to  satisfy  the  laws  of  the
                      country in which it took  place.   There  is  nothing
                      before me to suggest that there is  anything  in  the
                      law of either party's country of domicile to restrict
                      them from marrying.  I therefore  conclude  that  the
                      Appellant has entered into a valid  marriage  and  is
                      therefore a family member for the purposes of the EEA
                      Regulations.   There  are  no  other  issues  to   be
                      determined in this appeal.'

         11.  The judge therefore allowed the appeal.


         12.  The grounds of appeal claimed that the judge's  findings  were
             irrational because she had relied on paragraph  24.19  of  the
             respondent's Country of Origin Report but  it  was  not  clear
             what year the report was from.  The grounds  referred  to  the
             terms of that paragraph in the January 2012 report  which  was
             completely different and therefore stated that the  judge  had
             erred in not relying on the current version of the COIR.   The
             grounds then went on to refer to the United States  Department
             Reciprocity Schedule referred to in  the  refusal  letter  and
             alleged that the judge had relied on out of date  evidence  to
             find that proxy marriages are valid in Nigeria  as  "seemingly
             the only evidence relied on is that from an out of date COIR".
              The final ground of appeal was that:

                  '(3) The FTTJ has therefore erred on two counts:

                      "(a) he failed to reconcile  the  difference  between
                           24.23 quoted in the refusal letter and the  'old'
                           24.19 submitted by the appellant; and


                      (b)  he erred in finding  that  proxy  marriages  are
                           valid in Nigeria by relying on  an  out  of  date
                           COIR; the current one makes no mention  of  proxy
                           marriages being valid  under  Nigerian  customary
                           law.


                  (4)  As such the  appellant  failed  to  demonstrate  that
                      proxy marriages are valid in Nigeria.'


         13.  On that basis permission was granted.


         14.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Nath first asked for
             an adjournment on the basis that a Vice Presidential panel was
             shortly to determine the issue  of  Nigerian  proxy  marriages
             before he submitted a number of  documents  from  the  Foreign
             Commonwealth Office.  The first dated 4 February  2013  states
             that 'proxy marriages' were a fairly common  practice  amongst
             communities  in  Nigeria  and  is  recognised  under  Nigerian
             customary law as a form of customary law marriage.  The letter
             went on to say:-

                  'A marriage is by proxy where the presence  of  the  bride
                  and groom is not  required  for  the  ceremony.   In  most
                  cases, it is celebrated  by  the  immediate  and  extended
                  family of the bride and groom.


                  'Proxy marriages' find their origin in the fact that under
                  customary law, marriage creates a  relationship  not  only
                  between the parties to the marriage but also between their
                  families.  Because customary  law  marriages  are  legally
                  binding and recognised as one of the types of marriages in
                  Nigeria, 'proxy marriages' which form  part  of  customary
                  law marriages are also legally binding where celebrated in
                  accordance  with  the  native  law  and  custom   of   the
                  particular community.'


              Having referred to the requirements for registering  marriages
             it  is  stated  that  every   customary  marriage  is  to   be
             registered within 60 days in the area court or customary court
             where the marriage was contracted.

         15.  It was stated that:

                  'The Honorary Legal Adviser is therefore  of  the  opinion
                  that  so-called  'proxy  marriages',  as  an   aspect   of
                  customary law marriage, are legal; and  legal  recognition
                  is conferred by  registration  in  an  area  or  customary
                  court.'

         16.  The second letter which is dated 22 May stated:-

                  'The  British  High  Commission  consulted  several  local
                  lawyers,  including  its  honorary   legal   adviser,   in
                  collating this response.


                  It was emphasised that the words 'proxy'  and  'customary'
                  ought  not  to  be  used  interchangeably,  and  a  proper
                  distinction  observed.   Proxy  marriage  is  a   marriage
                  purported to be carried out in a  ceremony  where  one  or
                  both  (double  proxy)  of  the  parties   is/are   absent.
                  Photographs of the party/parties absent  may  be  used  to
                  represent  him/her/them.    More   'sophisticated'   proxy
                  marriages   are   celebrated   via   video   conferencing.
                  Customary  marriage  is  a  marriage  ceremony   conducted
                  according to the historical norms, values and  beliefs  of
                  one or both parties.  This is  in  contrast  to  statutory
                  marriage, under the Marriage Act, which is conducted by  a
                  registrar of marriages or conducted by clergy in a  church
                  licensed under law to conduct marriages....


                  Marriage by proxy has come to be accepted in Nigeria,  but
                  only as far as customary marriage is concerned. ...Lawyers
                  emphasised  that,  under  Nigerian  law,  customary   (and
                  Islamic) marriages are valid and acceptable.'


             With regard to the issue of whether or not  a  Nigerian  proxy
             marriage is valid if it involved a  foreign   citizen  it  was
             stated that:


                  'A  Nigerian  could  marry  a  foreigner  by  proxy  under
                  customary law in a ceremony held in Nigeria.'


         17.  Mr Nath also referred to the section of the COIS  2013  Report
             which at paragraph 23.26 referred to the US  State  Department
             Reciprocity Schedule, which stated that both  parties  to  the
             marriage should technically be physically present at the  same
             location with the witnesses to sign certain marriage documents
             and that proxy marriages had ceased to be valid but then  went
             on to  refer  to  the  correspondence  from  the  Foreign  and
             Commonwealth Office to which I have referred above.


         18.  In his submissions Mr Nath referred to the grounds  of  appeal
             on which he relied and the  terms  of  the  COIS  Report.   He
             argued that the judge had erred in law in that  there  was  no
             evidence that customary procedures had been followed.


         19.  In reply Mr Layne stated that the judge had made  findings  on
             the basis of the evidence before her which included  the  2011
             COIS Report.  He pointed out that the respondent had  appeared
             to rely on a USA State Department document which  was  undated
             and referred to the contradictory information in  the  various
             reports.  In any event he argued  that  the  affidavit  showed
             that the customary provisions had been met - the families  had
             been present  and  moreover  the  marriage  certificate  being
             registered within the relevant timescale.  He emphasised  that
             the most recent COIS Report  indicated  that  proxy  marriages
             were valid.


         20.  In reply Mr Nath stated that the burden lay on  the  appellant
             to prove her case and to show that  the  requirements  of  the
             Nigerian Customary Law were met.


         Decision


         21.  The refusal in this case is  on  the  sole  basis  that  proxy
             marriages in Nigeria are not valid.  However, for  a  marriage
             to be valid it is clear that certain requirements must be  met
             such as  the  presence  of  both  families  at  the  ceremony.
             Although the  affidavit  claims that Mr Linhart's  mother  was
             at the ceremony there was nothing  to show that that  was  the
             case and I conclude that  the  judge   erred  in  law  in  not
             further enquiring  whether those requirements  were met. There
             was before her nothing to how that all the requirements of the
              relevant Nigerian law were met.   Moreover,  despite   noting
             the  terms of the IDIs which pointed  out  that  the  marriage
             needed to be accepted as  valid   in  the    country  of  both
             parties to the marriage the judge made no enquiry  as  to  the
             whether or not  a proxy marriage was valid in the  country  of
             Mr Linhart's domicile. Moreover, before  allowing  the  appeal
             outright I consider that she should have   considered  whether
             or not the  marriage was not a  marriage  of  convenience.   I
             find that these  were material errors of law and  I  therefore
             set aside the  determination of the  Judge of the First-tier.

                                 Directions

         1.   The  determination of the first-tier  Judge  having  been  set
             aside I direct that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh  in
             the Upper Tribunal.


         2.   At the hearing  evidence will be led and submissions  made  on
             whether or not the requirements of Nigerian law were  met  and
             whether or not the  marriage is valid in the Czech Republic  -
             the country of Mr Linhart's domicile.  Both the appellant  and
             Mr Linhart must attend the hearing and  evidence  to show that
             Mrs Linhortova was present in Nigeria and swore the  affidavit
             must be produced: her passport  or  a  copy  thereof  must  be
             produced.  Furthermore evidence must be produced to show  that
             this was not a marriage of convenience.


        3.   Full statements and all documentary  evidence  as  well  as  a
             detailed    skeleton    argument    from    the     appellant's
             representatives must be served 14 days before the hearing."

6.   At the substantive hearing before me on 8th January  2014  ,  Mr  Layne
    was instructed on behalf of the appellant.  Despite the clear direction
    which I had made in paragraph 2 of my directions, neither the appellant
    nor Mr Linhart attended, nor was there any evidence to  show  that  Mrs
    Linhortova had been present in Nigeria and sworn the affidavit on which
    the appellant relied.

7.   Mr Layne  contacted  the  appellant's  solicitors  and  was  told  that
    neither the appellant nor Mr Linhart would attend the hearing.

8.   In these circumstances, I heard submissions from both  representatives.
     Mr Saunders  relied  on  the  notice  of  refusal  and  the  US  State
    Department Report to which reference was made therein.  He also  relied
    on what I had written in paragraph 21 of my decision.

9.   In reply, Mr Layne argued that  the  refusal  notice  only  raised  one
    issue which was whether or not proxy marriage in Nigeria was valid.  He
    emphasised that the respondent had not questioned  the  genuineness  of
    the relationship.  He referred to the COIS Report of 14 June 2013 which
    at  paragraph  23.27  referred  to  a  letter  from  the  Foreign   and
    Commonwealth Office to UKBA dated 1 February  2013  which  stated  that
    proxy marriages were a fairly common practice  amongst  communities  in
    Nigeria and that:-

         "It is recognised under  Nigerian  customary  laws  as  a   form  a
         customary law marriage.  A marriage is by proxy where the  presence
         of the bride and groom is not required at the  ceremony.   In  most
         cases, it is celebrated by the immediate and extended family of the
         bride and groom...  'Proxy marriages' find their origin in the fact
         that under customary law, marriage creates a relationship not  only
         between  the  parties  to  the  marriage  but  also  between  their
         families."

10.  He pointed  out  that  there  was  a  requirement  that  the  customary
    marriage be registered within 60 days and stated that had  happened  in
    this case - the appellant's marriage therefore  complied,  he  claimed,
    with local requirements.  He referred to the affidavit  produced  which
    indicated that the appellant's parents and  her  husband's  mother  had
    been present - the affidavit had been signed by both proxies.

11.  He therefore asked me  to  find  that,  notwithstanding  there  was  no
    evidence that the  sponsor's  mother  had  travelled  to  Nigeria,  the
    documentary evidence produced showed that the formalities for  a  proxy
    marriage  had  been  completed  and  should  the  respondent  have  not
    considered that the relevant requirements of the law had  been  met  it
    was for the respondent to make appropriate enquiries.

12.   He stated that he noted that I had indicated that it was  relevant  to
    ascertain whether or not a proxy marriage would be valid in  the  Czech
    Republic.  He referred me to a document which he had printed  from  the
    internet giving  relevant  information  about  procedures  relating  to
    marriage in the Czech Republic entitled "What to  do  if  you  wish  to
    marry a foreigner in the  Czech  Republic".     Paragraph  18  of  that
    document reads as follows:-

         "18. Marriage by proxy - exceptional circumstances


                . If one of the engaged  couple  is  unable  to  attend  the
                  ceremony  in  person  due  to  extenuating   and   serious
                  circumstances, you can apply for permission to conduct the
                  marriage by proxy.

                . First you need to obtain a confirmation that your  country
                  of origin will recognise that marriage.

                . The authority competent to give permission to marriage  by
                  proxy  is  the  regional  council  (Krajasky  Ulad),  some
                  municipal councils and the city councils in Prague,  Brno,
                  Ostreva, and Pizen."

13.  He stated that there was therefore evidence  that  the  proxy  marriage
    would be valid in the Czech Republic.

14.  He referred to the Immigration Directorate Instructions which  set  out
    the requirements which had to be met.  The first was whether or  not  a
    proxy marriage was valid in Nigeria  -  he  referred  to  the  Nigerian
    Marriage Act of 1994.   Secondly,  the  marriage  had  to  be  properly
    executed.  For  this  he  referred  to  the  certificate  of  customary
    marriage. Thirdly the requirements relating to domicile, he argued were
    met by the fact that Nigeria was the domicile  of  the  appellant.   He
    therefore asked me to find that the marriage was  valid  and  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.

Discussion

15.  In  my  decision  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination I emphasised my concerns regarding the  validity  of  the
    marriage.  In my directions I made it clear that  I  required  evidence
    that the appellant's husband's mother had,  as  claimed,  travelled  to
    Nigeria.  No such evidence has been forthcoming.  This is not  a  case,
    such as an asylum claim, where it would have been difficult  to  obtain
    supporting evidence and I am entitled to place weight on the fact  that
    there is no evidence of the travel of Mr Linhart's mother  to  Nigeria.
    Moreover, it is clear that the issue of whether or not proxy  marriages
    are valid in Nigeria is a complicated one and various requirements have
    to be met.  In considering whether those requirements have been met,  I
    have to look at the documents which have  been  produced.   I  consider
    these within the context of this appeal where this  appellant  and  her
    claimed husband have never appeared before  a  court  or  at  the  Home
    Office and, despite being directed by me to appear at  the  substantive
    hearing, did not do so.  The appellant has put in an affidavit  stating
    that she and her husband did not wish to incur the costs of a  marriage
    because  they  both  came  from  cultures  where   elaborate   marriage
    celebrations were expected.  However, the appellant claims  that rather
    than have a Registry Office wedding here,  she   and  Mr  Linhart  were
    prepared to make arrangements for Mr  Linhart's  mother  to  travel  to
    Nigeria.  I simply do not believe that that would have happened  and  I
    therefore do not find,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    documentary evidence from Nigeria is genuine.

16.   Moreover, I do not consider that,  while it may well be the case  that
    proxy marriages which, of themselves are not valid  in  Nigeria,  might
    take place in certain circumstances, they could be considered as  valid
    under customary law and that that was the case here.  I note the  terms
    of the letter of 4 February 2013, to which I referred in  paragraph  14
    of my decision.  That stated  that  customary  law  marriage  could  be
    legally binding when celebrated according to the native law and customs
    of the community.  There is  simply  no  evidence  that  the  appellant
    herself was a member of a particular community which would accept  that
    proxy marriages which could be valid under customary law.  I  therefore
    do not accept the form of register of the customary marriage which  has
    been produced, nor indeed the affidavit even though that  asserts  that
    the marriage was in accordance with Igbo  law  and  custom.   There  is
    nothing to back up that assertion.

17.  I have considered the documents relating to  the  acceptance  of  proxy
    marriages in the  Czech  Republic  on  which  Mr  Layne  relied.   That
    paragraph refers to exceptional circumstances where one of the  engaged
    couple is unable to attend the ceremony in person "due  to  extenuating
    and serious circumstances" and permission would be required to  conduct
    the marriage by proxy.  There are simply no  "extenuating  and  serious
    circumstances" put forward which would indicate that, had the appellant
    and her husband married by proxy in the Czech  Republic  that  marriage
    would have been valid. In any event that  document  does  not  indicate
    that proxy marriage between a Czech citizen and the  foreigner  in  the
    foreigner's country would be considered to be valid.

18.  For these circumstances, I find that the appellant has  not  discharged
    the burden of proof upon her and I dismiss this appeal.

19.  I would add that after the error of law hearing  I  received  a  letter
    from the appellant's solicitors dated  31  October  which  appeared  to
    argue that I should not have raised the question of whether or not  the
    marriage was genuine.  I consider that it was  appropriate  for  me  to
    have done so given the extraordinary circumstances  where  two  people,
    resident in Britain, would decide that they wished to marry "by  proxy"
    in Africa rather than marry here and would then decide that they  would
    not attend the hearing or indeed provide  any  persuasive  evidence  of
    cohabitation.

20.  For the above reasons, having set aside the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal, I  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  this  appeal  on
    immigration grounds.  I would add that,  although  it  was  not  argued
    before me that the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the  ECHR  are
    infringed by the  decision,  there  is  simply  nothing  before  me  to
    indicate that the removal  of  this  appellant  would  be  in  any  way
    disproportionate.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


