
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/14064/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 August 2013 (On the Papers)             |On 5 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                           miss jagdeep kaur behl

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India born on 20  May  1989  appeals,  with
    permission, against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Greasley  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  25  October  2012
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse her leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant pursuant to paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules
    HC 395 (as amended).

2.   The appellant had  applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  Britain  on  23
    September 2011.  That application was refused on 22 May  on  the  basis
    that the CAS provided did not indicate  that  the  appellant  had  made
    "academic progress" from her previous course of study during  the  last
    period of leave.

3.   In paragraphs 3 onwards of the determination the  judge  sets  out  the
    evidence, the submissions made and his conclusions.

4.    Judge  Greasley  noted  that  the  appellant's  application  had   not
    succeeded not only because there was a lack of  evidence  of  "academic
    progress" but that no points had been awarded for  funds  as  the  bank
    statements predated the application by more than one month.

5.    At  paragraph  7  of  the  determination  Judge  Greasley  noted   the
    appellant's evidence which  was  that  the  CAS  letter  on  which  the
    appellant relied had been obtained from St John's College  London  when
    the appellant was given 60 days  after  the  closure  of  the  Academic
    College of London.  At that time she did not have with her the advanced
    diploma in management studies  at  Edexcel  level  7  as  her  original
    documents of her level 7 qualification were with the Home Office.   The
    appellant had claimed that she did not obtain a new CAS letter  due  to
    the absence of the level 7 qualifying document so she had been  advised
    by the college to obtain  the  60  day  extension.   As  she  found  it
    impossible  to  obtain  the  level  7  CAS  letter   without   original
    qualification she had felt helpless.  Moreover the appellant  had  said
    that it was not her  fault  if  the  bank  statements  failed  to  meet
    relevant dates - this had been the fault of the college.

6.   The Judge  noted, however,  that the appellant had  accepted  that  she
    had received the 60 day  extension  from  the  respondent  to  find  an
    alternative sponsor following the revocation  of  the  licence  of  the
    academic college.  He found that the appeal could not succeed under the
    Rules.

7.   The grounds of appeal refer to the amount of money which the  appellant
    had spent on her course and that there were mitigating circumstances as
    to why she had enrolled on the course which she had undertaken and that
    these factors were relevant to  the  assessment  of  her  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The error of law argued was that the judge  had
    failed to consider the rights of the appellant under Article 8 and that
    "there is no consideration of Pankina and moreover the guidance set out
    in CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305".

8.   It was emphasised there was an  obvious  point  of  fairness  that  the
    appellant had difficulty in obtaining a further course of study  during
    the relevant 60 day period.

9.   The grounds also argued that the  appellant  had  been  misled  by  her
    college who had suggested that she could get a new CAS  letter  on  the
    basis of getting admission at level 5.  He stated that there was  merit
    in the ground that the Tribunal had erred in not  assessing  the  human
    rights element of the claim as there was no assessment.
10.  The grounds raised a further point that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    made a decision to remove under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 which was unlawful.


11.  I directed, on 19 December 2012:-

         "It is considered that it is appropriate that  this  appeal  should
         now be determined on the papers.


         Unless either party raises any objection to this course  of  action
         and gives cogent reasons for requesting an oral hearing, within  28
         days hereof, the appeal will therefore be determined on the  papers
         before the Tribunal.  Within that time the appellant must serve  on
         the Tribunal  and  on  the  respondent  any  documentary  evidence,
         including witness statements on which she wishes to rely."


12.  There was no response from either the appellant or the  respondent.   I
    now proceed to determine the appeal taking into account the  papers  on
    the file.

13.  I note firstly that there  are  medical  reports  from  the  Relaxation
    Response Medical  Centre  stating  that  the  appellant  was  receiving
    counselling between 26 June and 26 July 2012.  However, I note that the
    grounds of appeal before the Immigration Judge merely  state  that  the
    decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  or  in
    accordance with the law and that discretion on  the  Immigration  Rules
    should have been exercised differently.  There is no  direct  reference
    to the rights of the appellant under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  in  the
    grounds.

14.  There was no error of law in the decision of the  Judge  regarding  the
    refusal of the appellant's claim under the points-based system.  It  is
    not, I consider, argued in the grounds of appeal before me  that  there
    was an error of law in the judge's consideration of that matter.   What
    is argued is that the Article 8 rights of the appellant  had  not  been
    properly considered.  However the reality is that the grounds of appeal
    before the Judge did not raise the issue of the Article 8 rights of the
    appellant and it can hardly be said to be an error of  law  for  him  ,
    given that this appellant was a student who would be expected,  in  any
    event, to return to her own country, not to have taken into account her
    Article 8 rights when those had not been argued before him (neither the
    determination nor the Judge's handwritten note  of  evidence  indicates
    that the Article 8 rights of the appellant were argued).

15.  I have considered the issue of the Article 8 rights  of  the  appellant
    but the reality is that there is  nothing  on  which  I  could  base  a
    conclusion that the decision was in breach of the appellant's Article 8
    rights.  There is nothing to indicate that the appellant was pursuing a
    coherent course of study which  had  clear  objectives  and  which  was
    thwarted by the decision - there is no statement from the appellant  to
    indicate that that is the case.   I  do  not  consider  therefore  that
    should the Immigration Judge have considered the issue of the rights of
    the appellant under Article 8 in an appropriate structured way he could
    have reached a conclusion whereby the Article 8 rights of the appellant
    were  engaged  or  if  they  were  engaged   her   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.

16.  I have however considered the issue  of  the  removal  directions  made
    under Section 47 in the refusal of the application for an extension  of
    stay.   Those  removal  directions  were  unlawful  and  following  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ  517  I  find
    that the decision to make the removal direction under  Section  47  was
    not in accordance with the law and I allow the appeal in that regard.

17.  I therefore  find  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds shall stand but I allow the    appeal against the  decision  to
    make removal directions under Section 47 of the 2007 Act.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

