
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/14704/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 August 2017                          | On 7 September 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                              mohsin raza shah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration & Asylum
                    Practitioners Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 16 October 1987.
     He entered the United Kingdom on 24 January 2011 as a Tier  4  Student
    with leave valid until 14  June  2012.   That  leave  was  subsequently
    extended until 30 January 2015.

 2. In 2003, the appellant met a British citizen, Rubila Nisar Malik.  They
    married on 13 August 2014.  They have a child together who was born  on
    7 October 2014 and the appellant's wife has a  child  from  a  previous
    relationship who was born on 27 May 2005.  Both  children  are  British
    citizens.

 3. On 24 October 2014, the appellant made an in time application for leave
    to remain as the spouse of a British citizen.

 4. On 18 March 2015, the Home Office wrote to the appellant requiring  him
    to provide a DNA test to establish that he was the father of the  child
    born on 7 October 2014.  That evidence was  not  subsequently  provided
    although the appellant is named on the child's birth certificate as the
    father.

 5. On 20 April 2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave as a spouse.

 6. First, the Secretary of State refused the application as the  appellant
    did not meet the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.7 as he had  failed
    without reasonable excuse to comply with  the  requirement  to  provide
    information or physical  data,  namely  the  DNA  test  concerning  the
    parentage of the child.

 7. Secondly, in any event, the Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that
    the relationship with his spouse was a genuine and subsisting  one  and
    so the eligibility requirement in E-LTRP.1.7 of  Appendix  FM  was  not
    met.  Consequently, the appellant could not meet the  requirements  for
    leave as a partner under the five-year route in R-LTRP1.1(c).

 8. For the same reasons, the appellant could not succeed  under  the  ten-
    year route set out in R-LTRP1.1  as  the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements in S-LTR.1.7 and  E-LTRP1.7  were  mandatory  requirements
    under that route also.

 9. Thirdly, the Secretary of State concluded that the appellant could  not
    succeed as a parent under R-LTRPT.

10. Fourthly, the appellant could not succeed based  on  his  private  life
    under para 276ADE.

11. Finally, the respondent was not satisfied that there  were  exceptional
    circumstances to justify the grant of leave outside Art 8 of the ECHR.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Judge Holder accepted that the appellant's marriage was a  genuine  and
    subsisting one.  However, agreeing with the Secretary of State's  view,
    he  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the   suitability
    requirement in S-LTR.1.7 because he had failed to provide the DNA  test
    as required.  Further, the judge found that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed as a parent under Appendix FM or based upon  his  private  life
    under para 276ADE and under Art 8 outside the Rules.

14. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
    including that  S-LTR.1.7  could  not  apply  as  there  was  no  legal
    requirement for the appellant to provide a DNA test when  applying  for
    leave as a partner under Appendix FM.  Further, the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider whether  the  appellant  could  otherwise  succeed
    under the Rules and under Art 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules.

15. On 20 April 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E S  Martins)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

16. On 5 May 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice seeking to
    uphold the decision.

17. Thus, the appeal came before me.

18. Mr Diwnycz, who represented the Secretary of State, conceded that there
    was no power to require the appellant to provide a DNA test as set  out
    in the Home Office letter of 18 March 2015.   There  was,  he  said,  a
    discretion but the IDI in force at the time stated that case owners may
    not  demand  DNA  evidence  in  establishing  paternity  in  in-country
    applications.  They may request it but cannot direct it.   He  accepted
    that the judge was therefore wrong to find that the appellant  did  not
    meet the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.7.

19. In the light of that, Mr Diwnycz accepted that the  appellant  met  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a  partner  in  section  R-LTRP  of
    Appendix FM.  The Judge had accepted the relationship was genuine.   Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that the appellant had the necessary English  language
    certificate,  which  had  been  provided  with  the  application.    He
    acknowledged that no point had been taken in relation to the  financial
    requirements  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  submitted   with   the
    application concerning the sponsor's finances. Having accepted that the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules as a partner,  he  did  not
    seek to argue that the appellant should not succeed under Art 8 in  his
    appeal.

20. On the basis of Mr Diwnycz's  concession,  which  in  my  judgment  was
    properly made, the judge erred in law in  finding  that  the  appellant
    could  not  meet  the  suitability  requirement  in  S-LTR.1.7  as  the
    Secretary of State could not require that he provide the  DNA  test  as
    stated in the letter of 18 March 2015.  Further, if that finding cannot
    stand, as Mr Diwnycz accepted, the appellant has established  (and  had
    established before the judge) that he met the requirements for leave to
    remain as a partner in section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.   He was entitled
    to succeed under the  five-year  route  set  out  in  R-LTRP.1.1(c)  of
    Appendix FM.  His application  did  not  fall  for  refusal  under  the
    suitability requirements and he met all  the  eligibility  requirements
    for leave to remain as a partner.

21. In this appeal, however, the appellant's right of appeal is limited  to
    Art 8.  Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue that, once it was  clear  that
    the appellant met the requirement for leave to  remain  as  a  partner,
    that there was any basis upon which it could be argued that his removal
    was not a breach of Art 8.

22. Consequently, I am satisfied that the appellant's removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his family life and a breach of  Art
    8.

Decision

23. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  That decision is set aside.

24. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.



                                 Signed

                       [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  6 September 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal.  The appeal  should  have  been  allowed  by  the
First-tier Tribunal and having regard to all the circumstances,  I  consider
it appropriate to make a full fee award  in  respect  of  any  fee  paid  or
payable.



                                 Signed

                       [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 6 September 2017



