
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14463/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2014                           |On 5 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr N M
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Tapfumaneyi instructed by PT Law & Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Secretary of State made the application for permission  to  appeal,
    nevertheless I shall refer to the parties as they were described before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr  N  M  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born on 19th  April  1957.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 16th  April  2013
    to refuse to vary his leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  a
    victim of domestic violence and against the decision to remove him from
    the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellant had met his spouse L Z in Zimbabwe in July 2003 and  they
    became engaged in July 2007, married in August 2009 and  the  appellant
    entered the UK in January 2011 on a two year visa.  He became  ill  two
    weeks after his arrival and was hospitalised. This  caused  him  sexual
    problems and the marriage broke down.

 4. First Tier Tribunal Judge Callow heard the appellant's appeal  on  10th
    December  2013  and  allowed  the  appeal  on  7th  January  2013.   An
    application for permission to appeal was filed by the respondent on the
    basis that the 'Judge did not enter into any discussion  regarding  the
    contradictory accounts given by the appellant's wife  in  the  e-mails'
    and thus the Judge had not taken  into  account  relevant  evidence  in
    reaching his positive credibility findings.   Further  the  Judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for his decision.  Permission to appeal was  granted
    by First Tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson who  noted  that  the  ex-wife's
    email indicated that his erectile problems  commenced  prior  to  their
    marriage and the emails did not  show  an  abusive  relationship.   The
    judge failed to address the contradictory accounts given in the  emails
    or why they were rejected.

 5. The refusal letter of the respondent set out that at the  beginning  of
    his stay in the UK the appellant claimed he  was  hospitalised  with  a
    pulmonary embolism.  As a result he suffered from psychogenic impotence
    and  premature  ejaculation.   Because  of  his  impotence   his   wife
    emotionally and sexually abused him calling  him  names  and  regretted
    marrying him.   He stated that he  attempted  to  use  counselling  and
    mediation but his wife refused and removed  him  from  the  matrimonial
    bed, refused him financial assistance and  eventually  ordered  him  to
    leave the home, which he did in May 2011, before notifying his employer
    that he no longer lived with her.   He submitted emails dated 15th June
    onwards although he claimed to have left the home earlier on  19th  May
    2011.  His email of 18th June 2011 indicated that  'I  [the  appellant]
    decided to move out to give you time and space to get over it' and thus
    he had not been ordered to leave and an email dated  13th  August  2011
    stated that  'our  problems  actually  started  when  I  was  still  in
    Zimbabwe.  It started with your nagging and faultfinding'.   The  email
    from his wife dated 25th June 2011 did not threaten harass or mock  and
    that the erectile dysfunction was a long  term  problem  which  started
    before the marriage and that she offered mediation but he refused.

 6. The refusal letter from the respondent claimed the emails did not  show
    an abusive relationship, the marital problems began before his  arrival
    in the UK and his wife asked him to get help for his  penile  problems.
    He had submitted no corroborative evidence  such  as  medical  reports.
    His application was refused with reference  to  Paragraph  289  C  with
    reference to paragraph 289A and (iv).  The application was also refused
    with reference to Paragraph 276ADE. He was aged 56  years  and  entered
    the UK in 2011.  He had not lived in the UK for 20 years  and  had  not
    severed ties with Zimbabwe.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Tufan submitted that there was no  evidence  of  how
    the marriage ended and the medical report did not corroborate  domestic
    violence.  The judge referred to the  emails  at  paragraph  4  of  his
    decision and noted there had been previous problems but the  judge  did
    not deal with the emails. This was  countered  by  Mr  Tapfumaneyi  who
    stated that the judge looked at the medical evidence and the emails and
    based his decision on the extensive cross-examination of the appellant.
     A single email  would  not  undermine  the  remaining  evidence.   The
    grounds for appeal were simply a disagreement.

Conclusions

 8. The judge, I find noted at paragraph 8 the legal test which  needed  to
    be established with reference to  Paragraph  289(iv)  namely  that  the
    appellant was able to

      (iv) produced such evidence as may be required  by  the  Secretary  of
      State to establish that the relationship  was  caused  to  permanently
      break down before the end of that period {two years] as  a  result  of
      domestic violence'.

 9. The judge also recorded at [9] the respondent's Modernised  Guidance  -
    Victims of Domestic Violence,  which  defined  domestic  violence  with
    effect from 31st  March  2013  and  that  the  definition  of  domestic
    violence and abuse included psychological  and  emotional  abuse.   The
    judge noted the difficulties with the production of  evidence  but  was
    clear that the domestic violence needed to be shown by cogent  relevant
    evidence, not necessarily that prescribed by the  Secretary  of  State,
    and that the domestic abuse must be the cause of the breakdown [11].

10. At [6] the judge recorded the oral evidence and in particular the judge
    noted the appellant's evidence and that of the expert.  The judge noted
    that it was only

      'after his arrival in the UK that the issue of  gratification  between
      the parties arose.  It  was  as  a  result  of  this  issue  that  the
      relationship deteriorated wherein the  appellant  was  the  victim  of
      abuse and humiliation by his wife.  The fact that his wife refused  to
      sleep with him despite the fact that he had overcome  the  issue  that
      had undermined the relationship, upset him greatly'.

11. The judge assessed the evidence in the round  [12].   The  judge  noted
    that domestic abuse could involve psychological  and  emotional  abuse.
    He acknowledged that the problem of  sexual  dysfunction  had  occurred
    beforehand but this is  not  inconsistent  with  it  causing  permanent
    problems in the marriage at  a  later  date  even  though  known  about
    beforehand.  The judge described that 'the fact that his  wife  refused
    to sleep with him, despite the fact that he had overcome the issue that
    had undermined the relationship, upset him greatly'.     The  judge  at
    [12]  clearly  accepted  the  appellant's  evidence,  following  cross-
    examination.  The Home Office was represented at the  hearing  and  the
    judge noted [6] that 'with tact and sensitivity Mr Bose questioned  the
    appellant about the complaints made by his wife'.  This could only have
    been from the emails and it would appear from  the  decision  that  the
    judge preferred the evidence of the appellant to that of the wife which
    included the emails. The appellant  impressed  the  judge,  who  having
    heard the oral evidence, accepted the appellant as a 'credible witness'
    [12].  The judge set out at [3] that the appellant's case was that  the
    wife was unsympathetic and spoke of him in derogatory terms and that he
    failed to report the abuse because he wanted to save the  marriage  and
    that 'his wife refused to assist and to accompany  him  to  his  GP  to
    obtain advice.  It was in all of  these  circumstances  that  the  wife
    asked the appellant to leave the matrimonial home and reported the fact
    of separation to the appellant's employers resulting in  his  dismissal
    from employment'.

12. The judge also accepted [12] that 'undoubtedly the appellant was abused
    and humiliated in public as stated by him in his evidence'.

13. The judge referred at [12] to the hospital report which was set out  in
    more detail at [3(b)] from Dr Onuorah of Addison  House  Surgery  which
    confirmed that the appellant was hospitalised with a pulmonary embolism
    and pneumonia  in  February  2011  and  that  at  a  follow  up  clinic
    appointment  held  on  21st  April  2011  psychogenic   impotence   was
    discussed.  Furthermore the appellant was seen on 6th  June  2011  with
    marital stress-related problems and  that  a  Viagra  prescription  was
    issued in May 2011.  Thus the appellant was without doubt  hospitalised
    and that sexual problems were associated with this  medical  issue.  Mr
    Tufan stated that this did not refer to domestic abuse but the lack  of
    reference does  not  exclude  domestic  violence  and  the  appellant's
    account was that he wished to attempt to save his marriage.

14. Although the judge asserts 'for the  first  time  in  his  relationship
    [following entry to the UK] with his wife he suffered from  psychogenic
    impotence and premature ejaculation resulting in domestic  abuse'  even
    if the appellant had sexual problems previously this had  not  resulted
    in domestic abuse as the parties had indeed married.

15. The judge also stated at [12] with reference to  Kudakwashe  Nyakudya's
    report 'the evidence of  the  expert  was  furnished  in  an  objective
    manner.  It is supportive of the appellant's claim'.

16. Although the reference to the medical expert  report  is  short  it  is
    nonetheless contained at [12] of the decision and adopted by the judge.
     The report was given by  a  qualified  mental  health  nurse  who  had
    training in Domestic Violence and Abuse for Professionals and she  gave
    her qualifications at the hearing and which the  judge  recorded  [3c].
    She noted that DVA was not isolated to the physical.   She recorded  in
    the report that between 2004 and 2009 the  couple  had  a  satisfactory
    sexual relationship.  The appellant's case was that,  contrary  to  the
    emails the couple had a good sexual relationship, albeit  that  he  had
    suffered problems previously, when he came to the  United  Kingdom  but
    was in February 2011 he was admitted to hospital and  this  caused  on-
    going sexual dysfunction which the  ex  wife  could  not  accept.   The
    report notes that the GP advised the  appellant  that  the  psychogenic
    impotence was caused by the pulmonary embolism.

17. Essentially the judge set out the evidence and  set  out  the  law  and
    although his findings at [12] are pithy they do make reference  to  and
    encompass the evidence overall.   Even if the judge  made  no  specific
    reference to the emails which may have been an error,  the  version  of
    events of the appellant, through his oral evidence and statements,  and
    which differed from that put forward by the wife was clearly preferred,
    and further the wife did not give  evidence  and  could  not  be  cross
    examined.  The appellant was clear in his email of 18th June 2011  that
    despite stating "I decided to move out to give you time and  space'  he
    also stated 'in the first place it's you who asked  me  to  leave  your
    house and kept on insisting that I should  let  you  know  when  I  was
    moving out' and in 'the last weeks you kept isolating me'.

18. The judge accepted that the real  sexual  problems  started  after  the
    appellant's arrival in the UK  and  in  two  of  her  emails  the  wife
    acknowledged that they did have 'normal sexual contact during the first
    week' of the appellant's arrival in the UK  despite  stating  that  the
    problems had been long term. Indeed in her email of 1st  February  2012
    she disclosed that the appellant had prostrate problems  and  frequency
    of urination but also stated 'we only had normal sexual contact on less
    than 5  occasions  during  the  first  week  of  your  arrival  in  UK,
    subsequent to which the problem gradually became worse to the point  of
    you losing your erection each time we tried to make contact'.   As  the
    appellant went into hospital two weeks after his arrival and  no  doubt
    was ill beforehand I consider that reference to  the  emails,  much  of
    which are sadly symptomatic of a marriage  breakdown,  would  not  have
    materially altered the judge's decision.   The  email  of  the  ex-wife
    acknowledges in her email that he did claim he was being ill treated by
    his wife and that he did feel unwelcome. The reason for the appellant's
    departure was not inconsistent with  feeling  forced  to  depart  as  a
    result of domestic 'violence'.   Although the email of 25th  June  2011
    from his ex wife stated that she had no legal authority to prevent  him
    from being employed the suggestion  was  that  she  had  contacted  the
    employer to advise that he was no longer living with her and  the  visa
    was not valid.  The expert report to which the judge made reference  to
    the fear of unemployment.

19. Although Mr Tufan submitted that the medical report did not corroborate
    domestic violence the expert report did set  out  the  background,  the
    statistics in relation to domestic violence and analysed and found  the
    appellant's account consistent with the  extent  of  domestic  violence
    against men.  She acknowledged that the appellant  did  not  experience
    physical abuse but found  his  account  consistent  with  sexual  abuse
    through sexually degrading language, verbal  abuse  and  emotional  and
    psychological abuse through being insulted and experiencing the 'silent
    treatment' and being ignored and which in turn could  have  exacerbated
    his psychogenic impotence.

20. I therefore find that although the reasoning is brief at [12]  it  does
    make reference to and bring in the evidence overall.   The  judge  gave
    very brief but adequate reasoning and there is  no  error  which  would
    make a material difference. The decision of Judge Callow shall stand.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date 31st December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


