
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14266/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th November 2014                           |On 8th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mrs Vivian Dzandze Atsu
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 8th  June  1968.   She  was
    last admitted to the United Kingdom on 7th  April  2004  as  a  visitor
    until 30th September 2004.  Since 1st October 2004  she  has  illegally
    resided in the UK.  On 5th October 2012  she  made  application  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community law as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State by Notice of Refusal dated 12th April 2013.

 2. The Appellant appeals and the appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Dineen sitting at Hatton Cross on 18th December 2013.  In
    a determination promulgated on 12th May 2014 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. On 19th May 2014 the Secretary  of  State  lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Those Grounds of Appeal contended that in  reaching  his  findings  the
    judge had not had due regard to the decision in Kareem (Proxy Marriages
    - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 and that in determining  the  validity
    of the marriage the judge should have firstly established whether  this
    type of marriage was recognised in the EEA state of  the  Sponsor,  the
    Netherlands.  As no evidence was advanced by the Appellant  to  support
    the recognition of the marriage  in  the  Netherlands  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal contended that the Appellant had failed to discharge her  burden
    of proof and that the appeal should have been dismissed.

 4. On 13th June 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler  granted  permission
    to appeal.  It was on that basis that the  appeal  came  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there has been a material error of law in  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   For  the  sake  of  continuity
    throughout the Tribunal process Ms Dzandze Atsu is referred  to  herein
    as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as  the  Respondent  albeit
    that I acknowledge that the appeal in  question  is  the  Secretary  of
    State's.

 5. Part of the difficulty in this case related to  the  time  period  that
    evolved between the date of hearing and the date of decision.  Not only
    during that period was the case of Kareem decided but also the decision
    in TA (Kareem explained) [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC).  That case is authority
    for stating that the appeal turns on whether the  Appellant's  Ghanaian
    proxy marriage is considered valid by Dutch law and  is  authority  for
    stating  that  the  Appellant  must  establish  that  her  marriage  is
    recognised by the Dutch authorities in order to qualify for a residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights.
    It is not merely sufficiently for the Appellant to rely on the marriage
    certificate issued by the Ghanaian authorities.

 6. In such circumstances I found that there was a material error of law in
    the approach adopted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I gave specific
    directions in this matter that the issue outstanding was whether or not
    the Appellant's proxy marriage was recognised by the Dutch  authorities
    and I granted leave to the Appellant to file and serve at  least  seven
    days prehearing an additional bundle of documents addressing:-

      a) Such proof that the customary marriage  has  been  legalised  by  a
         competent authority such as the Dutch Embassy in  the  state  where
         the marriage took place; or

      b) such  evidence  that  suggested  registration  with  the  competent
         authority in the  country  of  origin  was  sufficient  to  warrant
         recognition under Dutch law.

    On that basis I adjourned the matter to be heard before me on the first
    available date after 1st October 2014.  The matter came back before  me
    on 10th October 2014 when the Appellant advised  that  she  was  having
    difficulty in obtaining the relevant documentation and  a  request  was
    made for a further six week extension.  I granted  such  extension  and
    adjournment indicating that I was unlikely  to  entertain  any  further
    extension in obtaining the relevant information.  It is on  that  basis
    that the matter reappears before  me.   Mr  Akohene  appears  again  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  The Secretary of State is represented by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Kandola.

 7. I note that the documentation that the Appellant sought to disclose and
    upon which directions were given has not been produced.  In fact  there
    is no further evidence before the Tribunal.  Mr Akohene  concedes  that
    it has not been possible to obtain such evidence.   Advising  that  the
    papers are still awaited.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Akohene seeks to persuade me that  there  is  authority  for  me  to
    proceed under Regulation 8(5).   That  Regulation  or  any  submissions
    thereunder is not before me.  Mr Kandola points out that it was not  an
    issue that was  raised  either  before  me  or  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal albeit that it is contended by Mr Akohene that it was  in  the
    original Grounds of Appeal from the refusal by the Secretary  of  State
    to the First-tier Tribunal.   It  is  pointed  out  that  there  is  no
    "alternative" recited in the Grounds of Appeal and Mr  Kandola  submits
    that it is, as a matter of law, necessary if the  Appellant  wishes  to
    cross-appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge even  though
    he was successful on other issues before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    to make such application to the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings

 9. There are two issues that I am asked to determine effectively  in  this
    appeal.  I start by reminding myself so far as  the  primary  issue  is
    concerned namely whether or not the Appellant can meet the requirements
    of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 that the burden of  proof  is
    on the Appellant when making her application for a residence card as  a
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom and the  burden
    of proof is on the balance of probabilities.  In this  instant  case  I
    have given very considerable opportunity to the Appellant to show  that
    she meets those requirements.  Despite that the Appellant has failed to
    produce requisite information.  It is for the  Appellant  to  discharge
    that  burden  of  proof.   Following  the  decision  in  Kareem  (proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 the determination of  whether  there
    is a marital relationship for the purposes  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 must always be examined in accordance with the laws of
    the Member State from which the union citizen obtains nationality.  The
    issues were explained further  in  detail  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  The Appellant has failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof or to show to  the  satisfaction  of  the
    Tribunal that the marital relationship as set down in Kareem  has  been
    satisfied.  The Appellant consequently cannot succeed  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

10. Further the submission by Mr Akohene that he seeks to  appeal  pursuant
    to a different Regulation  which  was  neither  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor before the Upper Tribunal when an error of  law  is  found
    and is purely made I consider an appeal of last resort at  the  hearing
    cannot be sustained.  As the Tribunal found in EG and NG (UT  Rule  17:
    withdrawal; Rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143  (IAC)  a  party
    that seeks to persuade the Upper Tribunal to replace a decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  with  a  decision  that  would  make  a  material
    difference to one of the parties needs permission to appeal.  The Upper
    Tribunal cannot entertain an application purporting to  be  made  under
    Rule 24 for permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  until  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been asked in writing for permission to  appeal
    and has either  refused  it  or  declined  to  admit  the  application.
    Consequently is not for an Upper Tribunal Judge to entertain  any  late
    application.  Such application should, if it is to be made, be made  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant  consequently  is  not  granted
    permission to raise the late  Ground  of  Appeal  that  her  instructed
    solicitors seek to rely on.

11. In such circumstances the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the
    EEA Regulations and her appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The  Appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration   (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No  application
is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


