

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14109/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                     Decision        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4th March 2015                     |                     On 9th March    |
|                                      |2015                                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                      MISS LORRAINE THELMA TSIBO SEBATA
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr W Bhebhe
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant was born  on  11th  May  1984  and  is  a  citizen  of
       Zimbabwe. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal to
       the Upper Tribunal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Majid (the Judge)  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  24th
       October 2014, allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision to
       refuse her application to remain in the United Kingdom.  The  appeal
       was allowed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.
       The matter came before me  on  28th  January  2015  for  an  initial
       hearing at which I determined that the making of the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal involved the making of errors on points of  law.
       I set aside the decision and the case was accordingly adjourned  for
       a continuation hearing before me today for the decision to be remade
       with a direction  that  none  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal should stand.


    2. The appellant's immigration history in brief is that she arrived  in
       the United Kingdom on 12th July 2003 with valid entry clearance as a
       student  9th  September  2004.   Her  leave  was   renewed   through
       subsequent applications until 4th May 2013. It is common ground that
       the appellant applied on 2nd May 2013 for indefinite leave to remain
       on the grounds of her length of stay in the United Kingdom and  that
       this claim was rejected by the Secretary of State on 28th May  2013.
       A further application was made on 29th July 2013 on the basis of  10
       years' residence which was further rejected on 21st August 2013.


    3. A further application made by the appellant on 27th  September  2013
       was refused on 5th March 2014 giving rise to the appeal  now  before
       me in which the central argument  for  the  appellant  is  that  the
       refusal  of  her  application  by  the  Secretary   of   State   was
       unreasonable, wrong and unlawful.  The appellant  asserts  that  her
       period of continuous lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
       broken as a result of the actions of the respondent.


    4. The appellant attended the hearing with a number  of  witnesses  but
       before I received any evidence Mr Tufan addressed me  on  behalf  of
       the Secretary of State. He stated that he was not in a  position  to
       make any concessions, but on the basis of his research and inquiries
       into the issues under appeal he very helpfully submitted that  there
       may be a short resolution to matters on the basis of  a  preliminary
       view I may take about the lawfulness of the  decision  made  by  the
       Secretary of State for the following reasons.


    5. The Secretary of State accepts that the appellant had valid leave to
       remain in the United Kingdom until 4th May 2013 but  her  difficulty
       in showing the necessary period of 10 years' residence in  her  most
       recent application arose from the circumstances of the  applications
       she made on 2nd May 2013 and 29th July 2013 which were  rejected  on
       28th May 2013 and 21st August 2013 respectively.


    6. The Secretary of State subsequently found that the rejection of  the
       May 2013 and July 2013 applications meant that the appellant's valid
       leave expired on 26th June 2013, leaving her  with  no  valid  leave
       until 27th September 2013 when her next application was  made,  thus
       leaving a 90-day period when she was without valid leave. This break
       in her continuous lawful residence left the appellant short  of  the
       necessary period of residence.  The Secretary of  State  refused  to
       exercise discretion outside the Immigration Rules because  the  onus
       was considered to  be  upon  the  applicant  to  ensure  that  valid
       applications were made.


    7. The application made on 2nd May 2013 was submitted  on  form  SET(O)
       which was rejected by the Secretary of State on 28th May 2013 on the
       basis that it had been made on the wrong form and the appellant  was
       referred to the website for guidance.  However,  the  guidance  then
       available to the appellant was set out in a document valid from 16th
       April 2013 advising that the  relevant  form  for  applications  was
       SET(O), that used by the appellant.  New  guidance  was  not  issued
       until 20th May 2013 stipulating that from then onwards form  SET(LR)
       should  be  used.  The  rejection  of  the  appellant's   form   was
       accordingly in circumstances where the published guidance  was  that
       for applications between 16th April 2013  and  20th  May  2013  form
       SET(O) was the correct form to be used.


    8. Mr Tufan placed copies of all the relevant guidance  before  me  and
       submitted that the rejection of the appellant's application  on  the
       SET(O) form accordingly appears to have been as a matter of  policy,
       perhaps internal, which was not consistent with  the  guidance  then
       published.  Mr Tufan pointed out that the guidance  at  page  16  of
       that effective from 16th April 2013 was that all valid  applications
       for leave must be considered  even  if,  as  in  the  case  of  this
       applicant,  the  applicant  had  not  yet  completed  the  necessary
       qualifying period for indefinite leave.


    9. In these circumstances Mr Tufan said that he  could  not  oppose  an
       argument that the application should have  been  considered  by  the
       Secretary of State and not  rejected;  the  issue  was  not  one  in
       relation to which he wished to test  any  of  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant or  her  witnesses  present  at  the  hearing.   Mr  Tufan
       indicated that he would not argue against a view that  the  decision
       of the respondent was not in accordance with the law such  that  the
       matter should be remitted to the  Secretary  of  State  for  further
       consideration whilst the appellant awaited a lawful decision.


   10. Mr Bhebhe stated that he wished to make no submission in  the  light
       of my expressed view that the decision of the Secretary of State is,
       for all the reasons highlighted by Mr Tufan, not in accordance  with
       the law such that the appellant awaits a lawful  decision  from  the
       Secretary of State.


Notice of Decision


   11. The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State is not in accordance with the law.  The appellant
       awaits a lawful decision.

Anonymity


    There is no order for anonymity.

Signed:  J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                6th March 2015
Fee Award

The fee award remains as directed by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed: J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                6th March 2015

