
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14676/2015
                                                               IA/32961/2015
                                                               IA/32968/2015
                                                               IA/32971/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 7th November 2016               |On 22nd November 2016                    |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Larai [M]
                                 Michael [T]
                                    [E T]
                                    [D T]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr G Lee, instructed by Peer & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Appellants  were  born
    respectively on 14th May 1980, 11th May 1974, 24th March 2011  and  6th
    January 2014.  They are nationals of Nigeria and are  a  wife,  husband
    and two children.

2.   The third and fourth Appellants were born in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    first Appellant came to the UK in 2006 as a student.  She extended  her
    leave as a Tier 1 Migrant until March 2012.  On 26th June 2012 she  was
    refused leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

3.   The Appellant's current application was made on 30th December 2014  and
    refused in a decision dated 10th April 2015. First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain allowed the Appellants' appeals against the refusal of leave to
    remain on Article 8 grounds for  the  reasons  given  in  his  decision
    promulgated 19th May 2016.

4.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the judge had  made
    a material misdirection  in  law,  namely  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly apply Section 117B and failed to apply relevant  case  law  to
    the facts as he found them.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on the basis that: "Although the judge  appears  to  have  applied  the
    Razgar  principles  he  does  not  appear  to  have  given   sufficient
    consideration to the issue of proportionality.  Moreover, given that he
    found that the  third  Appellant's  medical  conditions  gave  rise  to
    exceptional circumstances, it is surprising  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider the leading cases of D v  UK  and  N  v  UK,  particularly  in
    relation to the UK's supposed 'duty' to provide treatment."

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

6.   The judge found that none of the Appellants  could  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. He then went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances sufficient to merit consideration outside the
    Rules. The judge considered that there were  two  factors  which  meant
    that he should consider Article 8 outside the Rules, namely two of  the
    four Appellants were minors, and therefore their welfare considerations
    must be taken into account, and secondly  that  the  third  Appellant's
    medical condition presented exceptional factors.

7.   The judge considered Article 8 and answered the  first  four  questions
    in Razgar in the affirmative.  With regard to proportionality the judge
    stated:

         "23. In making that  assessment  I  have  to  have  regard  to  the
             immigration history of the Appellants. As far as the third and
             fourth Appellants are concerned, they were both  born  in  the
             United Kingdom and therefore had no control over the situation
             they are in.  However, the  first  Appellant  and  the  second
             Appellant have made a deliberate choice of remaining  in  this
             country illegally. The second Appellant seems to  me  to  have
             been in the United Kingdom unlawfully  throughout.  The  first
             Appellant pleads that after her leave to  remain  expired  she
             could not go back because by then she had given birth to  [ET]
             who had already had a  period  of  hospitalisation.  In  other
             words she says that because her child was so ill she could not
             leave this country. In my view the truth of the matter is that
             the Appellant would not have left even if the child  was  born
             in the best of health.  I say this because she has,  prior  to
             the birth of [ET], had  refusals  from  the  Home  Office  but
             rather than return home she has persisted in remaining here."

         24.  The  first  and  second  Appellants'  immigration  history  is
             therefore not favourable to them."

8.   The judge considered  the  best  interests  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants. The third Appellant suffered from the following conditions:

         "He was born prematurely and had to  remain  in  hospital  for  six
         months before he was discharged.  He  weighed  only  650  grams  at
         birth  and  was  susceptible  to  infection.   He   suffered   from
         developmental delay which placed him at a mental age of 2 years. He
         has special educational needs and has been  allocated  one  to  one
         support of 25 hours per week.  The  child  has  problems  with  his
         vision and requires ongoing  support  from  specialist  speech  and
         language therapists. As was noted in the Home Office refusal letter
         he is seen by at least eight different specialists in hospital.  It
         is not clear whether any of the conditions  from  which  the  child
         suffers will ever be cured although I think  his  mother's  opinion
         that the child will have  special  educational  needs  is  probably
         correct".

9.    The  judge  found  that  there  was  no  expert  evidence  as  to  the
    availability of support that the third Appellant needed and  the  level
    to which it was available. However, there was a letter from the Federal
    Ministry of Education which suggested that some privately owned centres
    may be able to offer some of the support needed by the child  whilst  a
    letter from the Alkome Poly Clinic and Maternity suggested  that  there
    is a lack of facilities to  handle  people,  especially  children  with
    special needs. The judge concluded:

         "30. I think I am right in stating that the  decisive  question  is
             not whether a treatment is or is not available in Nigeria, but
             whether taking into account the welfare needs of the child and
             the United Kingdom's duty to promote it, the  removal  of  the
             child from the treatment/support regime that he  enjoys  would
             adversely affect that."

         31.  In my view, the condition of this child is so unusual in  that
             he suffers from multiple conditions for which whilst [sic]  he
             may never be cured, but is receiving support in the  UK  which
             are necessary both to try and improve  his  condition  but  at
             least to ensure that he does not get any worse.   In  my  view
             those are his basic welfare needs."

         32.  Having tried to  balance  the  United  Kingdom's  interest  in
             maintaining immigration control against the adverse impact  on
             the child, I have come to the view that  the  public  interest
             clearly lies in protecting [ET]'s welfare  which  favours  his
             remaining in the United Kingdom."

         33.  I have taken into account the public  interest  considerations
             in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002 and find that the public interest weighs in their favour.
             The first and second Appellants  speak  English  fluently  and
             whilst I have  not  been  presented  with  evidence  of  their
             financial circumstance, that is one factor that I have to take
             into account amongst others.  I find that the situation of the
             third Appellant as discussed above is such that  it  would  be
             disproportionate to remove him from the United Kingdom.   That
             finding seems to me to inexorably lead to  a  further  finding
             that if the first, second and fourth  Appellants  are  removed
             then the family and private life they  enjoy  with  the  third
             Appellant would be disproportionately interfered with."

         34.  The conclusion to which I have therefore come is that  all  of
             the Appellants succeed under Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention."

Submissions

10.  Mr Melvin made written submissions which in  summary  stated  that  the
    judge should have considered the fact that the child  in  question  had
    not completed seven years' residence in the UK and  that  fact  figured
    greatly when the Court of Appeal considered the reasonableness test  in
    MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.  He  submitted  that  the  court
    dismissed the appeals of five of the Appellants and in  AZ  (Pakistan),
    an autism case, the Court of Appeal had at paragraphs 102 to 103  found
    that the position might have been otherwise had the child not completed
    seven years' residence. It was submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not given any weight  to  the  significant  factor  of  seven
    years' residence in finding that the appeals should be allowed  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

11.  Mr Melvin  also  relied  on  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,
    paragraphs 58 to 62, and submitted in that case the court held that  it
    was not for the UK to provide medical treatment for  the  world  or  to
    educate the world and that the cost to the public  purse  of  education
    and healthcare must weigh in the proportionality  exercise.  The  judge
    had erred in law in that neither of  these  elements  appeared  in  the
    judge's conclusions.

12.  Mr Melvin submitted, relying on GS (India) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 40  at
    86, that the third Appellant's case would  fail  under  Article  3  and
    therefore without more it would be difficult to succeed  under  Article
    8. He relied on paragraph 86 of that decision, which states:

         "If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm.  That approach was,
         as it seems to  me,  applied  by  Moses  LJ  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  at
         paragraph 23: 'The only cases I can foresee where  the  absence  of
         adequate medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to
         be deported will be relevant to  Article  8,  is  where  it  is  an
         additional factor to be weighed in the balance, with other  factors
         which by themselves engage Article 8.  Suppose, in this  case,  the
         Appellant had established firm family ties in  this  country,  then
         the availability of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with
         his dependence on the family here for support,  together  establish
         'private life' under Article 8.  That conclusion would not  involve
         a comparison between medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe.
         Such a finding would not offend the principle expressed above  that
         the United Kingdom is under no  Convention  obligation  to  provide
         medical treatment here when it is not available in the  country  to
         which the Appellant is to be deported.'"

13.  In his oral submissions, Mr Melvin stated that  the  third  Appellant's
    medical condition was not life-threatening and the judge had failed  to
    take into account the poor immigration history of his  parents  in  the
    proportionality assessment. The third Appellant could  not  succeed  on
    Article 3 grounds and therefore it was very  difficult  to  succeed  on
    Article 8 grounds. The judge had to  identify  something  more  in  the
    Appellant's private life to meet that test. The facts of this case  did
    not show that  the  Appellant  had  established  private  life  outside
    medical care.

14.  Further the judge failed to consider the public  purse  in  considering
    the  exceptionality  test  and  proportionality,  namely  the  cost  of
    education and further  healthcare.  The  judge  had  gone  straight  to
    exceptional circumstances without considering Article 3 or  Article  8.
    He had not taken into account the weight to be attached to  the  public
    interest. This was not a case where the child had been residing in  the
    UK for seven years.

15.  Mr Melvin relied on paragraph 61 of  EV  (Philippines),  which  states:
    "In fact the Immigration  Judge  weighed  the  best  interests  of  the
    children as a primary consideration, and set against  it  the  economic
    wellbeing of the  country.   As  Maurice  Kay  LJ  pointed  out  in  AE
    (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have  been  appropriate
    to consider the cost to the public  purse  in  providing  education  to
    these children. In fact, that was not something  that  the  Immigration
    Judge explicitly considered.  If anything, therefore,  the  Immigration
    Judge adopted an approach too favourable to the Appellant."

16.  Mr Melvin submitted that the test was whether treatment  was  available
    to the third Appellant in Nigeria, not whether it was the same  as  the
    UK. The judge had accordingly made an error of law and I should  remake
    the  decision  on  the  facts  found  by  the  judge  and  dismiss  the
    Appellants' appeal on Article 8 grounds.

17.  Mr Lee submitted a skeleton argument in which he stated that the  judge
    came to the following findings:

    (i)  The case was sufficiently  exceptional  to  warrant  consideration
         outside of the Immigration Rules.

    (ii) The exceptionality consisted of a combination of the fact that two
         of the Appellants were children and thus their best interests  fell
         to be considered as a primary factor  and  the  medical  conditions
         that the third Appellant, [ET], suffered from.

    (iii)    The first and second Appellants' immigration history is to  be
         held against them.

    (iv) The third Appellant has exceptional needs and has been allocated a
         significant amount of support including 25  hours  of  one  to  one
         support, together with support from specialist speech and  language
         therapists. He is seen by at least eight different  specialists  in
         hospital.

    (v)  The key question was whether the removal of  the  third  Appellant
         from his treatment and support regime would  adversely  affect  his
         best interests.

    (vi) The answer to that question was that his  medical  conditions  and
         his prognosis were  so  unusual  such  that  it  was  in  his  best
         interests to remain under the care package he was receiving in  the
         UK at the very least to ensure that his condition did not worsen.

    (vii)    Taking into account  the  public  interest  considerations  in
         Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  and
         balancing the UK's interests  in  maintaining  immigration  control
         with the adverse impact removal would have on the  third  Appellant
         it would be disproportionate to remove him.

    (viii)   The first, second and fourth Appellants' appeals  fell  to  be
         allowed in line with the third Appellant as otherwise  family  life
         with   the   third   Appellant    would    be    interfered    with
         disproportionately.

18.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Lee submits that the grounds  complain  of
    two alleged errors of law, firstly that the judge  misdirected  himself
    and should have concentrated on the availability of care in Nigeria and
    secondly that the judge erred in his approach to Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.

19.  Mr Lee submitted that the judge's approach to the issue before him  was
    legally sustainable. He correctly identified the need for there  to  be
    exceptional circumstances to warrant consideration  outside  the  Rules
    consistent with Richard LJ's analysis in SS (Congo) & Ors  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA 387 at paragraph 33. There
    was also relevant case law which held that the  decision  to  remove  a
    person from the UK where that would prejudice  his  or  her  access  to
    medical treatment may engage Article 8. There were  numerous  cases  on
    mental health grounds and physical health grounds.

20.  There was authority that failure under Article 3  did  not  necessarily
    entail failure under Article 8. In JA (Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  1353  Lord
    Justice Sedley, with whom Lord Justices  Longmore  and  Aikens  agreed,
    said at paragraph 17:

         "There is no fixed relationship between Article 3  and  Article  8.
         Typically, a finding of a  violation  of  the  former  may  make  a
         decision on the latter unnecessary; but the latter is not simply  a
         more easily  accessed  version  of  the  former.  Each  has  to  be
         approached and applied on its own  terms,  and  Ms  Giovannetti  is
         accordingly right not to suggest that a claim of the  present  kind
         must come within Article 3 or fail."

21.  In GS, the Court of Appeal stated that if an Article 3 claim failed  on
    health grounds, in order for an Article 8 claim to succeed there  would
    have to be some separate or additional factual  element  which  brought
    the case within the Article 8, e.g. the  capacity  to  form  and  enjoy
    relationships. Mr Lee submitted that in the present case the judge  had
    identified the additional factor, the question of the best interests of
    [ET]. It was clear that his best interests were his continued access to
    the complex levels of care that he received in the UK and it was in his
    best interests to receive that  carefully  orchestrated  care  package.
    This finding was not dependent on a finding that  some  care  would  be
    available in Nigeria. The care he received was necessarily an important
    and protected facet of his private  life.  Accordingly,  there  was  no
    error of law in the judge's findings.

22.  In relation to Section 117B of the 2002 Act, it was submitted  that  in
    this case the judge's conclusions, in respect of the child with  severe
    difficulties and complex care packages, were properly open to him. When
    considering  MA  (Pakistan)  certain   aspects   resonated   with   the
    Appellants' case although the context was slightly different:

         "In my judgment, the observation of the judge to  the  effect  that
         people who come on a temporary  basis  can  be  expected  to  leave
         cannot be true of the child.  The purpose underlying the seven year
         rule is that this kind of reasoning ought  not  to  be  adopted  in
         their case. They are not to be  blamed  for  the  fact  that  their
         parents overstayed illegally, and the starting point is that  their
         status should be legitimised unless there is good reason not to  do
         so. I accept that the position might have  been  otherwise  without
         the seven years' residence, but that is a factor which  must  weigh
         heavily in this case. The fact that the parents are overstayers and
         have no right to remain  in  their  own  right  can  thereafter  be
         weighed in the proportionality balance against allowing  the  child
         to remain, but that is after a recognition that the  child's  seven
         years of residence is a significant factor pointing the other way."

23.  In his oral submissions, Mr Lee stated  that  considering  the  judge's
    factual findings his overall  conclusions  were  sustainable  on  those
    facts and his decision was open to him on the evidence before him.  The
    judge had identified factors which enabled him to  look  at  Article  8
    outside the Immigration  Rules.  He  then  considered  the  exceptional
    circumstances identified and took into account the immigration  history
    of the Appellants.  This  was  not  just  a  medical  case.  The  third
    Appellant received a significant learning package in his school and the
    judge had also taken into account  Section  117B.  The  proportionality
    balance fell in favour of protecting the third Appellant's welfare  and
    the judge's approach was consistent with GS.

24.  The judge had identified additional elements in this  case.  The  third
    Appellant was a child and  was  receiving  an  unusual  level  of  care
    including support in his learning environment. This  was  part  of  his
    private life. It was open to the judge to conclude that the package  of
    medical treatment and learning support constituted private life.   This
    was something more than medical treatment and it  was  in  the  child's
    best interests to receive such treatment and the learning support  that
    he did. The judge had properly applied Section 117B and concluded  that
    the third Appellant's removal was disproportionate, even though he  did
    not have seven years' residence. This finding should only be set  aside
    if it was not open to the judge on the  facts.  Whilst  this  could  be
    described as a sympathetic decision it was not a perverse decision.

25.  In response, Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  seven  year  rule  was  a
    significant factor and the judge  had  failed  to  properly  apply  the
    approach in MA (Pakistan).  He had not taken into account  the  adverse
    immigration  history  of  the  third   Appellant's   parents   in   his
    proportionality assessment and had not factored in the expense  to  the
    public purse of education and welfare. The judge had failed to look  at
    whether  the  Appellant's  parents  were  financially  independent  and
    therefore he had erred in his application of Section 117B. There was  a
    material misdirection in law.

26.  Further, the judge had failed to consider the case law referred  to  in
    submissions. The UK could not be expected to cover the educational  and
    medical needs of the world.  The judge had not  applied  relevant  case
    law and had not in fact referred to it. Had he applied that case law he
    would have come to the opposite conclusion. Accordingly,  his  findings
    were irrational.

Discussion and Conclusions

27.  I am not persuaded by Mr Melvin's submission that the judge  failed  to
    take into account the immigration  history  of  the  first  and  second
    Appellants in his assessment of proportionality. It is quite clear from
    the decision that, in looking at proportionality, the first  thing  the
    judge dealt with was the immigration history  of  the  Appellants.  The
    first and second Appellants had made a deliberate choice to  remain  in
    the UK illegally and the third and fourth  Appellants  had  no  control
    over the situation they are in.

28.  The next point made by Mr Melvin is that the third Appellant could  not
    succeed on Article 8 grounds and the only relevant element  taken  into
    account by the judge was the third Appellant's medical needs. The judge
    had failed to assess whether treatment was available in Nigeria. Had he
    done so he would have concluded that the removal of the  Appellant  did
    not breach Article 3. The judge failed to make any finding  on  Article
    3.

29.  I find that the judge's failure to specifically address Article  3  was
    not material. The Appellant cannot succeed on Article  3  grounds,  but
    this does not preclude a finding under Article 8.

30.  I am of the view  that  the  judge  considered  whether  treatment  was
    available in Nigeria and did not just assess whether it was  equivalent
    to that in the UK. He commented on the lack  of  expert  evidence,  but
    also assessed the contradictory evidence  before  him;  some  privately
    owned centres may be able to offer some  of  the  support  needed,  but
    there was a lack of facilities to handle  people,  especially  children
    with special care.

31.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  something  more  than  the  third
    Appellant's medical care sufficient to engage Article  8.  The  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 30 and 31 identify not only the medical needs of
    the Appellant and the treatment he receives in the  UK,  but  also  the
    fact that he is receiving support at school and with a variety of other
    professionals. The judge has concluded that the  unusual  circumstances
    and special needs of the third Appellant are something over  and  above
    his medical needs.

32.  I am persuaded by Mr Lee's submission that the judge's  conclusions  at
    30 and 31 amount to an assessment  of  the  third  Appellant's  private
    life. The judge found that the  third  Appellant's  private  life,  his
    healthcare, his learning support, all of his welfare needs mean that he
    has shown an additional element over and above medical treatment in the
    UK. The judge's decision was consistent GS that there had  to  be  some
    separate or additional factual element which brought  the  case  within
    the Article 8 paradigm, for example the  capacity  to  form  and  enjoy
    relationships or a state of affairs which had some affinity  with  that
    paradigm.

33.  Accordingly, whilst not referring  to  GS  or,  indeed  D  or  N,  that
    failure  was  not  material  because  the  judge  assessed  the   third
    Appellant's private life and came to conclusions which were open to him
    at paragraphs 30 and 31. The  judge  then  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise and found that the adverse impact on the child would be great.
    The judge weighs this against the other factors in Section 117B.

34.  The fact that the third Appellant has not been residing in the  UK  for
    seven years is not a factor to be held  against  him,  given  that  the
    judge found that his best interests were to remain in the UK and  there
    is a duty to promote his best interests.  The  Third  Appellant's  best
    interests are independent of the immigration history of his parents.

35.  The judge weighed the third  Appellant's  best  interests  against  the
    poor  immigration  history  of  his  parents  and  concluded  that  the
    circumstances  of  the  third  Appellant  were  so  unusual  that  they
    outweighed the public interest in maintaining immigration control.

36.  The failure to specifically refer to paragraph 61 of  EV  (Philippines)
    was not fatal to the decision. In assessing the 'care package' that the
    third Appellant received the judge was well aware of the expense to the
    public purse of educating the third and fourth Appellant and the  third
    Appellant's healthcare needs.

37.  The judge  found  that  the  best  interests  of  the  third  Appellant
    outweigh the public interest because his welfare needs were so  unusual
    that removing him to Nigeria would be disproportionate, notwithstanding
    the fact that his parents had remained  illegally  and  notwithstanding
    the cost of the expense and support that the Appellant received.

38   The judge's decision was open to him on the facts of this case. It  was
    consistent with case law and he properly applied Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act. I find that there was no error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dated 11th May 2016 and I dismiss the  Respondent's
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 18th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

