
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/14232/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/14246/2014
     IA/14252/2014
     IA/14257/2014
     IA/14264/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 23 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

|OLANREWAJU TAIWO OLUMUYIWA               |First Appellant |
|EYOANWAN ESTHER OLUMUYIWA                |Second Appellant|
|ANUOLUWAPO DAVID OLUMUYIWA               |Third Appellant |
|OLUWANIFEMI ESTHER OLUMUYIWA             |Fourth Appellant|
|OLUWATONI EMMANUEL OLUMUYIWA             |Fifth Appellant |


                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Bhebhe, of Njomane Immigration Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, all  of  whom  are  Nigerian  citizens,  are  a  family
    consisting of a married couple and their  three  children.   The  first
    appellant has been in the UK as a student since 2009, and his wife  and
    three children joined him at the end of 2010.  The first appellant  had
    leave for post-study work until 2012, and then obtained  further  leave
    as a Tier 2 Minister of Religion.  When his  position  ended,  and  his
    leave was consequently curtailed,  the  family  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds, with reference to Articles 3 and  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   Following a hearing on 15 May 2014 the appeals were dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson, in a determination promulgated on 26 June
    2014.

3.   Following the submission of lengthy and unfocused  grounds,  permission
    to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White,  on  11
    August 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was
    arguable that the judge had not made a  clear  finding  as  to  whether
    removal would amount to an  Article  8  breach.   A  Rule  24  response
    responded making the point that the judge had made such a clear finding
    at paragraphs 32 and 33 of the determination.   The  Rule  24  response
    went on to make the point that the family would be removed as  a  unit,
    that all were  now  without  leave  following  the  end  of  the  first
    appellant's employment as a Minister of Religion, that  the  appellants
    had been in the country for five years or less,  in  the  case  of  the
    first appellant's wife and children, and any  private  life  ties  were
    developed at a time when their immigration status was precarious, since
    they were temporary migrants.

4.   At the start of  the  hearing  we  indicated  to  Mr  Bhebhe,  for  the
    appellants, that our preliminary view, having read the papers, was that
    there was no legal error in the judge's approach.  We  gave  Mr  Bhebhe
    every opportunity to develop any legal argument, either with  reference
    to the lengthy grounds, or with reference to the  issue  identified  by
    the judge who granted permission to appeal, but he was unable to  mount
    a coherent legal argument as to how or why the judge could be  said  to
    have erred in law.  Insofar as any clear points emerged they were  that
    the medical matters had been dealt with  improperly;  that  there  were
    inadequate explanations for findings reached; and  that  paragraphs  32
    and 33 of the determination did not include an explanation of  how  the
    judge had proceeded in his reasoning process.  Mr Bhebhe also mentioned
    that the judge had not detailed how the appellants failed to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, despite accepting that this  had  been  conceded  on
    their behalf at the hearing.

5.   Mr Wilding, for the respondent, made  brief  submissions  pointing  out
    that the judge had dealt, at paragraph 24, with  the  reasons  for  the
    appellants not meeting any of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE, and
    had also looked at the nature and extent of the ties established by the
    children.  It had also not been specified what in the Immigration Rules
    might be of relevance.

Decision and Reasons

6.   We have decided that no error of law has  been  established,  and  that
    there is therefore no basis to disturb the judge's decision  dismissing
    the appeals.

7.   As we have said, the grounds seeking permission to appeal  were  poorly
    drafted and lacked focus.  The judge granting permission to appeal  did
    not refer to any of them, perhaps for this reason.  Although we gave Mr
    Bhebhe ample opportunity to make oral  submissions,  nothing  that  was
    said at the hearing  came  close  to  identifying  any  arguable  point
    arising from the grounds.  As a result it remained the  case  that  the
    only clearly identifiable point was that mentioned  by  the  permission
    judge, and addressed in the Rule 24 response.

8.   Nothing that was said at the hearing altered our  initial  view,  which
    was that the judge did make  a  clear  finding,  which  was  adequately
    reasoned in his determination, that the proposed removal of the  family
    would not amount to an Article 8 breach.  On a proper  reading  of  the
    determination as a whole it appears to us that there is nothing in  the
    point identified at the permission stage.

9.   In our view this was a careful  determination,  which  dealt  with  the
    issues fully and properly.  The best interests  of  the  children  were
    considered appropriately, as a primary consideration.  The issue of the
    kidnap fears, and the account of a past attempt  at  kidnap,  were  the
    subject of adequately reasoned findings, which were open to  the  judge
    on the evidence before him.  The judge gave  careful  consideration  to
    the subjective fears of one of the children.  The judge's decision that
    the circumstances did not establish a  risk  on  return  on  Article  3
    grounds was clearly open to the judge on the evidence before  him.   At
    paragraphs 32 and 33 the judge appears to us to have set  out  the  key
    elements to be considered in an Article  8  proportionality  assessment
    focusing on the private life ties of the family,  and  the  outcome  of
    that assessment was also one that was clearly open to him.

10.  Despite the current difficulties in achieving clarity about the  nature
    of the law on Article 8, and the relationship between Article 8 and the
    Immigration Rules, no argument was put forward that the judge  had  not
    conducted the Article 8 assessment within the correct legal  framework.
    In any event, in our view, what stands out from  the  determination  is
    that the judge  gave  a  full,  clear,  and  well  reasoned  assessment
    engaging with the particular facts, both in relation  to  the  risk  on
    return arguments, and  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  private  life
    arguments.

11.  Anonymity directions were not made at the First-tier, and neither  side
    suggested that there was any such need before  us.   No  issue  of  fee
    awards arises.

Decision

12.  The appeals are dismissed.  Since no error of law has been  established
    the judge's decision remains undisturbed.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb             23 October 2014

