


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14668/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered at : Field House                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 25 March 2014                            |On : 11 April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE



                                   Between


                          Olasoji Olajide Atolagbe
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision made on  6  January  2014  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Rimington set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  of  9  August
      2013 allowing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
      to refuse to issue him with a residence  card  under  the  Immigration
      (EEA) Regulations 2006 and directed that the decision  be  re-made  in
      the Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing.

2.    In  a  letter  dated  13   February   2014   the   appellant's   legal
      representatives advised the Upper Tribunal that the  appellant  wished
      to withdraw  his  appeal.  In  response,  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
      directions on 17 February 2014 giving its consent to the withdrawal by
      the appellant of his case before  it,  pursuant  to  rule  17  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and proposing,  in  the
      absence of any objection, to treat the respondent's decision to refuse
      to issue the residence card as unchallenged.

4.   In the absence of any objection to that proposal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      treats as unchallenged the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue
      the appellant with a residence card. The appellant's appeal before the
      Upper Tribunal is accordingly dismissed.

DECISION

5.   The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and has been set aside. The  decision  is  re-
      made by dismissing the appeal.








                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
