
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14080/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 November 2014                        |On 19 November 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             Mr Md Shamim Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 October 1989.   His
    appeal against the respondent's decision on 17  April  2013  to  refuse
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 Student under paragraph  245ZX(c)
    and (d) of HC 395 (as amended) was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sarsfield in a determination promulgated on 17 September 2013.

2.   The hearing proceeded in the  absence  of  the  appellant  or  a  legal
    representative.  There was no explanation for the non  appearance  even
    though both the appellant and PGA Solicitors had been notified  of  the
    hearing date by first-class mail on 16 October 2014.

3.   The appellant did not lodge an application  for  permission  to  appeal
    against the judge's decision until a year later on 25  September  2014.
    The explanation given by PGA Solicitors on his behalf for the delay was
    that the appellant never received communication  regarding  his  First-
    tier appeal.  He first became aware of the decision on 4 September 2014
    when he was arrested by an Immigration  Officer.   They  contacted  the
    Tribunal services to get the determination on 11 September 2014 and  it
    confirmed that the determination was only sent to his  representatives.
    They  tried  to  communicate  with  his  previous  representatives  for
    information about his appeal but were unsuccessful.  For these  reasons
    the appellant requested that his appeal be considered out of time.

4.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew and it  says
    the following in the second paragraph:

         "The application for permission was made about a year later than it
         should have been.  Nonetheless, having considered the grounds I  am
         satisfied  that  there  is  an  arguable  error  of  law   in   the
         determination in that the judge gave no consideration to Article  8
         despite this having been raised in the grounds of appeal."

5.   The Secretary of State opposed the appellant's appeal in  her  response
    to the appellant's grounds under Rule 24.    The  respondent  submitted
    that in granting permission Judge Andrew did not state the  reason  why
    she was treating the application as being in time.  She simply did  not
    engage with the issue but merely stated  that  there  was  an  arguable
    error of law.

6.    Mr  Wilding  developed  this  submission.   He  relied  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal's  decision  in  Boktor  and  Wanis  (late   application   for
    permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 442 (IAC) which was issued on 22 November
    2011.  The head note in Boktor and Wanis states as follows:

         "Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,
         but in circumstances where the  application  is  out  of  time,  an
         explanation is provided, but that explanation is not considered  by
         the judge granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal  appeal
         - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear
         wording of Rule 24(4) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)
         Rules 2005, the grant of permission to appeal is  conditional,  and
         the question of whether there are special circumstances  making  it
         unjust not to extend time has to be considered."

7.   Mr Wilding relied on the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Wang  (extension
    of time for appealing) Malaysia [2013] UKUT 343 (IAC) issued on 18 July
    2013.  The Upper Tribunal held as follows:

         "When considering an application for permission to appeal  that  is
         out of time, a judge  must  (i)  consider  all  available  material
         including the material on file  and  bear  in  mind  the  need  for
         evidence to rebut the presumption of  service,  (ii)  consider  the
         extent of the delay and whether any explanation covers the whole of
         that  period;  (iii)  give  brief  reasons  for  the  discretionary
         decision to extend time or refuse to do so.   The  same  principles
         apply whichever side is the applicant."

8.   Mr Wilding submitted that in this case the only explanation  given  was
    that his representative did not inform him of the determination.  There
    was no evidence to back up this assertion.

9.   Mr Wilding also relied on the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC)  (18  February
    2013).  Head note 1 states:

         "The expectation is that it will be an exceptional  case  in  which
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted  where
         the lodging of the application for permission is more than 28  days
         out of time.  Where, in such a case, a judge  is  minded  to  grant
         permission, the preferable course is to provide an  opportunity  to
         the respondent to make representations. This might be  achieved  by
         listing the permission application for oral hearing."

10.  Mr Wilding submitted that firstly time should not  have  been  extended
    and in any event the respondent was not given the opportunity  to  make
    representations.  Consequently he asked me not to extend time.

11.  In any event, he relied on the Supreme Court case of Patel [2013]  UKSC
    72 which states at paragraph 57  that:  "...   The  opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is not in itself a  right  protected  under
    Article 8."

12.  I find that the decided cases relied on by Mr Wilding are pertinent  to
    this appeal.  The appellant's application for an extension was one year
    out of date.  The appellant's assertion that he  did  not  receive  the
    determination from his solicitors was not backed up by any evidence.  I
    also find that the appellant should bear some of the responsibility for
    this.  I note that the determination was sent to  his  then  solicitors
    because that was the address the appellant  gave  when  he  lodged  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision refusing his  application.  He
    did not provide his personal address.  In the circumstances I would say
    that the appellant bore the burden to check with his solicitors or even
    the Tribunal or the UKBA whether a decision had  been  reached  in  his
    case.  It does not appear that he did this.

13.  On this evidence and in the light of the case law,  I  find  that  time
    should not have been extended  and  the  judge  was  wrong  to  do  so.
    Accordingly I do not extend time for the  lodging  of  the  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal.

14.   The  judge  who  granted  permission  gave  as  her  only  reason  her
    satisfaction that the judge who dismissed the appellant's  appeal  gave
    no consideration to Article 8 despite this having been  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  In the light of the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Patel, it is difficult to see how this appellant's appeal could succeed
    on Article 8.

15.  My primary finding is that the appellant's application is out  of  time
    and the application is not admitted.



Signed        Date 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


