
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14416/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2016                          |On 13th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Suranga Sampath Liyanage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams of Counsel, instructed by SBG Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Lingam  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 9th May 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Sri Lankan citizen born 30th September 1983  who
    claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 11th May  2007.   On  9th
    July 2014 the Claimant applied for a residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national, which application was refused with no
    right of appeal.

 4. On 19th November 2014 the Claimant made a  further  application  for  a
    residence card as the extended family member of an EEA  national,  that
    being his cousin Pathiranage Don Nilanka Sampath Yapa  Subasinghe  (the
    Sponsor) who is a citizen of the Netherlands.

 5. The application was refused  on  29th  March  2015  with  reference  to
    regulation 8(2) of The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

 6. In giving reasons for refusal the Respondent did not  accept  that  the
    Claimant and the Sponsor were related  as  claimed  as  original  birth
    certificates together with English translations had not been  provided.
    In addition it was contended that the Claimant  had  not  provided  any
    evidence of dependency upon the Sponsor at  any  time,  either  in  Sri
    Lanka, or in the United Kingdom.  The Claimant  had  not  provided  any
    evidence that he was dependent on  the  Sponsor  immediately  prior  to
    entering the United Kingdom, and had not provided any evidence that  he
    was residing with,  or  had  been  dependent  upon  the  Sponsor  since
    entering the United Kingdom.  The  application  was  therefore  refused
    with reference to regulation 8(2)(a) and (c) of the 2006 Regulations.

 7. The Claimant appealed, and his appeal was heard  by  the  FtT  on  12th
    April 2016.  The FtT heard evidence from the Claimant and  Sponsor  and
    was satisfied that the Claimant  and  Sponsor  were  related  as  first
    cousins.  The FtT found that the Claimant had proved past membership of
    the Sponsor's household.  The FtT also found that the Claimant had been
    financially supported by the Sponsor prior to entering the UK, and that
    the Claimant was a current  member  of  the  Sponsor's  household,  and
    currently financially dependent upon  him.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    requirements  of  regulation  8  were  satisfied  and  the  appeal  was
    therefore allowed.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended the FtT  had  erred  in  finding
    that the Claimant had been part of the  Sponsor's  household  prior  to
    coming to the UK in 2007.  It was pointed out that the Sponsor  is  two
    years younger than the Claimant, and it was not the Sponsor's household
    in which the Claimant lived in Sri Lanka,  but  the  household  of  the
    Sponsor's father, the Claimant's uncle.   The  property  in  which  the
    Claimant lived, was transferred into the Sponsor's name in 2013 by  way
    of a deed of gift, but by this time the Claimant had  already  been  in
    the UK for approximately six years.  He  had  therefore  never  been  a
    member of the  Sponsor's  household  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. It was contended that the FtT had erred by finding  any  evidence  that
    the Sponsor had made financial contributions to the Claimant, prior  to
    the Claimant coming to live in the United Kingdom.

10. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald in the following terms;

         "The grounds of application point out that the Sponsor is two years
         younger than the Appellant and it was not his household but that of
         his father, namely the Appellant's uncle.  While there was  a  deed
         of gift to the Sponsor the Appellant had already been in the UK for
         around six years.  He had never therefore  been  a  member  of  the
         Sponsor's household at the relevant time.   Reference  is  made  to
         Moneke.

         The judge did find that the Appellant had shown past membership  of
         his Sponsor's household but it may be, as the grounds suggest, that
         there has been  a  material  error  in  fact  by  the  judge  which
         translates into an arguable error in law."

11. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  denied  that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  law
    materially or at  all,  and  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  skeleton
    argument that had been before the FtT.

12. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Whitwell raised an issue that had not been in the Grounds of Appeal,
    that being the validity of the Claimant's appeal to the FtT, and relied
    upon Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

14. Mr Lams raised no objection to this point being considered and was  not
    taken by surprise, as he had  addressed  this  issue  in  his  skeleton
    argument dated 9th October 2016 which was provided to the Tribunal, and
    Mr Whitwell.

15. In brief summary Mr Whitwell submitted that the Claimant claimed to  be
    the extended family member of an EEA national,  being  related  to  the
    Sponsor as a first cousin.  Therefore Sala  was  authority  to  confirm
    that the Claimant did not have a statutory right of appeal to the  FtT,
    and the FtT had materially erred in law in considering the appeal.

16. If I did not accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    invalidity of the appeal, Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds contained
    within the application  for  permission  to  appeal,  as  disclosing  a
    material error of law.

17. Mr Lams relied upon  his  skeleton  argument,  acknowledging  that  the
    principal issue related to jurisdiction.

18. Mr Lams submitted copies of the case law referred to in paragraph 3  of
    his skeleton argument, and in very brief summary, argued that Sala  was
    wrongly decided and was not binding on the Upper Tribunal.

19. Mr Lams argued that the submissions made in Sala by the  Claimant,  and
    the Respondent, were in fact correct and should have been  accepted  by
    the Upper Tribunal, and Mr Lams adopted those submissions before me.

20. If I found that Sala should not be followed, and therefore the Claimant
    had lodged a valid appeal, Mr Lams submitted that  the  grounds  relied
    upon by the Secretary of State did not disclose  a  material  error  of
    law.  I was invited to find that the FtT was entitled to conclude  that
    the Claimant had been a member of the Sponsor's household, and also had
    been financially dependent  upon  him  prior  to  entering  the  United
    Kingdom.

21. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. Both representatives agreed that the initial  issue  to  be  considered
    related to jurisdiction, and I find this to be the case.

23.  I  have  taken  into  account  the  oral  submissions  made  by   both
    representatives, and Mr Lams' skeleton argument.

24. I made the representatives aware that the Upper Tribunal file  did  not
    contain the bundle submitted on behalf of the Claimant before the  FtT.
    It is clear that such a bundle was before the FtT as there is reference
    to it in the decision.  Mr Whitwell supplied me with the relevant pages
    from that bundle, that related to the issues before me.

25. I am unable to accept that Sala has been wrongly decided.   I  set  out
    below the headnote to that decision;

         "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the
         Secretary of State not to  grant  a  residence  card  to  a  person
         claiming to be an Extended Family Member."

26. Sala was decided by a Vice-Presidential panel, and the panel considered
    forensically and comprehensively the  issues  in  appeals  relating  to
    extended family members.

27. The Claimant in this case claims to be the extended family member of an
    EEA national.  It is not disputed that they are related as cousins.

28. However, because the Claimant relied upon  regulation  8  of  the  2006
    Regulations, and relied upon being an extended family member of an  EEA
    national, I have to conclude that he had no statutory right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant him a
    residence card, and the error of law was the  failure  of  the  FtT  to
    recognise that.  It should go without  saying  that  no  blame  can  be
    attached to the FtT, as Sala  had  not  been  published  when  the  FtT
    decision was made.

29. Nevertheless, because the FtT had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal,
    it erred in law in doing so.  It is therefore not necessary  to  go  on
    and examine the Grounds of Appeal initially submitted by the  Secretary
    of State.   I set aside the decision of the FtT.  The decision  is  re-
    made in that I find there was no valid appeal before the FtT.

Notice of Decision


The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision that there was no valid  appeal
before the FtT.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 10th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is invalid.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

