
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14464/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th December 2016                |On 16th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mr syed Moin-Ud-Din
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan  who  arrived  here  on  1st
    September 2011 with Tier 4 student leave valid to  26th  January  2015.
    He subsequently claimed he was unable to complete his  studies  because
    the college had been suspended and then its licence  revoked  in  April
    2014.

 2. He applied for leave to remain outside the Rules explaining that he had
    been unable to find a new sponsor because the Respondent,  despite  his
    request, had not sent him a curtailment letter.  His appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.

 3. The judge found the Appellant's evidence to  be  highly  unsatisfactory
    (paragraph 10) for reasons given.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

 4. Grounds of application were lodged.  They said that the sponsor licence
    was not revoked until 2014 and therefore the Appellant's  annual  leave
    remained valid and thus the Appellant "was unable to require a 60  days
    curtailment letter".

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  in
    a decision dated 19th  September  2016  which  said  that  it  was  not
    arguable, even upon the Appellant's own case, that he had been deprived
    of the opportunity to  seek  a  CAS  certificate  from  an  alternative
    college due to the Respondent's supposed failure to issue him with a 60
    day curtailment notice.

 6. Grounds for permission to appeal were renewed to the Upper Tribunal, it
    being said in the grounds that "It is duty  of  Respondent  to  send  a
    curtailment letter to all  the  students  of  such  institute".   Those
    grounds were found to be arguable by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  in  a
    decision dated 16th November 2016.

 7. A Rule 24 notice was lodged submitting that there was no evidence  that
    the college had ever been suspended and therefore  there  was  no  duty
    upon the Secretary of State to provide 60 days variation of leave.

 8. Furthermore, to provide such a letter would have been inconsistent with
    the Home Office's own policy guidance as stated in the refusal  letter,
    namely that at the time of the request there  was  less  than  60  days
    leave remaining, so the Home Office would not have been able to issue a
    60 day curtailment notification.

 9. Thus the matter came before me.

10. The Appellant was unrepresented and said he should have been allowed 60
    days by the Home Office in terms of  their  policy.   He  narrated  the
    history of what had happened.  He needed the 60 day letter.   In  terms
    of paragraph 7 of the judge's decision he had not  contacted  the  Home
    Office in writing as stated there, but rather by telephone.

11. For the Respondent, Mr Duffy, said the policy had  not  been  produced.
    The policy did not say that in every case a 60 day  letter  had  to  be
    given to every student.  The Appellant had had some  eleven  months  in
    which to obtain a further CAS and therefore, even granting him a 60 day
    letter would not have made any difference.

12. The judge had correctly analysed the position and made no error in law.



13. I reserved my decision.

Conclusion

14. It is within judicial knowledge that  the  Home  Office  do  operate  a
    policy in that, in certain circumstances, a claimant will be allowed  a
    period of 60 days to obtain a further college at which they can  study;
    the precise terms of  that  policy  are  plainly  not  within  judicial
    knowledge.  As Mr Duffy pointed out, this  does  not  mean  that  every
    single appellant will be afforded an opportunity to  obtain  a  further
    college.

15. The case for the appellant is that the Home Office breached  their  own
    policy but, for reasons which are unexplained, the claimant and/or  his
    solicitors have never produced the terms of the  policy.   It  has  not
    served the appellant well to maintain in the grounds that  it  was  the
    "duty" of the Respondent to send a curtailment letter when  the  policy
    that is said to lie behind such an alleged  "duty" was not provided  or
    exhibited to the First -Tier or  Upper Tribunal.

16. Absent the policy and in these circumstances it is difficult to see how
    the First -  tier  Tribunal  judge  could  have  come  to  a  different
    decision.  For reasons given he found the appellant's  evidence  to  be
    highly unsatisfactory.  There was a considerable delay in the appellant
    contacting the Respondent.  The judge was entitled to conclude that his
    actions were not those of a genuine student.  As Mr Duffy indicated the
    appellant had had almost a year to apply to a further college  and  had
    not done so.

17. In all the circumstances there was no error in  law  by  the  judge  in
    dismissing the appeal.  As such the judge's decision must stand.



Notice of Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

19. I do not set aside the decision.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

