
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14707/2013
                                                               IA/14713/2013
                                                               IA/14717/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27th February 2014                         |On 8th April 2014            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MOHAMMED SIFUL HAQUE SUJAN
                                SHAYMA AKTER
                                AMANUL HAQUE
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mrs Sinha of Chetna & Co Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge L Murray promulgated  on  6th  November  2013  in  which  she
        dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  it
        under Article 8 ECHR. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State
        in relation to which permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
        P Lane on 9th December 2013 on  the  basis  that  the  grounds  are
        clearly arguable and that apart from anything else Article  8  does
        not confer a discrete right to work in a place of one's choice.



Background


     2. Mr Sujan is a national of Bangladesh born on 3rd October 1984.  The
        other two named Respondent's are his wife who was born on 1st  July
        1987 and their son born  on  26th  June  2011,  both  of  whom  are
        dependent upon Mr Sujan succeeding with his claim.


     3. On 26th August 2003 Mr Sujan was granted leave to enter the  United
        Kingdom as a student with leave valid until the 31st October  2004.
        His leave to remain as a student was varied until 31st October 2009
        and thereafter he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
        Student until 2nd October 2012. On  1st  October  2012  he  made  a
        combined application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a
        Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Points Based System and for
        a Biometric Residence Permit which was refused by the Secretary  of
        State on 25th April 2013.


     4. Mrs Akter was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a spouse
        on 27th June 2005 which was varied in line with that of her husband
        until 2nd October 2012. On 1st October 2012 she made an application
        for leave to remain as a partner of a  Tier  1  Migrant  which  was
        refused in line with that of her husband on 25th April 2013.  Their
        son, who was born in the United Kingdom on the above  stated  date,
        is dependent upon his parent's claims.


     5. Having considered the available material Judge Murray dismissed the
        appeal  under  the  Rules.  She  states  in  paragraph  28  of  the
        determination:


              28. The requirements of 41SD  are  clearly  set  out  and  the
   Appellant has                failed to meet them. The Appellant will only
   be considered to have                 access to funds if he provides  the
   specified documents.   He  has  not                    done  so.  In  the
   circumstances he has not demonstrated he has  access                   to
   the funds and cannot be awarded the points for Attributes.


     6.  The finding Mr Sujan and his family  are  unable  to  satisfy  the
        relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules is not contested and
        there is no cross-appeal.  Having  made  the  above  finding  Judge
        Murray states in paragraph 29 of her determination:


              29. The Appellant states that he has  been  in  the  UK  since
   August 2003.                 His immigration history summarised at page 1
   of the RFLR appears                   to confirm this. I accept  that  in
   this time he has established private               life in the UK. It  is
   clear       however       that       he       cannot       meet       the
   requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the Rules.


     7. In  paragraph  30  Judge  Murray  then  states  "I  have  therefore
        considered the Appellants case under  Article  8  ECHR",  and  then
        proceeded to undertake what can be  described  as  an  "old  style"
        freestanding  Article  8  ECHR  assessment  before  concluding,  in
        paragraph 41, that "Clearly, the nature of  the  non-compliance  is
        relevant to the proportionality of removal. The nature of the  non-
        compliance in this case is the failure to  meet  strict  evidential
        requirements as to the  form  of  documentation.  In  view  of  the
        Appellant's long residence, excellent immigration history, the fact
        that the money is I accept available to him  I  consider  that  the
        weight to be attached in this case to the interests of  immigration
        control has been outweighed  by  the  material  disruption  to  the
        Appellant's private life in removing them."


     8. I find that in proceeding as she did, Judge Murray has made a legal
        error. It appears that one aspect she considered  relevant  to  the
        decision to allow the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds  is  based
        upon the near miss principal which does not exist.  This  has  been
        confirmed by the Supreme Court in the case of Patel [2013] UKSC  72
        at paragraph 56:


          56. Although the context of the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
   consideration of                 proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ
   that this cannot be equated with a                 formalised "near-miss"
   or "sliding scale" principle, as argued for by Mr Malik.             That
   approach is unsupported by Strasbourg authority, or by a  proper  reading
   of             Lord Bingham's words.  Mrs  Huang's  case  for  favourable
   treatment outside the            rules did not turn on how close she  had
   come to compliance with rule 317, but on           the application of the
   family  values  which  underlie  that  rule  and   are   at   the   heart
   also of article 8. Conversely, a near-miss under the rules cannot provide
                  substance to  a  human  rights  case  which  is  otherwise
   lacking in merit.


     9. I find Judge Murray also fell into legal error in her  approach  to
        the Article 8 assessment.  Having concluded, quite  properly,  that
        Mr Sujan was unable to succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  the
        Judge proceeded to undertake an old-style Article 8 ECHR assessment
        which is structurally and legally wrong. It was necessary for Judge
        Murray to consider the merits of the case  in accordance  with  the
        approach set out by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA
        Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  and  by
        the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640,  as  confirmed  by
        Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).   These
        judgments have made it clear that the question  of  proportionality
        must be looked at in the context of the Immigration Rules  with  no
        need to go on to a specific assessment under Article  8  if  it  is
        clear from the facts that there are  no  particular  compelling  or
        exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be  taken.  That
        approach is consistent with what the Court of  Appeal  said  in  MF
        (Nigeria) and with the approach of the House of Lords, particularly
        in cases such as Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
        In Shahzad it was found that where an area of the  Rules  does  not
        have  such  an  express  mechanism  such  as  that  found  in   the
        deportation  provisions,  the  approach  in  Nagre  ([29]-[31]   in
        particular) and Gulshan should be followed: i.e. after applying the
        requirements of the Rules, only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
        grounds for granting leave to remain outside them, is it  necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
        compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


    10. The starting position for the Judge was to look at  the  Rules  and
        see whether Mr Sujan was able to meet their requirements, which she
        did.  He could not, and so the next question to  arise  is  whether
        the decision would lead to a breach of Article 8 but in the context
        of whether there are factors not covered by the  Rules  which  give
        rise to the need to consider Article 8 further.  The  Secretary  of
        State is of the view that having considered the merits of the  case
        outside the Rules it should have been found  there  was  no  reason
        established to warrant a grant of leave on this basis. In light  of
        the material the Judge was  asked  to  consider  it  has  not  been
        arguably made out that  the  decision  will  result  in  compelling
        circumstances giving rise to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
        Mr Sujan or any family member, such as  to  establish  an  arguable
        case at this time.


    11. I find Judge Murray made a legal error material to her decision  to
        allow the appeal and, as a result, set aside the determination. The
        factual findings relating to the inability of Mr Sujan  to  succeed
        under the Rules and the existence of private and family life  shall
        be preserved findings.



Discussion



    12. This case involves an individual of considerable  ability  who  has
        pioneered an on-line ordering system which may be  of  considerable
        benefit to business within the United Kingdom  and  elsewhere.  The
        fact Mr Sujan appears to  have  such  abilities  in  the  field  of
        engineering does not, however, enable him to remain in  the  United
        Kingdom per se, as it is clearly the Secretary of State's  position
        that  unless  an  individual  can  satisfy  the   requirements   of
        Immigration Rules, or  establish  a  case  warranting  a  grant  of
        discretionary leave outside the rules, they will not be allowed  to
        remain in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State's position is
        that on the facts neither of the above conditions were satisfied.


    13. As stated, it is not disputed that Mr Sujan is  unable  to  succeed
        under the Rules leaving him with no option other than to pursue the
        appeal under Article 8.


    14. The family  life  elements  of  the  case  do  not  afford  him  an
        opportunity to remain as the family life he has with his  wife  and
        child will, as they will be removed as a family unit,  continue  in
        their home state. There is no evidence to show that  the  Secretary
        of State's decision will cause any material disruption to the  core
        elements of their family life.


    15. Judge Murray found that Mr Sujan has been in the United Kingdom for
        ten years during which the family have established a strong private
        life and ties to the United Kingdom. This finding is based upon the
        strength and nature of the family life, including duration. It  was
        also found that any interference would result  in  consequences  of
        sufficient gravity so as to engage Article 8 but this is an element
        which should have been considered by reference to the fact that the
        Immigration Rules provide that the minimum period of  residence  to
        enable an individual to succeed under paragraph 276ADE is 20 years.




    16. The 20 year period is not an inflexible period as  the  Rules  also
        provided for an individual who may not have 20 years  stay  in  the
        United Kingdom to succeed if they can satisfy the  requirements  of
        276ADE (vi). This element was not relied upon by Mr Sujan  and  the
        finding that he is unable to succeed under the Rules is a preserved
        finding in any event.


    17. The focus of the current approach to Article 8,  in  light  of  the
        above case-law, must be upon the  effect  and  consequence  of  the
        removal decision upon the individual. Upper Tribunal Judge  P  Lane
        is correct in noting that Article 8 does not give an  individual  a
        right to work or even live in a place of his or her choice. That is
        established jurisprudence. In this case Mr  Sujan  and  his  family
        wish to remain in the United Kingdom to enable him to continue  his
        work and the life they have  established.  It  is  based  upon  the
        desire to preserve the status quo when that  status  quo  is  based
        upon period's of temporary admission with  no  arguable  legitimate
        expectation that a right to remain permanently would  be  conferred
        upon this family.  In considering whether the decision will lead to
        a breach of Article 8 it has not been established  that  there  are
        factors not covered by the Rules which give rise  to  the  need  to
        consider Article 8 further, unless the  economic  benefits  to  the
        United Kingdom that Mr Sujan's continued presence could be said  to
        fall within such  category,  which  I  find  is  debatable.  Having
        considered the merits of the case outside the Rules I find there is
        no reason established to warrant a grant of leave on this basis. In
        light of the available material it has not been arguably  made  out
        that the Secretary of State's decision will  result  in  compelling
        circumstances giving rise to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
        Mr Sujan or any family member, such as  to  establish  an  arguable
        case at this time.  It has not been shown that  the  family  cannot
        return to their home state  and  continue  with  their  family  and
        economic life there. No adverse consequences have  been  proved  to
        follow from the decision such as to warrant a  grant  of  leave  on
        this basis.


Decision

    18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. These appeals are dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make not such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure  (Upper       Tribunal) Rules  2008  as  no  justification  for
   making such an order has been             established on the facts.


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    20. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by dismissing it, I have considered whether to  make  a  fee  award
        (rule  23A  (costs)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
        (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
        Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make no fee award.


          Reasons:     The appeals have been dismissed on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th April 2014












