
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/14592/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 January 2017                    |       On 9 May 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse of Counsel, instructed by Lords
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 March 1979.

2.   He appealed against a decision made by the respondent on 1  April  2015
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of family and/or private life.

3.   It is his contention that his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    breach his fundamental human rights, particularly as a  parent  because
    of his relationship with his daughter HG  who  resides  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

4.   The appeal came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Quinn  on
    19 February 2016.  A large volume of documentation  was  presented  and
    the appellant gave evidence on that occasion.  The appeal was  allowed.



5.   The respondent sought to challenge  that  appeal  particularly  on  the
    basis that the Judge, in determining the  question  of  proportionality
    "mistakenly considered child HG as a qualifying child".  She  was  not.
    Clearly in determining the issue of proportionality Sections  117A  and
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were important
    to be taken into consideration.  However that consideration had  to  be
    on a proper basis.  In those  circumstances  I  found  there  to  be  a
    material error of law such as to set aside  the  decision.  My  written
    reasons are annexed hereto.

6.   Ms Hulse, who represented the appellant at the hearing before me on  24
    October 2016, invited me on that occasion to remake the decision in the
    light of the  documentation  already  provided.  Given  that  the  most
    central consideration in the case was  the  best  interests  of  HG,  I
    suggested that it might be prudent to obtain more  up-to-date  evidence
    as to her situation and circumstances and that of the appellant.   Such
    additional evidence  has  been  provided  in  the  form  of  a  further
    supplementary bundle, containing in particular  a  statement  of  Susan
    Pagella in the form of a report on psychological assessment.

7.   Thus the appeal came before me for a rehearing.   On  that  occasion  I
    heard some evidence from the appellant but generally  the  hearing  was
    conducted by way  of  submissions  made  by  both  parties.   Ms  Hulse
    understandably placed great weight upon the report of Susan Pagella and
    invited me to find that, notwithstanding the immigration history of the
    appellant, the best interests of HG was served by his remaining in  the
    United Kingdom, and that proportionality should be an issue resolved in
    his favour.

8.   The starting point for my consideration perhaps should begin  with  the
    decision of 1 April  2015  itself.   Such  responded  to  a  number  of
    documents identified as having been submitted in March 2015.

9.   The adverse immigration  history  of  the  appellant  was  noted.   The
    appellant failed  to  meet  the  requirements  as  set  out  under  the
    Immigration Rules for family and private life as giving rise  to  leave
    to remain.  No  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  were  found
    outside of those rules which  would  render  removal  disproportionate.
    The appellant has family in India to whom he could return.

10.  There has been no suggestion in this matter on behalf of the  appellant
    that he  does  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  or  that  he  would  face
    significant obstacles to reintegration in  India.   The  focus  of  the
    application before the respondent and indeed the focus  of  the  appeal
    before me is essentially in relation to his daughter HG.

11.  The immigration history of the appellant is of some importance in  this
    case, particularly having regard to the operation of Section  117A  and
    117B.  He entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  in  or  around  2004,
    thereafter living and working in the United Kingdom  clandestinely  and
    certainly without any lawful justification.  Indeed he was  encountered
    by the police on 6 April 2008 and was  arrested  as  being  an  illegal
    entrant.  He was served with IS151A form on the same day notifying  him
    that he was liable to  detention  and  removal.   Notwithstanding  that
    notice he failed to leave the United Kingdom but remained.

12.  The child HG was  born  on  22  May  2011  to  her  mother  who  is  of
    Lithuanian citizenship.  The appellant married on 11 December 2011.

13.  On 20 December 2011 he sought an EEA residence card  on  the  basis  of
    that relationship.  The application was refused on 19  June  2012.   An
    appeal against that decision was lodged on 2 July 2012.  The appeal was
    dismissed on 30 August 2012.  Seemingly the reason  for  the  dismissal
    was that there was insufficient evidence presented that the sponsor was
    exercising her treaty rights.

14.  On 1 November  2012  the  appellant  applied  once  again  for  an  EEA
    residence card.  His application being refused on 8 May 2013.

15.  A matter of potential relevance to this matter may  be  found  also  in
    the CAFCASS Report of 3 December 2014, enclosed at pages 236 to 244  of
    the main bundle.  It is to be noted that when the sponsor, Miss LG  was
    interviewed, she would seem to have been doubtful  about  the  marriage
    because she believed that the appellant's intention had simply been  to
    gain leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  she  being  consistently
    persuaded by him to  get  married.   It  is  her  account  that  almost
    immediately after the  marriage  abusive  behaviour  started  with  the
    result  that  in  December  2013  their  marriage  broke  up  following
    allegations of domestic violence and of serious  sexual  crime.   After
    that  the  parties  continue  to  live  apart.   There  was  no  access
    whatsoever to child HG during the period December 2013 to July 2014 but
    thereafter access was permitted through the Family Courts.

16.  On 22 May 2014 the appellant submitted an application to remain on  the
    basis of family and private life, which was refused on  25  July  2014.
    Thereafter  further  submissions  were  made,  which  resulted  in  the
    decision of 1 April 2015.

17.  I note the witness statement of the appellant dated 5 February 2016  to
    be found in the hearing bundle.

18.  He communicated  via  Skype  with  LG  in  2009.   She  was  living  in
    Lithuania at the time.  She visited him in September  2009  and  stayed
    with him until February 2010, thereafter they began living together  in
    March 2010 and married on 11 November 2011.  LG has also a  daughter  A
    by another relationship.

19.  Following the refusal of the second application for  an  EEA  residence
    card made by the appellant, which was refused on 8 May 2013,  his  wife
    left the matrimonial home with HG on 24 December 2013.  For a few weeks
    he was allowed to see HG but that ceased on 23 January 2014 because  of
    the opposition by his wife.  On 8 January  2014  he  was  contacted  by
    police in regard to the allegation of sexual assault.  That  allegation
    resulted in a court hearing  for  five  days  in  October  2015,  which
    resulted in a verdict of not guilty for those offences.

20.  In the meantime the appellant had sought to prevent the removal  of  HG
    from the jurisdiction of an order dated 5 February 2014.

21.  Limited contact between the appellant and HG was ordered by the  Family
    Court on 30 June  2014  under  a  child  arrangements  order.   Limited
    contact was arranged as from July 2014.

22.   There  followed  the  CAFCASS  Report  dated  8  December  2014   with
    subsequent child arrangements orders, particularly those of 23  January
    2015, 27 March 2015 and 16 November 2015 with a further CAFCASS  Report
    dated 28 January 2016.

23.  The appellant has made a statement. He speaks of the pleasure of  being
    with HG and sets out the arrangements that currently exist.  He says of
    LG that she has been difficult and remains difficult in terms of access
    to HG.

24.  It would seem particularly in  2014  that  the  appellant  had  limited
    access to HG seeing her for about one and a half  hours  at  a  contact
    centre.  Matters have now progressed to unsupervised contact.   Contact
    is now on alternative weekends with the appellant  collecting  HG  from
    school on Friday evening and returning her  to  her  mother  on  Sunday
    evening.  In addition there is  granted  a  week's  staying  access  at
    Christmas and at Easter and two weeks staying access as arranged during
    the year particularly during the holidays.

25.  In his evidence to me, the appellant indicated that he lives in  rented
    accommodation in a shared house, he having two rooms one  of  which  is
    designated as HG's room when she comes to  stay.   The  house  is  also
    occupied by two other couples.  In fact this was the accommodation that
    he shared with  HG  and  her  mother  and  stepdaughter  prior  to  the
    separation in 2013 and so it is in  effect  HG  coming  home  when  she
    stays.

26.  The appellant indicates  that  he  has  qualifications  as  a  building
    carpenter and would find work through a number  of  building  companies
    working some four to five days a week  on  average.   Currently  he  is
    unable to work of the restrictions upon doing so.   He  speaks  of  the
    desire to build up his contacts with HG,  expressing his fear  that  if
    removed to India he would be prevented by LG from seeing or  contacting
    her and indeed she might take her to Lithuania.  He has had no  contact
    with LG's daughter A for a considerable time.

27.  The departure of the LG in December  2013  resulted  in  a  very  large
    volume of correspondence particularly with the  local  authorities  and
    with the courts as set out in some detail in the  hearing  bundle.   My
    attention has not been drawn specifically to any  particular  item.   I
    have sought to consider those documents which have perhaps the greatest
    relevance to the issues in this appeal.

28.  Perhaps most helpful to the  overall  situation  are  the  two  CAFCASS
    Reports. The first dated 8 December 2014 has already had some reference
    made to it.

29.  Following the court hearing on 17 September 2014 the appellant had  had
    eleven sessions at the Hope Contact Centre.   Contact  since  then  had
    progressed to an unsupported arrangement held within the community  for
    two hours on a Tuesday.  This particular CAFCASS Report was prepared on
    the directions of the District Judge.

30.  The  author  of  the  report  indicated  that  it  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with the safeguarding letter filed with  the  court  on  10
    June 2014, which recommends that HG should have a positive relationship
    with both parents to develop her sense of identity and self-confidence.



31.  Mrs LG  was  interviewed  on  24  November  2011.   The  appellant  was
    interviewed on 24 November 2011.  On that particular occasion he and HG
    were observed, various other contacts between the parties were made  as
    highlighted in the report.

32.  At the time of the report HG was 3 years old communicating  in  English
    to her mother and her father.  At that time she was  attending  nursery
    and appeared to be settled.  She appeared to be a sociable  child.   At
    that time her stepsister A was 7  years  old.   Obvious  affection  was
    noted as between HG and her father upon contact.   Reference  was  also
    made in the report to the social worker's assessment which observed  HG
    to be a "happy child" she has settled well into the nursery.  A further
    report dated 24 June 2014, as mentioned in paragraph 12 of the  CAFCASS
    Report, speaks of HG appearing to be withdrawn and lacking  confidence.
    Mrs LG reported that her daughter was bedwetting.  It was noted for the
    period December 2013 to July 2014 that HG had not spent time  with  her
    father and it was considered that her  behaviour  might  have  been  an
    indication of missing her father.  An alternative explanation had  been
    her witnessing the alleged domestic violence.

33.  It was the view of the author of the report that HG and  the  appellant
    appeared to be developing a positive relationship.

34.  There is also a CAFCASS Report dated 28 January 2016  to  be  found  at
    pages 321 to 329 of the bundle.  This  was  made  in  response  to  the
    appellant's request for further time with his  daughter  now  aged  4�.
    The report was ordered on 16 November 2015.  HG  was  healthy  with  no
    special needs.  English was her first language.  She has  not  met  her
    paternal  family.   She  has  met  her  maternal  family.   There   was
    conversation between the author of the report and HG in which she  said
    that she enjoyed school and liked  living  in  her  new  home  and  the
    activities that she undertook.  She indicated that she wished to  spend
    more time with the appellant and enjoyed her time with both parents.

35.  It  noted  that  the  appellant  lived  in  a  three-bedroom,  terraced
    Victorian house and had sole access to two rooms, a living room and  an
    upstairs bedroom.  It was approved  for  HG  to  stay  overnight.   The
    appellant refuted the allegations as to his violence and lifestyle  and
    denied that his motivation for seeing HG was for immigration  purposes.
    It was the view of the author of the report that there was a very  real
    bond which exists between the appellant and HG.   Although  HG  is  not
    aware of the court proceedings she is aware of  the  hostility  between
    her parents.  Reference was made at paragraph 22 of the report that  it
    was not in HG's best interests for decisions about her care to be  made
    by the court.  Ms Hulse underlined the fact that it was not the fact of
    parental separation which was likely to cause  harm  but  the  way  the
    parents handled that change, especially having regard to their  ability
    to collaborate, make arrangements and  work  together  towards  meeting
    their children's changing needs.  Whilst  HG  has  experienced  adverse
    life effects, such as  family  separation  and  parental  conflict  and
    frequent changes  of  address,  she  has  managed  to  adapt  to  those
    variables.  Increased contact with the appellant was the outcome of the
    report.   It  was  as  a  result  of  that  report  that  the   current
    arrangements are in place.

36.  In citing the CAFCASS Reports it is to be borne in mind that  they  are
    reports primarily focused upon the relationship of HG with her  father,
    rather than analysing in any great detail the relationship  between  HG
    and her mother and stepsister.   It  seems  clear,  however,  from  the
    generality of the reports and of the evidence that  surrounds  them  in
    the bundle, that HG is progressing well at school and is  a  happy  and
    balanced child.  She has coped well with the difficult family situation
    over the past few years and there is little to  indicate  that  she  is
    suffering from any psychological or real difficulties as  a  result  of
    the uncertainties that clearly have been manifested over  these  years.
    Significantly there is little to indicate that HG faced any significant
    difficulties or distress during the absence  of  her  father  from  her
    life.

37.  I turn therefore to the report of Susan Pagella, who had time with  the
    appellant  and  HG  on  16  December  2016.   The  assessment  was   of
    approximately two hours duration (in effect the  report  confirms  that
    which is set out in the CAFCASS Reports namely  that  HG  enjoys  being
    with her father.   She  was  observed  to  be  playing  with  her  toys
    expressing her affection for the appellant.

38.  The report sets out in some  detail  the  academic  research  regarding
    daughters  with  absent  fathers.   I  find  such  matters  of  limited
    assistance in the practicalities of this case.  Clearly the impact upon
    separation has much to do with context and psychological wellbeing  and
    personality make up  as  it  does  with  the  separation  itself.   The
    examples given are somewhat generic. The author of the report seeks  to
    conclude that being deprived  of  the  appellant's  love  and  physical
    presence could lead to long-term overt or covert psychological  damage,
    possible including childhood depression and absence of self-worth at an
    internal level.  This general comment takes no account, however, as  to
    the relationship between HG and her  mother  and  her  stepsibling  and
    points to no factors specific to HG, which  would  lead  reasonably  to
    that conclusion.

39.  Bearing in mind, as I do, the importance that is to be  attached  to  a
    child being reunited with a parent after  a  prolonged  separation,  HG
    has  demonstrated  in  the  past  her  resilience  to  that   difficult
    situation.  As has been recognised in many judicial  decisions,  it  is
    almost always in a child's best interest to have the love and affection
    of both parents if at all possible.

40.  The difficulty it seems to me in assessing the best interests of  H  in
    this case, is the lack of a balanced assessment as to the chemistry  of
    the family as a whole.  The CAFCASS  Reports  understandably  had  been
    focused upon the issue as to how contact with HG can be safely made  by
    the appellant, rather than focusing upon the overall relevance of  that
    arrangement for the future  family  development  and  her  development.
    There has been no assessment for example as to the relationship  of  HG
    with her mother and with her stepsibling.  Given that it is accepted by
    all parties that the primary parental responsibility for HG  will  fall
    upon her mother, little has been canvassed with her mother  as  to  the
    hopes and plans for the future and indeed t where  he  appellant  would
    fit into such plans. It is not clear whether A, who is the stepdaughter
    and only a few years older than HG, is living with her  mother  or  has
    returned to Lithuania.  There is no consideration as to whether or  not
    the mother would wish to return to her family in Lithuania.   There  is
    at present the prohibitive steps order under Section 8 of the  Children
    Act 1989 issued by the Family Court on 5  February  2014.   It  is  not
    entirely clear as to whether  that  remains  in  force  preventing  the
    mother removing HG from the jurisdiction.  It  may  well  be  that  her
    mother wishes to go back to Lithuania or may  wish  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The difficulty of her  position,  as  was  adjudicated
    upon by the Tribunal in the appeal as to an  EEA  residence  card,  was
    that there was little evidence to satisfy the Tribunal that she was  in
    fact exercising her treaty rights.  In those circumstances she  has  no
    settled status and it may be argued that her right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is in any event precarious.

41.  One important matter in  this  case  is  of  course  the  cultural  and
    personal identity of HG, particularly being a child  of  a  mixed  race
    relationship.  It is important for her to have an understanding of  the
    two cultures and to be attuned to the context  and  affirmed.   Clearly
    identity encompasses far more than the racial ingredients but it  is  c
    an important consideration to be borne in mind.  That having been  said
    HG has been brought up more in the Lithuanian household, having contact
    with her mother's  parents.   She  has  had  little  contact  with  the
    appellant's family if any.  Clearly he is a link to that other culture.
     That being said, such contact could also  be  made  by  communications
    such as Skype, telephone and visits to the  appellant  and  his  family
    arranged outside of the United Kingdom.

42.  The appellant expresses the fear that if mother and daughter return  to
    Lithuania he will be permanently deprived of any contact with HG.  Such
    is to ignore the reality that in that country there are no doubt proper
    Family Court processes, which can be  applied  to  secure  contact  and
    communication.  Once again the  fact  that  the  mother  has  not  been
    questioned  about  her  plans  for  the   future   has   meant   little
    clarification with her as to her  willingness  to  permit  contact  and
    cooperation in the future.

43.  In seeking to assess the best interests of HG it is  undoubtedly  clear
    that in the short-term it is in her best  interests  to  maintain  some
    contact with her father.  Whether the arrangements now in place are  in
    her best interests in the long-term is less clear.  It may well be that
    the best interests of HG ultimately is  for  her  to  be  immersed  and
    secure in one particular culture with her  mother's  wider  family  and
    with her stepsister, finding her identity by that  means.   As  I  have
    indicated, such does not prevent her maintaining some contact with  the
    appellant and hopefully with his wider family in due course.

44.  Although the best interests of the child is a primary consideration  to
    determine whether or not removal is justified, it is not a factor which
    trumps everything else.  I bear in mind in that regard  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4. It was held that the consideration  of  a  child's  best
    interests should take place first and should be given more weight  than
    any other individual concerned.  The best interests of the child  could
    not, however, succeed against substantial countervailing grounds  which
    had to be serious to outweigh the best interests of the child.

45.  Mr Jarvis submits that the adverse immigration of the  history  of  the
    appellant  provides  a  substantial  countervailing  ground.   In  that
    connection I have regard to Sections 117A and 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Paragraph 117B(1) makes it clear that
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  In  this  case  the  appellant  entered  illegally  and  has
    remained in the UK despite receiving notification that he should leave.
    He has faced the refusal of a number of applications which he has  made
    for leave to remain.

46.  As is indicated at 117B(5) little weight should be given to  a  private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is  precarious.   The  nature  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, I find, is of particular relevance in this case.   It  is  not
    simply a question of his overstaying his leave by a short period but by
    unlawfully entering the United Kingdom on no proper basis. Even  having
    been encountered as an illegal entrant he  has  failed  to  leave  when
    requested to do so.  In effect he has fundamentally sought  because  of
    his own self-interests to override any immigration control.

47.  It is said that his inability to speak good English is  a  matter  also
    to be borne in mind under the provisions of Section 117B.  In  fairness
    to the appellant I note he obtained an EMD entry level  certificate  in
    ESOL international (entry three) Empress College of London, April 2014.



48.   It is the public interest, in  particular  in  the  interests  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,  that  persons  who  seek  to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons are not a burden on taxpayers and are better  able
    to integrate into society.  There has been a paucity of information  as
    to the appellant's financial stability.  At present of course he is not
    permitted to work and indeed at no stage in  his  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant was there any overt permission  to  work.
    It is not clear whether he has ever paid taxes or how regular  was  the
    work undertaken in reality.  I have noted  the  comments  he  has  made
    about his ability to find work. How legitimate that work is it  is  far
    from clear, as he would not have been entitled to national insurance or
    any of the other benefits of being a legal resident.  I  find  that  he
    has always remained unlawfully and I do not find in  the  circumstances
    that he has achieved any significant integration into society.  He  was
    in a shared accommodation and has always done so.  He has given  little
    indication as to his contribution to society.

49.  Indeed it may be said that his family  relationships  were  also  short
    lived and precarious.  In that connection I bear in mind the  comments,
    as recorded in the CAFCASS Reports,  from LG as to the  pressures  upon
    her to  marry  in  order  to  create  an  immigration  status  for  the
    appellant, which in the event did not succeed.  The  proximity  of  the
    marriage to the application to remain is a  relevant  consideration  in
    that connection.

50.  In all the circumstances I have little hesitation in finding  that  the
    appellant has from the outset sought to undermine  immigration  control
    and to ignore any restriction that was sought to be placed upon him  in
    that connection.

51.  In that connection my attention was  drawn  to  the  case  of  Rhuppiah
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803 in which Sections 117A to C were  considered.   The
    appellant in that case had come to the United Kingdom in 1997, remained
    unlawfully since 2010.  It was  recognised  by  the  Tribunal  in  that
    matter that the main features of her  private  life  had  already  been
    established before then.  This is not the case of the appellant  before
    me. He had no status whatsoever before seeking to develop  his  private
    life.  The court at paragraphs 58 onwards considered the  relevance  of
    Section 117B(2) proficiency in English and  Section  117B(3)  financial
    independence.  Although the lack of fluency in English was regarded  as
    a neutral factor, the lack of financial independence was a factor which
    counted against the appellant in the Article 8 balancing exercise.

52.  The court at  paragraph  54  considered  Section  117A(2)  and  Section
    117B(5) together as meaning that considerable weight should be given to
    parliament's statement in Section 117B(5) regarding the approach  which
    should be adopted and the weight given to parliament's  statement.   In
    order to identify an exceptional case  in  which  departure  from  that
    approach would be justified, compelling reasons would have to be shown.
     Although it is important that the relationship be re-established  with
    HG, such has been done without any full examination of HG's  long  term
    needs and development and the reports have assessed it in narrow  focus
    without consideration of the wider family and cultural context. HG  has
    shown herself to be  resilient  to  change  and  coped  well  with  her
    previous separation from her father.  There  is  no  reliable  evidence
    placed before me to  indicate  that  any  further  period  of  physical
    separation would result in significant harm to her,  particularly  when
    other forms of communication are more likely than not to  be  available
    to maintain the relationship.  In  seeking  to  balance  the  competing
    interests as fairly as I am able, it seems to me that it is  proper  to
    attach little weight to the formation of the appellant's  private  life
    and  his  human  rights  to  see  his  child,   given  his  fundamental
    disregard for immigration Regulations and control. I  find  that  is  a
    factor strongly supporting the proportionality  of  his  removal,  even
    when set beside the current best interests of HG that he remain.

Notice of Decision

53.  I dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  dismiss  the
    appeal on human rights grounds and Article 8 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings. This  order
is made to protect the interests of HG in particular

Signed

[pic]
Upper             Tribunal             Judge             King             TD
                     Date 27 February 2017





