
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14942/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                FARHANA BATEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by MA Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Bangladesh born on 17 October 1978.  On 30 November  2009  she  arrived
    with leave to enter as a student.  She was subsequently  granted  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Worker)  Migrant  until  18  January
    2014.  On 27 December 2013 she applied for further leave as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

The Decision and Appeal

 2. On 14 March 2014 the Respondent refused  the  Applicant  further  leave
    under paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules because she did not  met
    the requirements to submit evidence specified at  para.41-SD(e),  being
    marketing, advertising or similar material and  under  para.41-SD(c)(i)
    because she had not supplied all the documentary evidence  required  by
    the paragraph to show she had access to funds being made available by a
    third party.

 3. On 27 March 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds refer to details of her company and its website
    and evidence of active trading submitted with the application and  that
    documentary evidence showing the  ability  of  the  Applicant  to  have
    access to third party funds had been submitted to the SSHD.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 4. By a decision promulgated on 4 December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Rothwell found the Applicant and  the  third  party  supplying
    funds, both of whom gave evidence, to be credible witnesses and allowed
    the appeal.

 5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    erred in finding that the documentary evidence required in relation  to
    the Applicant's funding arrangements as set  out  in  para.41-SD(c)(ii)
    but  should  have  considered  para.41-SD(c)(i).   In   addition,   the
    Applicant had not satisfied the  requirements  of  para.41-SD(c)(ii)(4)
    and the Judge had consequently erred in law.

 6. On 22 January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. At the start of the hearing Mr Wilding handed up the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Arshad Iqbal and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  169
    delivered on 3 March 2015 explaining the operation  of  para.245DD  and
    Appendix A. In this judgment Sullivan LJ said that compliance with  the
    requirements of para.41-SD(a) (now renumbered as  para.41-SD(c)(i)  and
    para.41-SD(b) (now renumbered as para.41-SD(c)(ii) was mandatory in all
    cases.  He also referred to paragraph  26  of  the  judgment  in  which
    Sullivan LJ noted  that  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  there  was  no
    satisfactory evidence that financial institutions would  be  unable  or
    unwilling to provide the relevant information.  Further,  at  paragraph
    34 Vos LJ said he knew of no reason under English law why a bank should
    not be prepared to write a letter confirming it had been instructed  by
    its customer to provide funds from  that  customer's  account  for  the
    benefit of a business undertaken by a third party.

 8. The Judge had looked exclusively at para.41-SD(c)(ii) which although it
    dealt with UK-based accounts expressly and did not include third  party
    accounts.

 9. The letter from the third party's bank at page  6  of  the  Applicant's
    bundle did not state her name, which was a requirement, and the  letter
    had  not  been  submitted  with  the  application  and  was   therefore
    inadmissible by reason of Section 85A of the 2002 Act.

10.  The  Judge  had  erred  at  para  20  of  her  decision  because   the
    documentation did not meet the requirements of para.41-SD(c)(i)(6)  and
    so regardless of any findings on credibility,  the  Applicant's  appeal
    had to fail under the Immigration Rules.

11. Mr Miah accepted the Judge should have considered para.41-SD(c)(ii) and
    in the light of the recent judgment in Iqbal and there was little which
    could be said to challenge the SSHD's view of the situation.

12. I noted that the original grounds of appeal had made reference  to  the
    European Convention and brief submissions had been made to the Judge on
    Article 8.  The Judge had not made any findings on the Article 8 claim.
     Mr Miah submitted  the  Article  8  claim  remained  outstanding.   Mr
    Wilding submitted that the claim  under  Article  8  had  been  in  the
    alternative.  No evidence in support of the claim could be found in the
    documents contained in the Applicant's bundle filed for the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  The Applicant was on notice by reason of the  second
    paragraph of the Upper Tribunal's directions of 11 February  2015  that
    any further evidence should be available to the Upper Tribunal  at  the
    hearing.  Mr Miah said that without the Applicant present he  would  be
    in difficulties.  The Judge at the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing had been aware that  the  Applicant  was  pregnant  and  having
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  would  not  have  been
    minded to deal  with  the  alternative  claim  under  Article  8.   The
    position now was that the child had now been born.

Findings and Consideration

13. I am satisfied for the reasons already  described  in  the  submissions
    made for the SSHD and not materially challenged for the Applicant  that
    the Judge made a material error  of  law  in  her  application  of  the
    provisions of paragraph 245DD and Appendix A para.41-SD(c) to the facts
    of the case.  The decision so far as it was made  under  para.245DD  of
    the Immigration Rules is therefore set aside and I re-make the decision
    and for the same reasons as it has been set aside I dismiss the  appeal
    of the Applicant against the  SSHD's  decision  under  Part  6  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  I note that the considerable  assistance  given  on
    the matters before the Judge by the Court of Appeal in  Iqbal  was  not
    available until some months after her decision was promulgated.

14. There was a claim under Article 8 before the  Judge.   There  may  have
    been little evidence to support it but given  that  the  Applicant  was
    pregnant, it  would  have  been  appropriate  for  the  Judge  to  have
    addressed it, even if only briefly.  Although there was no evidence  of
    the birth of the Applicant's  child,  given  what  the  Judge  said  in
    paragraph 6 of her decision, it would appear the position  may  now  be
    considerably changed. In all the circumstances I find the  decision  is
    in error because it failed to address the Applicant's ground of  appeal
    based on Article 8.

15. The birth of the Applicant's child will have caused a very  substantial
    change in circumstances which  may  well  necessitate  the  hearing  of
    considerable evidence and  extensive  fact  finding.   The  Applicant's
    failure  to  comply  with  the  directions  of   the   Upper   Tribunal
    necessitates that the consideration  of  the  appeal  under  Article  8
    remains outstanding and in need of a full  hearing.  Having  regard  to
    Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and para.7
    of  Part  3  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  Practice  Directions  and  the
    circumstances of the appeal I consider this is one of those cases which
    should be remitted for hearing afresh before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Neither party had any objection to that proposal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained errors of law such that it
    should be set aside.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    Part 6 of the Immigration Rules is re-made and the  Part  6  appeal  is
    dismissed. The Applicant's appeal on human rights grounds  (Article  8)
    only is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before a
    judge other than Rothwell.


    No anonymity order is made.



Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  31.
iii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





