
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2018                           |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Mr Ziya [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Counsel, instructed by Silvine Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie (the Judge), promulgated on  30  May  2017,  by
    which he dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   That  appeal  had  been
    against the Respondent's decision of 25 March 2015,  refusing  to  vary
    his leave to remain and making a decision to remove him  under  section
    47 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.  The  Respondent's  decision
    had been made on the basis that the Appellant's presence in the  United
    Kingdom was no longer conducive to  the  public  good  because  of  two
    convictions; one for driving whilst disqualified,  and  the  other  for
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm (that assault related to his ex-
    wife). The Appellant's case was predicated in the main on  his  claimed
    relationship with his minor daughter.




The judge's decision

 2. The Judge finds that the Appellant had practised deception  in  failing
    to mention the two convictions in his latest application form  [10-11].
    Addressing the core issue in the appeal, namely whether  the  Appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter, the  judge
    concluded that he did not.  The reasons for this core finding  are  set
    out at [14].  In light of this finding the  judge  concludes  that  the
    best interests of the relevant child would not be adversely affected by
    the Appellant's removal.  Finally the judge considers  the  Appellant's
    private life but concludes that this  would  not  be  breached  by  his
    removal from the United Kingdom.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds are drafted in somewhat vague terms.  They  refer  to  both
    the private and family life of the Appellant.  It is suggested that the
    judge should have "remitted" the case back to the Respondent  and  that
    in any event he failed to adequately consider the circumstances of  the
    Appellant's daughter.  There is also brief reference to section 117B of
    the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  with  particular
    reference to private life factors.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robertson
    commented that he saw little  merit  in  the  ground  relating  to  the
    daughter.   However,  as  I  read  the  grant,   permission   was   not
    specifically limited.




The hearing before me

 5. Mr Saeed focused his submissions on [14] of the judge's  decision.   He
    submitted  that  in  applying  the  test  of  whether  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his daughter was "meaningful" or not, the  judge  had
    erred in law.  The test in respect of section 117B(6) was whether there
    was a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship", not  whether  the
    relationship was "meaningful".   The  judge  had  failed  to  make  any
    express  finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughter.

 6. Mr Kotas noted that the grounds of appeal had not expressly raised  the
    issue of a misdirection in law by the judge.  In any event, I was asked
    to look at his reasoning as a whole.  The grounds did not challenge any
    of the specific factual findings made.  It was clear that the judge was
    in effect concluding that the Appellant did  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughter.

 7. In reply Mr Saeed reiterated his submission that the judge had  applied
    the wrong test.  In respect of private life, the grounds of appeal were
    relied on.



Decision on error of law

 8. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    no material errors of law in the judge's decision.  In so concluding, I
    have viewed the decision as a whole and in  light  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal and oral submissions made before me.  My reasons for  concluding
    as I do are as follows.

 9. First, although it is correct that the judge uses the term "meaningful"
    in [14(vi)] and [15], he specifically finds, as an overarching finding,
    at the beginning of [14] that:

         "...The Appellant has failed to demonstrate, I would  say  even  on
         the lower standard, less still on a balance of probabilities,  that
         he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a child  residing
         in the United Kingdom."

    This makes it clear that the judge had in mind all  along  and  applied
    the correct test applicable to the first limb under section 117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.  On this basis  alone  the  Appellant's  challenge  falls
    away.

10. Second, in any event it is quite  clear,  taking  the  judge's  various
    adverse findings holistically, that he was in effect finding  that  the
    Appellant did not have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his daughter (he had found as a fact that the  Appellant  was  the
    biological father of the child).  The findings made in respect  of  the
    lack of documentation, the use of funds  by  the  child's  mother,  the
    ignorance relating to the child's address, the absence of evidence from
    the mother, and other matters contained in [14(i)-(vi)], all combine to
    make it abundantly clear that the judge was roundly rejecting the  case
    put to him by the Appellant.  With respect, Mr Saeed's submission about
    the precise use of terminology rather misses the point.  In the context
    of the findings made in this  particular  case  it  is  very  difficult
    indeed to see any material difference between  the  term  "genuine  and
    subsisting" on the one hand, and "meaningful" on the other.  The  judge
    was rejecting the assertion that the Appellant had any contact with his
    daughter, still less that he had any sort of  relationship  that  could
    properly be described as subsisting and/or meaningful.

11. Third, as Mr Kotas rightly pointed out, the grounds  do  not  challenge
    any of the specific factual findings made by the judge.  In any  event,
    these findings were clearly open to him.

12. Fourth, the new evidence provided  for  the  purposes  of  the  hearing
    before me is of no relevance to whether or not the First-tier  Tribunal
    made any errors of law.

13. Fifth, in respect of the Appellant's private life, the judge was  fully
    entitled to conclude that any obstacles faced  by  him  in  respect  of
    reintegration into Turkish society would not be very  significant.   On
    the evidence before him he was entitled  to  conclude  that  Article  8
    would not be breached on this basis.  There has been no suggestion that
    there was anything other that was  of  a  particularly  significant  or
    compelling nature in order for the Appellant to succeed on the  private
    life grounds.

14. In light of the above, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 13 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 13 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
