

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/14367/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 August 2017                       |  On 8 August 2017             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between


                                  MEIMEI LI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr R Ahmed (counsel) instructed by AGI,
solicitors
For the Respondent:       Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Dearden  promulgated  on  14/03/2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 07/07/1961 and  is  a  national  of  China.  On
07/11/2014 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Dearden ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  19/05/2017  Judge  Gibb  granted
permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant, a citizen of China, was refused leave as a spouse on
      07/11/2014, and her appeal against removal was dismissed by  Judge  of
      the First-tier tribunal Dearden (promulgated on 14/03/2017).


      2. The grounds, which were in time, complain that the Judge erred  in:
      application of section 117B;  failure  to  consider  key  caselaw  and
      policies.


      3. The grounds are very poorly drafted, failing to mention  up-to-date
      caselaw, and failing  to  expand  any  of  the  legal  points  briefly
      referred to. The appellant has, as a result, been  placed  effectively
      in the position of an unrepresented appellant.


      4. Having read the  determination  with  that  in  mind  I  have  some
      concerns that in my view justified examination of  whether  there  may
      have been errors of law.


      5. The first concerns that Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 predated  the
      promulgation of the determination  by  a  few  weeks  and  was  widely
      circulated. This put an end to the compelling circumstances  threshold
      test for considering article 8, and it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
      erred in applying this test at [35(5)]. Following Agyarko the focus of
      the proportionality assessment should  have  been  on  "insurmountable
      obstacles" and "exceptional circumstances", and it  is  arguable  that
      the latter was not considered by the Judge. It was in this  area  that
      the  appellant  and  her  husband  had  factors  at  least  worthy  of
      consideration.


      6. The second point is that the Judge's consideration of section  117B
      of the 2002 Act (as amended) arguably gives no consideration to points
      in the appellant's favour (s.117B(3)  and  (4)),  and  only  considers
      those adverse (s117B(1) and (5). This is hinted at but not  identified
      in the grounds. As with the proportionality assessment as a whole  the
      legal process requires  the  balancing  of  competing  factors,  which
      requires consideration of factors on both sides, rather than  only  on
      one.



The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Ahmed counsel for the appellant moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He
took me to page 9 of the decision and told me  that  at  [35(6)]  the  Judge
failed to consider aspects of section 117B of the 2002 Act. He told me  that
the Judge emphasised the appellant's inability to speak English  (s.117B(2))
but misdirected himself in relation to  financial  independence  (s.117B(3))
the Judge went on to attach little weight  to  a  private  and  family  life
established when immigration status was precarious.  He  told  me  that  the
Judge was wrong to do so because the appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  has
always been lawful. He told me that the appellant has never  been  dependent
on public funds. He reminded me that the appellant and her  husband  married
in 1982. He told me that the Judge has failed to consider subparagraphs  (3)
& (4) of section 117B of the 2002 Act.

(b) Mr Ahmed told me that the Judge's proportionality assessment is  flawed.
He told me that there is no dispute that family life exists,  but  that  the
Judge had given inadequate consideration to the effect  removal  would  have
on the family life of the appellant and her husband. He  told  me  that  the
question that should have been asked is whether or not it is  reasonable  to
suggest that family life can continue in China, and that the Judge  had  not
adequately considered that question. He urged me to allow the appeal and  to
set the decision aside.

7. (a) Mr Petterson for the respondent adopted the  terms  of  the  rule  24
note, and took me straight to [35] of the  decision.  She  took  me  through
each of the sub-paragraphs of [35] and told me that the Judge gave full  and
proper consideration to the immigration rules before turning  his  attention
to section 117B of the 2002 Act in considering article 8 outside the  rules.
She told me that the grounds of appeal do not attack the  Judge's  findings,
and argued that the second ground of appeal is simply a complaint about  the
weight that the Judge gave various strands of evidence.  Mr  Petterson  took
me to [35(4)] of the decision and told me that there the Judge  makes  clear
findings that there are no obstacles to family life being pursued in  China,
and that the appellant and her husband can go  to  China,  where  they  have
adult children. She told me that the Judge makes a clear finding that  there
are no insurmountable obstacles, the appellant's  argument  is  based  on  a
preference to remain in the UK.

(b) Mr Petterson took me to [35(5)] of the decision and told me  that  there
the Judge makes clear findings that there are  no  compelling  circumstances
in this case. She asked me to read [35] as a whole. She told me that  it  is
clear that the Judge has adequately considered  the  appellant's  case  both
within the rules and outside  the  rules.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge's
proportionality assessment is beyond criticism. She asked me to dismiss  the
appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis
8. Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 held that the ECHR  intended  (in  cases  such  as
Jeunesse) that the words "insurmountable obstacles" should be understood  in
a practical and realistic sense,  rather  than  as  referring  to  obstacles
which made it literally impossible for the family to live  together  in  the
country  of  origin  of  the  non-national  concerned.  The  definition   of
"insurmountable obstacles" at EX.2 Appendix FM as meaning "very  significant
difficulties which would be faced by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
continuing their family life together outside the UK and which could not  be
overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the  applicant  or  their
partner" was consistent with Strasbourg case law.  The IDIs said that  leave
could  nevertheless  be  granted   outside   the   rules   in   "exceptional
circumstances"  i.e.  "circumstances  in  which  refusal  would  result   in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  such  that  refusal  of
the application would not be proportionate".  The rules  and  IDIs  together
were compatible with Article 8.  A court or tribunal had to  decide  whether
the refusal was proportionate in the particular case  before  it,  balancing
the strength of the  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the  person  in
question against the impact on private and family life.   In  doing  so,  it
should  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  Secretary  of  State's   policy,
expressed in the  rules  and  instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
immigration control can be outweighed, when considering an  application  for
leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration
laws, only  where  there  are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional
circumstances" as defined. "The critical issue will  generally  be  whether,
giving due weight to the strength of the public interest in the  removal  of
the person in the case before  it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with  precarious
family life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to  outweigh  the
public interest in immigration control".
9.  It is common ground in this case is that the appellant cannot  meet  the
requirements of appendix FM because she has not passed the English  language
test. Before the First-tier, counsel for the appellant said that  there  was
no realistic possibility that the appellant will pass the  English  language
test in the near future.

10. Between [25] and [29] the Judge summarises  the  submissions  that  were
made on the appellant's behalf. The Judge was asked to find that  there  are
insurmountable obstacles and/or compelling reasons preventing the  appellant
and her husband from living in China.

11. At [35] of the decision the Judge sets  out  his  consideration  of  the
appellant's claim under the rules. The facts as the Judge found them  to  be
are

      (a) The appellant is a Chinese national who entered the UK legally  on
      7 November 2011, with leave to  enter  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
      citizen. The appellant cannot speak English and cannot sit the English
      language test. The application for leave to remain was made before her
      existing leave expired


      (b) The appellant's husband is a British national of  Chinese  origin.
      He has lived in the UK for about 29 years. He has two  jobs  and  pays
      tax and national insurance. At the date of hearing he was 57 years  of
      age.


      (c) The appellant has led a blameless life in the UK and is  dependent
      upon her husband. The appellant and her husband married  in  1982.  In
      1989 the appellant's husband came  to  the  UK,  while  the  appellant
      remained in China. They lived apart for more or  less  22  years.  The
      appellant's husband's status in the UK was only regularised  in  2009.
      Since then he has returned to China to visit five times.


      (d) The appellant and her husband were only  reunited  in  the  UK  in
      2011. They spent the majority of their married  life  apart  but  have
      lived together  as  husband  and  wife  in  the  UK  since  2011.  The
      appellant's husband is reluctant to  return  to  China.  He  wants  to
      retain his employment in the UK.


      (e) The appellant and her husband have two adult children  who  remain
      in China. The appellant and her husband live in  rented  accommodation
      UK.

12. At [35(3)] the Judge finds that the appellant cannot meet the rules.  At
[35(4)] the Judge considers EX.1, and  finds  that  the  appellant  has  not
established any insurmountable  obstacles.  At  35(5)  the  judge  considers
whether or not there are any compelling  circumstances  in  this  case,  and
finds that there are none. At [35(6)] the Judge considers  section  117B  of
the 2002 Act.

13. At [35(6)] the Judge finds that the appellant's presence in the  UK  has
always been precarious because her stay in the UK has  always  been  limited
in time and has been  dependent  upon  applications  for  further  leave  to
remain.

14. In Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA  Civ  803  it  was  held  that  the  concept  of
precariousness in immigration status in section 117B(5)  was  distinct  from
the concept of unlawful presence in the UK in subsection (4).  Even  if  the
two concepts could be said to overlap, subsection (5) would be redundant  if
they were the same. The concept of precariousness extended more  widely,  to
include people who had leave to enter or remain which  was  qualified  to  a
degree such that they knew from the outset that their permission  to  be  in
the UK could be described as precarious. The extension and  re-extension  of
limited leave to remain did not mean that the person's status was not  still
precarious. In the context of section 117B, the relevance of  precariousness
of immigration status was the effect it had  on  the  extent  of  protection
which should be afforded to private life for the purposes of the  Article  8
proportionality balancing exercise. The more that  an  immigrant  should  be
taken to have understood that his or her time in the host country  would  be
comparatively short or would be liable to termination,  the  more  the  host
State was able to say  that  a  fair  balance  between  the  rights  of  the
individual and the general public interest in the firm and fair  enforcement
of immigration controls should come down  in  favour  of  removal  when  the
leave expired (paras 30 - 34)

15. When permission to appeal was granted it was suggested  that  the  Judge
only  considered  the  section  117B  factors  which  weighed  against   the
appellant and not those which weighed in her favour.

16.  In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that  an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
the  strength  of  his  financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

17. There is no error of law in the judge is consideration of section 117B.

18. Although the grant of permission  to  appeal  suggests  that  the  Judge
applied a threshold test and  then  declined  to  consider  article  8  ECHR
grounds outside the rules, a holistic  reading  of  the  decision  discloses
that that is not the case.

19. The Judge considers  whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  and
considers whether there are compelling circumstances. He does so as part  of
an overall assessment of article 8 within the  rules,  and  then  article  8
outside the rules. A fair reading of [36] of the  decision  makes  it  clear
that the Judge considered  this  case  outside  the  immigration  rules  and
decided that there were  no  reasons  to  grant  the  case  on  freestanding
article 8 ECHR grounds. The summary of the decision makes it clear that  the
Judge dismisses the case having considered article 8 ECHR grounds of  appeal
outside the rules.
20. Paragraphs EX.1(b) & 2 say
       EX.1. This paragraph applies if
             (b) the applicant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled  in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles
             to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.
       EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
       obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would  be
       faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family
       life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or
       would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
       partner.
21. It is not argued that the Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  cannot
meet the immigration rules is wrong. The focus is on a freestanding  article
8 ECHR argument. The Judge considered the immigration rules.  He  considered
whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles in a way which  meets  the
definition contained in EX.2, and which is consistent with the  findings  in
Agyarko

22. The Judge then goes on to consider a freestanding  article  8  argument,
and finds that the appellant cannot  meet  the  rules,  that  there  are  no
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK, and  that
there are no compelling circumstances in this case. The Judge factors  those
findings into his overall proportionality assessment and  takes  account  of
section 117B of the 2002 Act.

23. The Judge clearly considers whether or not  it  is  reasonable  for  the
appellant's British citizen husband to remove with the  appellant.  At  [36]
he finds that there are no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  living
alone or the couple living together in China.

24. In reality, the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission to  appeal
focus on the weight that the Judge gave to competing  factors,  and  quality
of the proportionality assessment.

25. In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v  SSHD  (NIA  2002:  Part
5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
considering,  pursuant  to  section  11  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is an error of law in  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal involving Article 8  proportionality,  the  task  of
the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that point) to  deciding  if  the  First-
tier Tribunal's assessment of where to  strike  the  balance  was  unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
took the firm view that a decision on proportionality of an  Adjudicator  or
Immigration Judge who has properly directed himself can only  be  overturned
on reconsideration on traditional public law grounds.

26. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)   the  Tribunal
said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or  another  is  for  the  fact
finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give  rise  to  an
error of law". In the decision promulgated  on  14  March  2017,  the  Judge
clearly took account of each strand  of  evidence  and  reached  conclusions
which were well within the range of conclusions available to him.

27.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

28. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.



CONCLUSION

29. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

30. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 7 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


