
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14789/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 29 August 2014                     |On 9 September 2014       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                               SRINIVASAN RAJU
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:             Mr A Syed-Ali, LG Law Chambers
For the Respondent:            Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen  of  India,  against  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herwald  in  which   he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.
 2. The application under appeal was  made  on  18  January  2014  and  was
    refused by reference to paragraph 245ZX(c),  245ZX(d)  and  Appendix  A
    paragraphs 116(da) and 116(db) of the Immigration Rules (HC395)  on  13
    November 2013.  The Appellant exercised his  right  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This  is  the  appeal  which  came  before  Judge
    Herwald on papers on 13 May  2014  and  was  dismissed.  The  Appellant
    applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper   Tribunal.    The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on  3  July
    2014 in the following terms

       There is a paucity of reasoning  in  the  judge's  determination  at
       paragraph 18 to explain why the judge was  not  persuaded  that  the
       appellant met the requirements  for  leave  to  be  granted  on  the
       grounds of his private life in the United  Kingdom  under  paragraph
       276ADE. All that is said about this  is  that  the  judge  was  "not
       persuaded" with no reference  as  to  why.  The  grounds  of  appeal
       complain  that  the  judge's  assessment  of   proportionality   was
       inadequate. This is clearly arguable  so  permission  to  appeal  is
       granted on this ground. The judge has set out the case law as to the
       approach to be taken where  there  has  been  a  revocation  of  the
       sponsor's licence in some detail at paragraphs 10-13 but after  that
       there is only one paragraph (paragraph 14) that makes any  reference
       to the appellant's case. The grounds of appeal argue that the  judge
       gave inadequate consideration to the appellant's case and failed  to
       give due regard to the case law that the judge set out. This  ground
       of appeal may be arguable also.



 3. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by  Mr  Syed-Ali
    who submitted an appeal bundle. Mr Whitwell appeared to  represent  the
    Secretary of State.

 4. At the outset of the  hearing  I  asked  Mr  Whitwell  whether  it  was
    accepted by the Respondent, as asserted by the Appellant in the grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, that the sponsoring college  held
    Grade A status at the time of the application. The hearing was put back
    to enable Mr Whitwell  to  make  enquiries  but  he  was  not  able  to
    ascertain when the sponsor's licence was downgraded from 'A' to 'B'.


Submissions

 5. For the Appellant Mr Syed-Ali said that he did not pursue the appeal on
    Article 8 grounds other than to say that the Appellant having paid  for
    his course  ought  to  get  the  benefit.  He  referred  to  CDS  (PBS:
    "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305  (IAC).  Dealing  with
    the specific grounds of appeal Mr Syed-Ali referred to paragraph 11  of
    the determination and said that the Judge was aware of the Respondent's
    policy to allow 60 days from the date of decision for an  applicant  to
    find an alternative college where a  sponsoring  college  has  had  its
    licence revoked. The Appellant asserts that this was the proper  course
    in this case. At the time of his application on  17  January  2014  the
    sponsoring college held Highly Trusted or 'A' Status. By the  time  the
    Respondent made her decision to refuse the  application  the  sponsor's
    status had been downgraded to Legacy or 'B' status.  So  far  as  funds
    were concerned the source of funds, being a  bank  loan  from  Tamilnad
    Bank, was exactly the same source as  that  used  successfully  in  the
    entry  clearance  application  yet  the  Respondent  now  resiles  from
    acceptance.

 6. For the Respondent Mr Whitwell said  that  he  had  not  been  able  to
    ascertain from the government register when the sponsoring college  was
    downgraded from Highly Trusted to  Legacy.  He  accepted  that  if  the
    college was downgraded after the application then the decision in  this
    respect was not in accordance with the law.  So  far  as  the  loan  is
    concerned a copy of the Immigration Rules pertaining at the time of the
    application was not available. If the Rules allowed a bank  loan  other
    than one that was part of an academic or educational loan  scheme  then
    it may be arguable that the Judge was wrong in law.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Syed-Ali  said  that  this  was  a  personal  loan
    secured on the Appellant's family property.  It  was  not  part  of  an
    academic or educational loans scheme but was  given  for  the  specific
    purpose of education.

 8. I reserved my decision.


Error of law

 9. I have considered the papers before me and the oral submissions of both
    parties very carefully. The issue  to  be  decided  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was a very straightforward one. The Applicant had  applied  to
    vary leave to remain as a student. To succeed  in  his  application  he
    needed to show that he held a valid CAS  and  that  he  had  access  to
    sufficient funds to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The
    Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  CAS  was  not
    valid because the sponsor held a Legacy Sponsor or B-Rated licence  and
    the Appellant had not shown that the loan evidencing  access  to  funds
    was provided as part of an academic or educational loans scheme.

10. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  said
    that when he applied for his extension of  leave  his  sponsor  held  a
    valid sponsor licence and the Respondent's decision to  downgrade  this
    licence was a matter over which he had no control. As far as  loan  was
    concerned the Appellant said  simply  that  the  Respondent  was  wrong
    because the letter submitted from  Tamilnad  Bank  specifically  stated
    that the loan was for educational purposes.

11. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on papers. Dealing  with
    the CAS the Judge, alive to the  Respondent's  policy  following  Patel
    (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC) made the following finding at paragraph 17.A).

        "The Appellant does not deny  that  the  sponsor  holds  a  B-rated
        licence, and therefore the CAS  could  not  be  treated  as  valid.
        Although the Appellant says that he should have been given a chance
        to change, there is  no  information  before  me  as  to  when  the
        sponsorship licence was revoked and, for all I know, it was revoked
        before the Appellant commenced his series of studies there".

12. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  asserts
    that the First-tier Tribunal's finding in  this  respect  was  perverse
    because "without any consideration of the facts" the Judge  found  that
    the sponsor held a B-rated licence without giving any consideration  to
    when it was downgraded.

13. In my judgement this ground of appeal has merit. The grounds of  appeal
    very clearly assert that the sponsor held a full licence at the date of
    application. The Respondent failed  to  respond  to  those  grounds  of
    appeal and indeed even by the date of the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  was
    unable to say when the sponsor's licence was downgraded. The finding by
    the First-tier Judge "for  all  I  know,  it  was  revoked  before  the
    Appellant commenced studies" is, if not perverse, irrational. Indeed it
    is not a finding at all rather a failure to make a finding on a  matter
    raised in the grounds that was crucial. In  my  judgement  this  is  an
    error of law.

14. As far as the second issue, the bank loan, is concerned this is  placed
    under the heading "proportionality" in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. "Proportionality" is not an assertion of  an  error  of
    law so it would not be possible for the Appellant to  succeed  on  this
    basis. The essence of this ground of appeal is found in paragraph  2(c)
    of the grounds. The assertion is simple. The  Appellant  never  claimed
    that he was to study in the United Kingdom on a scholarship or under  a
    grant. He is a student studying in the UK privately  with  his  private
    personal funds and therefore there is no need to show  that  the  funds
    were from an approved scholarship or grant. Mr Syed-Ali adds to this in
    oral submissions that the very same source of funds  was  accepted  for
    the Appellant's entry clearance application so having  been  acceptable
    on the one occasion  it  should  continue  to  be  acceptable  now.  Mr
    Whitwell did not have a copy of the Immigration Rules pertaining at the
    time of the application and so was unable to  say  whether  a  personal
    loan for educational purposes met the requirements  of  the  rules.  Mr
    Syed-Ali, who also did not have a copy of the rules pertaining  at  the
    time of the application bases the Appellant's case on the fact that  it
    does.

15. In this respect the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  clear  at
    paragraph 17.D). The Appellant relied on a letter of  17  January  from
    Tamilnad bank and the Judge finds that the letter

        "does not recite that it is  part  of  a  formal  educational  loan
        scheme and therefore the appeal must fail on that score".

    If the Judge was correct there can be no error of law.

16. Paragraph 1B(d) of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules, in the  version
    in place at the time of the application under appeal, states as follows
    in respect of  the  documentary  requirements  where  an  applicant  is
    reliant on a loan



        If the applicant is applying as a Tier 4 Migrant, an original loan
        letter from a financial institution regulated for the purpose of
        student loans by either the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and
        the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) or, in the case of
        overseas accounts, the official regulatory body for the country the
        institution is in and where the money is held, which is dated no
        more than 6 months before the date of the application and clearly
        shows:

        (1) the applicant's name,
        (2) the date of the letter,
        (3) the financial institution's name and logo,
        (4) the money available as a loan,
        (5) for applications for entry clearance, that the loan funds are
        or will be available to the applicant before he travels to the UK,
        unless the loan is an academic or student loan from the applicant's
        country's national government and will be released to the applicant
        on arrival in the UK,
        (6) there are no conditions placed upon the release of the loan
        funds to the applicant, other than him making a successful
        application as a Tier 4 Migrant, and
        (7) the loan is provided by the national government, the state or
        regional government or a government sponsored student loan company
        or is part of an academic or educational loans scheme.


17. The letter submitted by the Appellant dated  17  January  2014  records
    that the Appellant is "being sanctioned with an  educational  loan  ...
    for the purpose of studying at (sic) abroad".   There are two  problems
    with this letter from the Appellant's point  of  view.  Firstly  whilst
    referring to an "educational loan" the letter does not show  that  this
    is part of an educational loans scheme as required by  the  rules.  The
    Judge did not therefore err in law in finding that this letter did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. Secondly, although this
    was not the basis upon which the Judge made his decision, the  loan  is
    specifically in respect of a B.A, (HONS) Hospitality Management  course
    at the University of  West  London  whereas  having  completed  a  pre-
    sessional English Course at the University of West London the Appellant
    now proposed to undertake an Extended  Diploma  in  Management  at  the
    College of Advanced Studies. The loan was therefore not  being  put  to
    the use specified.

18. My conclusion is that whereas the Judge erred in law in his failure  to
    make a finding as to the date when the sponsor's status was  downgraded
    such error was not material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  as
    there was no error of law in his finding that the letter from  Tamilnad
    Bank did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

19. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


  Summary

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                                  Date:





J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
