
IAC-TH-CP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14046/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                            MR OLAWALE FAPOHUNDA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Claire of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Olawale Fapohunda, is a citizen of Uganda.  His date  of
    birth is 28 July 1968.  He applied for a residence card as confirmation
    of a right of residence under EC law as the extended family  member  of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   That
    application was refused by the respondent in a decision dated  5  March
    2014.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal was allowed  by
    Judge Wyman ("the Judge") in a determination promulgated on 6  November
    2014.  The grounds claimed the Judge made a  material  misdirection  in
    law by allowing the appellant's appeal.   The  respondent  relied  upon
    Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC), in particular
    with regard to headnote (iii).

 3. The grounds claimed that given the fact that no exercise of  discretion
    had been made by the Secretary of State, the Judge only had  the  power
    in law to allow the appeal to the extent that it be  remitted  back  to
    the Secretary of State for consideration under Regulation 17(4)  rather
    than allowing the appeal outright.

 4. Permission was granted by Judge Pooler on 15 December 2014 on the basis
    that it was arguable the Judge should not have done more than allow the
    appeal on the ground that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law so that the discretion which arose  under  Regulation  17(4)  could
    then be exercised by the respondent rather than allowing the appeal  by
    finding that the appellant met the requirements of Regulation  8(2)  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006.

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Mr Claire conceded that Regulation 17(4) provided for the Secretary  of
    State to exercise a discretion, such that he properly did not challenge
    the respondent's grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 6. The Judge's factual findings were not challenged.

 7. Headnote (iii) to Ihemedu is instructive:

         "(iii)   Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
             OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
             Secretary of State has not yet exercised that  discretion  the
             most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the
             appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving  the
             matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
             appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State."

 8. The Judge made a material error in  law  by  allowing  the  appeal.   I
    remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  so  that  the  discretion
    arising under Regulation 17(4) can be exercised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

