

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14527/2015
                                                               IA/14513/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford, Phoenix House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 May 2016                             |On 19 May 2016                 |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                              TAMILYN THIRKILL
                                    [M T]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuike a Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The respondent refused the appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
       remain on 21 March 2015. Their  appeal  against  that  decision  was
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson   ("the   Judge")
       following a hearing on 1 September 2015. This is an  appeal  against
       that decision.


    2. The 1st appellant was born on 29 October 1974. She  is  an  American
       citizen. The 2nd appellant was born on [ ] 2005. He is  an  American
       citizen and it was also claimed in both the application and  grounds
       of appeal that he was a British  citizen  as  his  father,  the  1st
       appellant's husband, was a British citizen. At the date  of  hearing
       he was 9 years and 11 months old.

The grant of permission


    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted permission to appeal (25
       February 2016) on the grounds that it is  arguable  that  the  Judge
       erred in relation to the approach to article 8 because;
          1) he should have proceeded on the basis that  their  family  life
             arose prior to the family coming here in 2014,
          2) it was unclear whether he  found  the  family  could  not  live
             together in the United States,
          3) there was no assessment of the 2nd appellant's best  interests,
             and
          4) it is arguable that the 1st appellant's  husband's  ability  to
             meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM could  have  had
             some bearing in the proportionality assessment.


Respondent's position

    4. The respondent asserted in her reply (1 March 2016) in essence  that
       the 1st appellant  was  not  a  genuine  visitor  and  had  employed
       deception in the application. It was unclear if the 1st  appellant's
       husband gave evidence at the hearing (I have checked the  record  of
       proceedings - he did not) or  if  he  could  return  to  the  United
       States. The husband's financial circumstances was  not  a  "Robinson
       obvious" point.


    5. When I raised the point that it  appeared  that  the  2nd  appellant
       could well be a British citizen and there was  no  consideration  of
       that or the impact it had on the 1st  appellant's  position  it  was
       submitted orally that he did not apply for registration as a British
       citizen until June 2015 and that had to be granted  for  him  to  be
       recognised as such.


The Judge's findings

    6. The Judge found that the 1st appellant was not a genuine visitor  to
       the United Kingdom, she gave up her  home  and  her  employment  and
       transferred all her funds from  the  United  States  to  the  United
       Kingdom, the 2nd appellant was enrolled in full-time education here,
       and they had both remained unlawfully here for 7 months [9].


    7. There is nothing  about  their  private  life  that  allows  him  to
       determine the appeal within the Strasbourg jurisprudence [13].

Discussion

    8.  I  raised  what  to  me  was  an  obvious  point  upon  which  both
       representatives were given the opportunity  of  making  submissions.
       The 2nd appellant claimed to be a British citizen.  That  issue  was
       never determined by the Judge despite it having been raised  in  the
       application  and  grounds  of  appeal.  The  appellants   were   not
       represented at the hearing. If  the  2nd  appellant  was  a  British
       citizen, he did not have to make an application for leave to remain.
       In addition, if he was a British citizen the Judge should have asked
       himself the question as to whether it was reasonable to require  him
       to leave the United Kingdom with the 1st appellant or whether it was
       reasonable to separate him from her whilst she left the country  and
       made an application for entry clearance.


    9. I was provided with a letter from the respondent (26  October  2015)
       referring to the  registration  received  in  relation  to  the  2nd
       appellant. It states that (my underlining)


           "... from the information provided  it  appears  that  [M]  is  a
           British  citizen  under  section  2  (1)  (a)  of   the   British
           Nationality Act 1981."



       I was told that the application  in  relation  to  that  matter  was
       submitted in June  2015.  Therefore  at  the  date  of  hearing  the
       application had been submitted but had not been determined.


   10. Given the appellants were not legally  represented  at  the  hearing
       before  the  Judge  and  the  issue  had  been  raised  within   the
       application and grounds of appeal, I am satisfied that there  was  a
       material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge  failing  to  adjourn   the
       proceedings to enable the relevant  documentation  to  be  produced,
       namely the 2nd appellant's birth certificate, the parent's  marriage
       certificates,  and  father's   British   passport,   as   adjourning
       proceedings in those circumstances was the only fair way to proceed.
       It was not fair to determine the appeals  without  determining  that
       issue as a preliminary matter.


   11. As a separate point within that and in response to the  respondent's
       submission, it is clear to me that section 2 (1) (a) of the  British
       Nationality Act 1981 merely provides  confirmation  of  a  state  of
       affairs  that  already  exists  and  accordingly  had  retrospective
       application. Section 2 (1) (a) states that;


            "A person born outside the United Kingdom ... shall be a British
            citizen if at the time of the birth his  father  ...  (a)  is  a
            British citizen otherwise than by descent ..."


   12. If therefore the 2nd appellant  was  able  to  establish  he  was  a
       British  citizen,  that  state  of  affairs  existed  prior  to  the
       application and his British citizenship was  not  dependent  on  the
       registration process.


   13. It is my judgement that the  Judge  then  failed  to  determine  the
       question that naturally flowed from this namely whether  or  not  it
       was reasonable to require the 2nd  appellant  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom within the terms of EX1 of Appendix FM of the  Statement  of
       Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC  395  ("the  rules")  as  the  2nd
       appellant may well have been a qualifying  child,  and  what  impact
       that had on the eligibility requirements for the  1st  appellant  to
       have leave to remain as his parent. That was  a  material  error  of
       law.


   14. The Judge appears to have determined that there were  no  compelling
       circumstances enabling him to consider article 8 outside the  rules.
       However, having set out the law, he fails to adequately explain  why
       if the 2nd appellant was a British citizen that would not amount  to
       a  compelling  circumstance  enabling  consideration  of  article  8
       outside the rules. That is a material error of law.


   15. In relation to  the  grounds  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
       granted, I am satisfied that the failure to consider the family life
       that existed prior to the family coming to the United Kingdom  is  a
       material error of law. That is because the  impact  of  a  potential
       separation of a family life that has existed for 9 years as  against
       6 months is a material difference when assessing the quality of  the
       family life.


   16. In addition, it was not considered whether circumstance  of  gravity
       could flow from the respondent's decision as  the  strength  of  the
       family life of some 9 years inevitably is greater than one lasting 6
       months and therefore  less  needs  to  be  shown  to  establish  the
       possibility of there being consequences of  gravity  that  may  flow
       from the respondent's decision where there are many years of  family
       life as opposed to only a few months. That  in  my  judgement  is  a
       material error of law.

   17. Had the Judge gone on to consider the appellants' family life, which
       in my judgement he materially erred in not doing so, he  would  have
       been required to determine the best interest of  the  2nd  appellant
       which he plainly has not done because apart from the reference  that
       he had been here for 7 months and was about to start school  he  did
       not engage with the question of what was in his best interest.  That
       in my judgement is a material error of law.


   18. In addition, he would have been required to ask whether it would  be
       reasonable to require the 2nd appellant to leave the United  Kingdom
       with the 1st appellant while  she  made  an  application  for  entry
       clearance within the human rights jurisprudence. He did not  do  so.
       This failure to do so in my judgement was a material error of law.


   19. In addition, the Judge did not consider the financial  circumstances
       of  the  1st  appellant's  husband  and  his  ability  to  meet  the
       requirements of Appendix FM of the rules. That  was  a  factor  that
       should have been considered in  the  proportionality  exercise.  The
       failure to do so in my judgement was a material error of law.


   20. In addition, there was no clear finding as  to  whether  the  family
       could live together in the United States. The failure to do so in my
       judgement was a material error of law.


   21. I set the decision aside.


   22. It was submitted on behalf of the appellants that I could proceed to
       determine all of the issues as the 1st appellant had been  ill  with
       cancer. I did not agree  as  the  findings  were  so  inadequate  in
       relation to the issues to be determined that it was more appropriate
       for the matter to be remitted.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Wilson.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 May 2016
