
[pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/14236/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2014                               |On 26 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Rajwant Kaur

                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Mayfair solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a citizen of India.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals
    with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan, who allowed on human  rights  grounds  the  claimant's  appeal
    against her refusal to issue the claimant a residence card  recognising
    a derived right of  residence  as  the  primary  carer  for  a  British
    citizen, her mother, alternatively under Article 8  ECHR  (private  and
    family life).

 2. The claimant has been in the United Kingdom since 6 June 2007; she  had
    entry clearance until 4  December  2007  as  a  visitor,  but  has  not
    succeeded in gaining any leave to remain since  that  expired.   On  21
    February 2009, the claimant made  a  human  rights  claim,  seeking  to
    remain in the United Kingdom to care  for  her  elderly  mother.   That
    application was refused and the claimant's  subsequent  appeal  failed.
    The previous determination is not in evidence and was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The claimant then made an application under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).  It is  that  application
    which underlies the  present  application.  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) appeal failed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but the Tribunal allowed the appeal on human rights
    grounds.

First-tier Tribunal determination

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that  there  had  been  a  previous
    examination of the Article 8 ECHR issue in 2010,  which  had  not  been
    disclosed by the claimant or  the  Secretary  of  State.   Whilst  that
    should have been the starting point on Devaseelan principles,  she  was
    not in a position to start from that determination.

 5. In any event, the judge considered it likely that the circumstances now
    were different: the claimant's mother was  82  years  old,  her  health
    problems were of a degenerative nature and it appeared that her  health
    had deteriorated over time, such that it seemed likely that  her  level
    of care and reliance on her daughter, the claimant,  had  increased  in
    the four years since the previous determination.

 6. The facts were not in dispute at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.  The
    evidence was that for the past  seven  years,  the  claimant  had  made
    herself responsible for all aspects of her mother's day  to  day  care:
    cooking, cleaning, emotional and social support, and  24-hour  personal
    care.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal's core findings in relation to  the  claimant's
    mother were in paragraphs 12 - 13 and 17 of the determination:

         "12.  It  seems  clear  from  the  evidence  before  me  that   the
         appellant's mother would not  be  compelled  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom if the appellant is  required  to  return  to  India.   The
         letter from the Medway Council care manager dated 18 September 2013
         states that they have a limited number of carers who speak  Punjabi
         and could not guarantee to provide a carer who  would  be  able  to
         communicate with [the claimant's mother].  They would only be  able
         to provide a carer at specific times of day to assist with personal
         care, supervision of medication and provisions of meals and  drinks
         but they were unable to provide night time support.   However,  the
         council suggested that  [the  claimant's  mother]  may  meet  their
         criteria for residential care and they would put  together  a  care
         package if her daughter were unable to continue  to  care  for  her
         mother. The care manager concluded that if her daughter was  unable
         to care for her it was unlikely that she would not [sic] be able to
         go out to any social activities and that she would have to spend  a
         great deal of time  on  her  own.   Her  levels  of  anxiety  would
         increase and this would  have  an  adverse  effect  on  her  mental
         health.

         13.  I conclude that this  evidence  shows  that  the  [claimant's]
         mother would be provided with some level of care  if  her  daughter
         had to return to India  and  for  that  reason  she  would  not  be
         compelled to leave the United Kingdom.  However, the quality of her
         care is unlikely to be of the  same  quality  as  her  daughter  is
         currently able to provide.  She is unlikely to have carers who  are
         able to speak her language, understand her cultural, religious  and
         emotional needs, and the  level  of  care  would  be  significantly
         reduced.  If  there  is  a  shortage  of  Punjabi  speaking  carers
         available for home care the situation is likely to be the  same  in
         residential care.  ...

         17.  I am  satisfied  that  the  level  of  care  provided  by  the
         [claimant] is sufficiently high that there is a level of dependency
         that  goes  beyond  normal  ties  between  adult  relatives.    The
         [claimant] has devoted her time to caring for all  aspects  of  her
         elderly mother's care.  Over the years it appears that her mother's
         health has deteriorated and she now requires a high level of  care.
         The appellant does not just provide physical care.  She is able  to
         provide her mother with company and emotional support.  She is able
         to minister to her mother's social, religious and  cultural  needs.
         The evidence shows that tit is unlikely that  the  local  authority
         would be able to provide the full level of  care  that  her  mother
         requires and that her mother's quality of life would be  much  more
         isolated and diminished with a far lower level  of  care.   At  the
         hearing  it  was  quite  clear  that  mother   and   daughter   are
         particularly close and that requiring the [claimant] to  leave  her
         mother and return to India  would  cause  both  of  them  emotional
         distress.  For these reasons I conclude  that  the  [claimant]  has
         established a family life in the United Kingdom with her mother and
         that removal in consequence of that decision would  interfere  with
         her life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation  of
         Article 8 (points  (i)  and  (ii)  of  Lord  Bingham's  five  stage
         approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349). "

 8. The judge found that there were other  family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but  that  they  had  not  taken,  and  would  not  take,  any
    responsibility for the claimant's mother.  She concluded that there was
    Kugathas dependency between these parties and that Article 8  ECHR  was
    triggered.  She considered  that  removal  of  the  claimant  would  be
    disproportionate and therefore unlawful.  It is right that she did  not
    address herself to paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM,  nor  indeed,  in
    terms to the Nagre exceptional or compassionate circumstances approach.
     She followed the Razgar  5-stage  test  without  reference  to  recent
    changes in the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of appeal

 9. The Secretary of State  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the
    Immigration Rules on private and family life are a  complete  code  and
    should form the starting point for a decision maker; that there were no
    compelling or exceptional circumstances in the Nagre  sense  which  the
    respondent should have considered outside the Rules;  that  there  were
    other family members who could  assist  with  the  claimant's  mother's
    care; and that there was no Kugathas dependency  between  the  parties.
    The claimant and her mother could maintain contact by modern methods of
    communication and visits, as they had done in the past.  The  Secretary
    of State argued that the decision to remove would have been found to be
    proportionate, had these matters been considered properly.

Grant of permission

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Secretary of State because he considered it arguable  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  consider  the  proportionality  of
    removal by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM, instead adopting what was arguably an
    impermissible freewheeling approach to Article 8 ECHR.

11. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

12. At the hearing before me, the parties agreed that  the  claimant  could
    not bring herself within the Rules.   For  the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin
    argued that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal were inadequate and
    that there were no compelling  circumstances.   The  respondent  had  a
    carer policy and the claimant had  been  given  three  months  to  make
    alternative arrangements.  The determination was unsound and should  be
    set aside and remade.

13. For the claimant, Mr Jafar argued that the determination was impeccable
    and that the judge had found that there was indeed something  over  and
    above the normal mother-daughter relationship such that family life had
    been  established  between  them.   The   claimant   had   demonstrated
    compelling and compassionate circumstances and it had been open to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on that basis.   He  relied  on
    paragraph 128 of MM & Ors, R (On the Application  Of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985, and on paragraph  15
    of Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC).   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a  carefully  reasoned   and   crafted
    determination and the Secretary of State's challenge was no more than a
    disagreement with the conclusions.  The evidence regarding  the  health
    of the claimant's mother was not disputed.    The  Upper  Tribunal  was
    entitled to interfere with  findings  of  fact  only  where  they  were
    irrational or perverse, which these were not.  He asked  me  to  uphold
    the determination.

Discussion

14. The Upper Tribunal's guidance in Shahzad, so far as relevant  to  these
    proceedings, is as follows:

         "...(iv)     MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 held  that  the  new
         immigration rules regarding deportation of a foreign criminal are a
         complete code. This was because of the express requirement in  them
         at paragraph 398 to have regard to  exceptional  circumstances  and
         other factors.
         (v)       It follows from this that any  other  rule  which  has  a
         similar provision will also constitute a complete code;
         (vi)             Where an area of the rules does not have  such  an
         express mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in
         particular) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)
         [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after  applying  the
         requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
         grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is  it  necessary
         for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
         compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

15. MM's case in the Court  of  Appeal  concerned  the  lawfulness  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to the amount of income  which  a  couple
    must have in order for one spouse (and children if appropriate) to join
    the other in the United Kingdom.  The ratio of MM is at paragraph  134-
    135, not paragraph 128 in the judgment of  Lord  Justice  Aikens,  with
    which Lord Justices Maurice Kay and Treacy concurred.

16. Immigration Rules  are  abbreviated  by  Aikens  LJ  as  'IRs'  in  his
    judgment.  At paragraph 134-5, the judgment reads as follows:

         "134.    Where does that  leave  the  statements  made  in  the  AM
         (Ethiopia),  Pankina  and  Nagre  line  of  cases,  viz.  that  the
         Secretary of State's duty is to protect an  immigrant's  Convention
         rights whether or not that is done through the medium of the IRs so
         that "it follows that the Rules are not of themselves  required  to
         guarantee compliance with the [relevant Article]". I think that the
         reconciliation must be along the following lines:  first,  Laws  LJ
         was dealing with the principles of construction of IRs. IRs are not
         to be construed upon  the  presumption  that  they  will  guarantee
         compliance with the relevant Convention right. Secondly, therefore,
         a particular IR does not,  in  each  case,  have  to  result  in  a
         person's Convention rights  being  "guaranteed".  In  a  particular
         case, an IR may  result  in  a  person's  Convention  rights  being
         interfered  with  in  a  manner  which  is  not  proportionate   or
         justifiable on the facts of that case. That will not  make  the  IR
         unlawful.  But  if  the  particular  IR  is  one  which,  being  an
         interference with the relevant Convention right, is also  incapable
         of being applied in a manner which is proportionate or  justifiable
         or is disproportionate in all (or nearly all  cases),  then  it  is
         unlawful.

         135.     Where  the  relevant  group  of  IRs,  upon  their  proper
         construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing with a person's
         Convention rights in the context of a particular  IR  or  statutory
         provision, such as in the case of  "foreign  criminals",  then  the
         balancing exercise and the way the various factors are to be  taken
         into account in an individual case must be done in accordance  with
         that code, although references to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in
         the code will nonetheless entail a proportionality exercise. But if
         the relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete  code"  then  the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law."

17. In this case there is no dispute that the claimant's  circumstances  do
    not meet either the EEA Regulations or the family  life  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules.  But Nagre acknowledges that the Rules are  not,
    in private and family life cases, a complete code, since  they  do  not
    provide  for   exceptional   or   compassionate   circumstances.    The
    circumstances relied upon here are that this claimant has  been  caring
    for her mother for 7 years, albeit without leave.  No other  member  of
    the family in the United Kingdom is prepared to help and  although  her
    local council is willing to assist, the claimant's mother is  82  years
    old and has high dependency needs, and the council  is  concerned  that
    they will be unable to provide night  care  or  even  someone  who  can
    understand what the mother is saying: they do not have  enough  Punjabi
    speakers to achieve that.  The  judge  found  that  the  same  language
    problems were likely to occur in the event that  residential  care  was
    provided for the claimant's mother.  The Secretary  of  State  has  not
    sought to rebut that finding.

18. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  consider  the  circumstances  with
    anxious  scrutiny  before  concluding,  in  effect,  that  there   were
    exceptional and compassionate circumstances. Although the claimant  may
    have been given time to make alternative arrangements, the  quality  of
    the available arrangements, given the language difficulty and the other
    matters identified in the First-tier Tribunal determination,  would  be
    significantly worse: this elderly Punjabi-speaking woman  would  become
    isolated and suffer a significant deterioration in her quality of  life
    and her mental health, to the distress of the mother and the  daughter.
    On the basis of those findings of fact, which were open to him  on  the
    evidence, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  unarguably  entitled  to
    conclude that the Nagre test had been  met  and  that  removal  of  the
    claimant was disproportionate.

19. The First-tier Tribunal determination stands.  It is a matter  for  the
    respondent what leave is granted to the claimant, and for how long.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
appellant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give effect  to
this determination.
                                                                       [pic]
Date                   Signed
                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

