
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/14133/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 31st August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                  FAYAZ ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Saini (Solicitor, Saini Law Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK as a  spouse,
    made following the curtailment of his previous leave, was refused.  The
    Home Office was that he had used deception in  a  previous  application
    having submitted a fraudulent English language certificate,  this  case
    being one of the ETS cases. The appeal was heard  by  Judge  Somal  who
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on the  3rd  of  September
    2016.

 2. The Judge's findings are  set  out  in  paragraphs  17  to  19  of  the
    decision. The Judge stated that there was nothing before  her  to  cast
    doubt  on  the  Appellant's  case  or  his  credibility.  Although  the
    Appellant had changed address without notifying the Respondent, despite
    the obligation on him to do so, she found the curtailment of his  leave
    had not been validly terminated. On that basis the Appellant had  valid
    leave when he applied to vary his leave as  a  spouse.  The  suggestion
    that he did not meet the suitability requirements because of the use of
    deception in the ETS was rejected. The Judge found that  there  was  no
    credible evidence before her that the Appellant was not the person  who
    took the test and no evidence of his using a proxy.

 3. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in grounds of application of the 9th of September 2015. It  is
    argued that the Judge was wrong  to  find  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Secretary of State did not show that the Appellant  was  an  individual
    identified as having used deception. The fact that the Appellant  spoke
    English fluently at the hearing did not show that he  had  not  used  a
    proxy in the test. It was also argued  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    respect of article 8, his case failed under the Immigration Rules as it
    had not been shown  that  there  were  circumstances  that  would  make
    removal unjustifiably harsh. There were no findings on the  possibility
    of the  separation  being  temporary,  his  presence  had  always  been
    temporary. The best interests of the children were  a  factor.  Finally
    the Appellant had not informed the Tribunal that the  college,  Colwell
    College, is the subject of a criminal enquiry.

 4. Permission was granted by Judge Woodcraft on the 30th of December  2015
    who found that it was arguable that the Judge had erred in not  placing
    any weight on the ETS printout which identified the Appellant.  It  was
    also arguable that the article 8 assessment was also flawed as since it
    was predicated on the Appellant being  able  to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and it was also arguable that it was an error for  the  Judge  to
    find that he had not been validly served with the curtailment decision.

 5. Both parties attended the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  and  made
    submissions. The submissions are set out in the Record of  Proceedings,
    these are referred to where relevant below. At the end of  the  hearing
    the case was reserved.

 6. Although Qadir [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and Shehzad and  Choudhury  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 615  post-date  the  decision  under  consideration  in  these
    proceedings it  has  been  held  that  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State is sufficient to  discharge  the  evidential  burden
    that rests on the Secretary of State. The effect  of  the  decision  is
    declaratory and so has the effect of  stating  what  the  position  has
    always been.

 7. The difficulty with this decision is that the Judge  found  that  there
    was no evidence to cast doubt on the Appellant's case. Apart  from  his
    failure to keep the Secretary of State informed of his address or  that
    his college had stopped him studying, which are  not  minor  omissions,
    the fact is that the Judge took the  view  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Secretary of State did not discharge the  evidential  burden  which  is
    clearly incorrect.

 8. Having regard to the case of Qadir and subsequent authority I find that
    the analysis of the Judge in paragraph 11 of the decision is flawed and
    legally erroneous. In rejecting the Secretary of  State's  evidence  is
    inadequate to begin  with  the  Judge  has  proceeded  from  the  wrong
    starting point in then assessing the evidence in the case as  a  whole.
    This has to be seen in the context of his  failure  to  keep  the  Home
    Office informed of other relevant matters. In those circumstances I  am
    satisfied that her findings on the issue of the use  of  deception  are
    unsustainable and cannot stand.

 9. Given then that the finding that the Appellant  meets  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules cannot stand it follows  that  he
    cannot necessarily meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to spouse  applications  and  the  analysis  in  paragraph  21
    proceeds on what is an unsustainable basis. In the circumstances  those
    findings cannot stand either.

10. Given that the basic premise on which the Judge  proceeded  was  flawed
    there is no justification for preserving any of the  findings  made  by
    the Judge and the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  In  those
    circumstances the appropriate course of action is to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all issues, not to  be  heard
    by Judge Somal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting this case I make no fee award which remains a  matter  for  the
First-tier Tribunal dependent on the outcome of the hearing.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 30th August 2016
