
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14058/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                             Mrs Mariam Shaheen
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by Axiom Solicitors
                    Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  the  19th  March
   1989. She appeals, with permission, from the dismissal by the  First-tier
   Tribunal (Judge Pickup) of her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
   to curtail her extant leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse
   of a British citizen. The decision to curtail her leave was made  on  the
   basis of a finding that the appellant had submitted an  English  language
   test certificate with her application for entry clearance,  the  validity
   of which had been subsequently called into question by the issuing body.


2. In dismissing the appeal, Judge Pickup directed himself as follows:


    I have borne in mind that the burden of proof on is on  the  appellant.
    The standard of proof is a balance of probabilities. [Paragraph 5]


    In considering documents produced by or on behalf of  the  appellant  I
    must bear in mind that in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00438 STARRED,  it
    was held that "It is for an individual claimant to show that a document
    on which he seeks to rely can be relied on ... A document should not be
    viewed in isolation. The decision maker should look at the evidence  as
    a whole or in the round (which  is  the  same  thing)."  [Paragraph  6,
    original emphasis]


   The judge then summarised the oral testimony that the appellant had given
   at the hearing before continuing as follows:


    Taken  as  a  whole,  I  found  her  evidence  unsatisfactory,   vague,
    unpersuasive, and ultimately not credible. I reach the conclusion  that
    she did not take  the  test  properly  and  thus  that  she  failed  to
    demonstrate that  her  results  can  be  relied  upon.  [Paragraph  15,
    emphasis added]


3. The appellant  argues  that  the  above  passages  of  the  determination
   clearly demonstrate, both individually and collectively, that  the  judge
   made the fundamental error of  placing  the  burden  of  proof  upon  the
   appellant. It is also argued that the judge failed to appreciate that the
   issue to be determined was not whether the appellant's  English  language
   certificate was a reliable document, but rather  whether  the  respondent
   had proved that she had been obtained it by deception.


4. The respondent based the decision to curtail  the  appellant's  leave  to
   remain upon the discretionary ground that is contained  within  paragraph
   322(2) of the Immigration Rules. That paragraph, to which the judge  made
   only passing reference, reads as follows:


    323 A person's leave to enter or remain may be curtailed on any of  the
    grounds set out in paragraph 322(2)-(5)


    322 (2) the making of false representations or the failure to  disclose
    any material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a
    previous variation of leave, or in order to obtain documents  from  the
    Secretary of State  or  a  third  party  required  in  support  of  the
    application.


    [Emphasis added in respect of the material parts of the paragraph]


5. The particulars of the allegation that  the  appellant  had  made  "false
   representations" were contained in the respondent's  explanatory  letter.
   The material passage in that letter, to which the judge  did  not  refer,
   reads as follows:


    You were previously granted leave to enter in the United Kingdom  until
    04 January 2015 as a Spouse/Civil Partner. We have now identified  that
    you made false representations in that application for the  purpose  of
    obtaining leave to enter. [Emphasis added]


6. The position regarding the legal burden  of  proof  in  relation  to  the
   general  grounds  for   refusal   under   the   Immigration   Rules   was
   comprehensively considered in JC (Part 9 HC395- burden  of  proof)  China
   [2007]  UKAIT  00027.  In  the  course  of  stating  a  series  of  legal
   propositions, the Tribunal said as follows -


    Sixth, in relation to all of the general grounds the burden of proof is
    on the decision-maker (entry clearance  officer,  immigration  officer,
    Secretary of State) to establish the facts relied  upon.  Their  common
    thread is that they depend for their  validity  on  the  decision-maker
    being able to establish a precedent fact. Unless it is  not  contested,
    the precedent fact needs to be established for the duty or power to  be
    exercised.


7. It is thus clear that the legal burden of proving the precedent  fact  of
   the "false representation" that had allegedly been made by the  appellant
   was one that rested squarely upon the respondent.  It  did  not,  as  the
   judge supposed, rest upon the appellant.  Furthermore,  the  decision  in
   Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKAIT 0438 was of no relevance to  the  issue  that
   the judge had to determine.  This  is  because  the  principles  of  that
   decision are relevant only to situations in which a person seeks to  rely
   upon a document in making an asylum or human rights claim, in respect  of
   which the applicant bears the  burden  of  proof.  Moreover,  whilst  the
   standard of  proof  upon  the  respondent  was  that  of  a  'balance  of
   probabilities', it will generally require particularly cogent evidence to
   discharge that burden where, as here, the allegation is one of fraud, and
   which may have very severe consequences for the appellant if proven.


8. It is clear from the above that  the  judge's  dismissal  of  appeal  was
   based upon an error of law that was highly material  to  the  outcome.  I
   therefore set it aside and remake the decision.


9. The sole evidence upon which the respondent  relies  in  support  of  the
   allegation that the appellant made  false  representations  in  order  to
   obtain the  English  language  test  certificate  is  the  report  of  an
   investigation conducted by the issuing body. This indicates that  a  two-
   part malpractice investigation had been carried  out  at  the  centre  in
   Pakistan where the appellant had sat her English  test.  The  first  part
   involved statistical analysis; the second involved interrogation of  both
   the candidates and the  centre.  The  issuing  body  concluded  that  the
   appellant was one of some  255  candidates  who  had  shown  insufficient
   engagement with the test in order for it  "to  be  able  to  confirm  the
   validity of the scores with confidence" [emphasis  added].  Their  scores
   had thus been "cancelled".


10. In my judgement, the mere fact that the  issuing  body  felt  unable  to
   confirm the validity of the appellant's score "with confidence", does not
   come close to proving the respondent's accusation that her score had been
   obtained by deception. At most, it proves that the  score  that  she  had
   apparently achieved was an unreliable indicator of her  facility  in  the
   English language. Thus, the proper course would simply have been to  give
   the appellant a reasonable opportunity to re-take the test  in  question;
   something which the evidence served upon the Upper Tribunal suggests that
   she may now have done.


Decision


11. The appeal is allowed.


12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
   appeal against curtailment of her leave to remain is set aside, and it is
   substituted by a decision to allow that appeal.


Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





