
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14712/2013
                                                               IA/14725/2013
                                                               IA/14731/2013
                                                               IA/14757/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2014                           |On 28 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

|1  |P O O                                                                |   |
|2  |L K A O                                                              |   |
|3  |B A O                                                                |   |
|4  |P T O                                                                |   |


                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Record, Counsel instructed by David A Grand,
                    Non-Practising Barrister
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to   identify   the
    respondents. Breach of this order can be  punished  as  a  contempt  of
    court. I make this order because the  case  is  about  the  welfare  of
    children whose circumstances should be protected from the public  gaze.
    This order does not restrict publishing details about the case so  long
    as the respondents cannot be identified.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing on human rights grounds the appeals of the
    four respondents against decisions of the Secretary of State to  refuse
    them further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  first
    respondent is the mother of the other three respondents.  She  came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2005.  She has remained in the United Kingdom  at
    all times with permission, her leave being extended on her  application
    when necessary until further leave was refused in  the  decisions  that
    gave rise to these appeals.

 3. The  children  were  born  in  2003,  2007  and  2010,  so  the  second
    respondent, the oldest of the children, was aged about 9 years  at  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal's decision and had lived in the  United
    Kingdom for seven or more years.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeals particularly out of concern
    for the second respondent.  The judge  said  at  paragraph  12  of  his
    determination:

         "It is my view that it would in the circumstances of this  case  be
         inappropriate to disrupt the pattern of life of the 8 year old,  L-
         K-, in the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary.  I see no
         compelling reasons to the contrary in this case, with his  father's
         case far from resolved as well as aforesaid."

 5. This is a reference to the state of uncertainty about  the  immigration
    status of the husband of the first respondent and father of  the  other
    respondents.  He has been in the United Kingdom  for  longer  than  the
    present respondents and it seems that for much of that time he has been
    in the United Kingdom without  permission.  However  the  Secretary  of
    State showed no enthusiasm for deciding whether or  not  he  should  be
    removed.  I am told by Ms Record, and I accept, that the  Secretary  of
    State served a removal decision on the person concerned on the  day  of
    the  hearing  of   the   appeal   before   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Unsurprisingly the decision is being appealed and I am  told  that  the
    appeal will be heard in the earlier part of next year.

 6. Ms Record explained that the respondents  in  this  appeal  have  never
    tried to have their cases heard separately from any case concerning the
    husband and father and on an earlier occasion the  First-tier  Tribunal
    expressed concern that there was no decision that related to the family
    as a whole. These appeals were adjourned for a time in  the  hope  that
    the Secretary of State would be prompted to make a  decision  but  this
    was not done until, as I  have  indicated,  the  very  morning  of  the
    hearing of these appeals in the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I have not seen any papers relating to that husband and father.   I  do
    not know why there was not a decision on an earlier occasion so I am in
    no position to criticise the delay but it is a mystery to me  that  the
    Secretary of State thinks it appropriate to  consider  members  of  the
    same  family  separately  when  they  appear  to  be  living  together.
    Certainly one of the reasons that the appeals were allowed was  because
    the family circumstances as a whole could not be considered.

 8. It is plain from paragraph 12 of  the  determination  (see  above)  and
    elsewhere that there were two elements in the case that gave the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge considerable concern.  The first was the amount  of
    time that the family had spent in the United Kingdom so that the oldest
    child had established a private and family life that is independent and
    significant. The second is that there was no decision about the father,
    so the judge did not know if he was dealing with a case where the whole
    family would be removed or whether  the  children  and  wife  would  be
    removed leaving behind the husband and father.  This  difficulty  could
    have been avoided if the Secretary of State had acted more promptly  in
    that case.

 9. The grounds of appeal are not particularly illuminating.  They complain
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred  to  the  "huge  amount  of
    blame" placed on the shoulders of the Secretary of State without really
    saying why that criticism amounts to an error of law.   They  say  that
    the Secretary of  State's  case  is  that  it  would  be  open  to  the
    respondents to apply for entry clearance in the event of the husband or
    father being allowed to remain, that it is not unreasonable  to  expect
    the family to adjust to the life in  the  country  of  which  they  are
    nationals and that Article 8 is not a general dispensing power and that
    it is not unjustifiably  harsh  to  return  the  respondents  there  to
    continue their family life.  These are almost standard paragraphs these
    days that although they are not inherently unmeritorious  they  do  not
    deal with the important facts in this  case.  The  Secretary  of  State
    contemplated removing a wife and children that had been in  the  United
    Kingdom for many years knowing that it was at least  possible  that  in
    the future the father would be allowed to stay and the respondent might
    be able to come back.

10. As I indicated  in  argument,  although  it  is  a  trite  observation,
    immigration appeals deal with people  with  rights  and  relationships.
    They are not parcels on a  warehouse  shelf.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was clearly concerned that it was  very  undesirable  to  make  a
    decision that would separate children from their father when it may  be
    the case that the father is allowed to remain in the United Kingdom and
    they may be able to come back under the Rules.

11. Mr Kandola did all that could reasonably be expected of him but he  was
    struggling to find  an  identifiable  relevant  error  of  law  in  the
    grounds, still less to support it by reference to the determination.

12. It is quite plain that the First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed  himself
    about the Rules, addressed himself about making a decision outside  the
    Rules, referred to the  authority  in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197,
    reminded himself that if both parents are being removed from the United
    Kingdom the starting point would suggest that children forming part  of
    the same household should go with them. He found that this was not such
    a case because no decision had been  made  about  removing  the  father
    until shortly before the hearing of the case. Clearly that decision was
    open to examination and appeal.

13. I do not see how it can be said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law.  He appears to have considered  all  that  needed  to  be
    considered and applied the law appropriately.

14. It follows that I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal against  this
    decision.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not indicate what kind of  leave  was
    necessary to give effect to his decision.  He is not obliged to do that
    but it is clear to me that a period  of  leave  settling  the  position
    until the outcome of the father's  case  is  finally  determined  would
    probably be sufficient.  If there has to be a further removal  decision
    all rights can be looked at again. At present I can  find  no  material
    error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  certainly
    none had been identified in the grounds before me.

16. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 October 2014                |

