

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15606/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12th February 2015               |On: 22nd April 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                           Tuvshintugs Purevgerel
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sharkey, instructed by Medivisas UK LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of Mongolia. He is now aged 18.  He was
         brought to this country when he was 11 years  old,  having  entered
         with his mother on a valid visit visa. His mother  thereafter  left
         him in the care of his elder  sister  and  her  husband  who  is  a
         Portuguese national.

      2. On the 9th January 2014 an application was made on his behalf for a
         residence card confirming his right of residence  as  the  extended
         family member of an EEA national, namely his brother-in-law.

      3. The application was refused on the 11th March 2014  on  the  ground
         that the Appellant had produced no evidence of  dependency  on  his
         sponsor at any time, either in Mongolia or in the UK. In particular
         he had not shown that he was dependent upon his  sponsor  prior  to
         entering the UK.

      4. An appeal was brought to the First-tier Tribunal. Bafflingly, given
         that she had advised the Appellant to make the EEA  application  in
         the first place, on appeal Ms Sharkey immediately conceded that the
         Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration   (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("EEA Regs"). This  is  a  position
         she has maintained in her present grounds of appeal. The appeal was
         pursued on Article 8 grounds only.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge I  Ross)  noted  the  concession  in
         respect of the EEA Regs and  expressly  found  that  the  Appellant
         could not show himself to be an extended family member  within  the
         meaning of Regulation 8.  He then effectively declined to make  any
         findings on Article 8 ECHR on the ground that the Appellant had not
         made an application under either paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM.

      6. Permission to appeal was granted on the 28th  July  2014  by  Judge
         Pooler of the First-tier Tribunal who noted that in light of  Ahmed
         (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA  Regs)  [2013]  UKUT  00089
         (IAC) the Judge should have considered Article 8.

      7. At a hearing before me on the 7th November 2014 Mr Kandola for  the
         Respondent agreed that this must be so. Article 8 was  prima  facie
         engaged, had been raised in the grounds of appeal and  should  have
         been dealt with. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect
         of Article 8 ECHR is set aside. The findings on Regulation 8 of the
         EEA Regs are unchallenged and are therefore preserved.

         The Re-Made Decision

      8. I start with the Immigration Rules. The  parties  agreed  that  the
         only conceivable paragraph of the Rules that  could  apply  to  the
         Appellant was 276ADE; the parties were also in  agreement  that  at
         the date of the appeal he could not meet the requirements  therein.
         The Appellant was not under 18 and Ms  Sharkey  expressly  conceded
         that he could not show that he faced "very serious obstacles to his
         reintegration" since he still speaks Mongolian, has his parents and
         the family home there.   He arrived in the UK on the 19th  November
         2007 when he was aged 11 years, 2 months and  four  days  old;   it
         will not be until the 24th January 2019 that  he  will  have  spent
         more than half his life in the UK.

      9. The Appellant does not qualify for leave to remain under the Rules.
          I am nevertheless satisfied that his  case  should  be  considered
         under Article 8. He has only very recently turned 18 and has  spent
         almost seven and half years of his life in  the  UK.    That  is  a
         significant period of time for a young person and I accept that  he
         has established a substantial private life since he has been  here.
         He has many friends and has done well in his education.   I further
         accept that he enjoys a family life with his sister and brother-in-
         law. In the time that he has spent here his  sister  has  acted  in
         loco parentis and I accept her evidence that she would  be  "deeply
         heartbroken" if he had to return to permanently  to  Mongolia.  The
         Appellant's brother-in-law Antonio Gabriel has also written  and  I
         accept his evidence that he treats the Appellant as his  own  child
         and that he feels responsible for him.  Although the Appellant  has
         now reached 18 he is still in the family home, has not  established
         an independent family unit and I accept that he is currently wholly
         financially dependent upon Mr Gabriel: there is  no  "bright  line"
         crossed when one reaches majority  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has a  family  life  with  his  sister  and  Mr  Gabriel.
         Accordingly I am satisfied that there would be an interference with
         the Appellant's family and private life in the UK if he were to  be
         returned to Mongolia.

     10. The removal of persons who have no right to remain under the  Rules
         is rationally connected to the legitimate  aim  Article  8  (2)  of
         protecting the economy. The decision is one that is  lawfully  open
         to the Respondent.

     11. I am bound, in considering proportionality, to consider the factors
         set out in paragraph  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014):

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                 (a) a private life, or

                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5) Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-

                 (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom.

     12. I attach some weight to the fact that the Appellant has not had any
         leave to remain for the time that he has spent in the UK, but  that
         is necessarily very limited since  he  was  a  child  when  he  was
         allowed to overstay: I find it to be irrational to  blame  him  for
         any lapse in his leave.  I do attach some significant weight to the
         fact that he does not presently meet the requirements of the Rules,
         because I accept that maintenance of immigration control is in  the
         public interest.

     13. It is in the public interest that persons who seek leave to  remain
         are  able  to  speak  English  because  they  are  better  able  to
         integrate. That this is so is amply demonstrated by  the  Appellant
         who speaks English beautifully and has indeed integrated well.

     14. It is in the public interest that persons who seek leave to  remain
         are financially independent. Since the Appellant is still so  young
         it makes little sense to give this provision a strict  reading.  He
         may not be self sufficient but he has certainly never been a  drain
         on the resources of the tax-payer.  During the entire time  he  has
         lived in the UK with his sister he has  been  provided  for  and  I
         accept and find as fact that he is presently financially  dependent
         on his brother-in-law.

     15. Section 117B (4) mandates that little weight should be attached  to
         a  private  life  established  when  an  applicant  is  in  the  UK
         unlawfully. There can be no doubt that  the  Appellant  established
         his friendships and relationships with his teachers whilst  he  was
         here with no leave but I am conscious  that  again,  he  cannot  be
         blamed for that. He was a child of 11  when  his  leave  lapsed.  I
         cannot be satisfied that it was  the  intention  of  parliament  to
         attach "little weight" to the private life  of  a  child  in  those
         circumstances: indeed this would be contrary to all of  the  policy
         guidance and ministerial statements relating to 276ADE(1)(iv).  See
         for instance The Grounds of Compatibility with  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR, the Statement  by  the  Home  Office  (13  June  2012)  which
         accompanied the introduction of that  paragraph:  "a  period  of  7
         continuous years  spent  in  the  UK  as  a  child  will  generally
         establish a sufficient level of integration for family and  private
         life to exist such that removal would normally not be in  the  best
         interests  of  the  child"  [at  27].   The   current   Immigration
         Directorates'  Instruction[1]  states:  "strong  reasons  will   be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7  years".   In  all  of  this  guidance  the  government
         recognises that after a period of seven years a child will have put
         down roots and will have an established and valuable private  life.
         I am not therefore minded to attach only a "little" weight  to  the
         private life that the Appellant established in this country between
         the years of 11 and 18.   I have attached significant weight to it.

     16. I am nevertheless satisfied that the Secretary of  State  can  show
         the decision to remove to be justified.  As Mr Avery observes,  the
         Appellant's case presents a "zero sum" outcome, since  whatever  he
         loses in the UK, he will gain in  Mongolia,  where  he  speaks  the
         language, has both his parents with whom he can  be  reunited,  his
         family home and access to education, albeit not of the quality that
         he may have access to in the UK. It is very difficult to  say  that
         the Article 8(1) rights that the Appellant enjoys in the UK  should
         outweigh that which he could enjoy with his  parents  and  extended
         family members in Mongolia.   It cannot be said that this  decision
         is unjustifiably harsh.

     17. I appreciate that the Appellant has used his time in the  UK  well.
         He has worked hard and I am sure  that  he  will  have  the  bright
         future he deserves, wherever he lives.  No doubt his  family  would
         wish to consider whether he would like to apply for entry clearance
         as an extended family member of his brother-in-law's  household  in
         the UK. I accept that Mr Gabriel considers the Appellant "as a son"
         and that having provided for him financially for a number of  years
         in the UK will continue to do so should he return  to  Mongolia.  I
         have considered whether this factor should result  in  this  appeal
         being allowed, applying Chikwamba by analogy.  If I find  that  the
         Appellant would ultimately succeed in his EEA claim, upon making an
         application for entry clearance, there  would  arguably  be  little
         point in making him go through the process of  return  to  Mongolia
         only to come back again.   Two factors weigh heavily  against  that
         route. Firstly at today's date the Appellant does not qualify as an
         extended family member because he could not show  that  Mr  Gabriel
         supported him in Mongolia before his arrival:  whether  Mr  Gabriel
         wishes to continue to support him once he has returned is a  matter
         for him. Secondly recognition as an "extended family member"  under
         Regulation 8 does not confer an automatic right of entry to the UK.
         Whether the Respondent wishes  to  exercise  her  discretion  under
         Regulation 17(4) is entirely a matter for her.




         Decisions

     18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of
         law and it is set aside.

     19. The decision in the appeal is remade as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
         dismissed on all grounds".

     20. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on the  facts
         I see no reason to make one.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             10th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a  Partner
or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes'


