


                                                      [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal number:
IA/15220/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |             Decision       |
|                                     |Promulgated                 |
|On June 24, 2015                     |             On June 26,2015|
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           MR MD ABDUL BAQI NAHEN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Kuddus Kamla
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. He entered the United Kingdom
    as a student on January 19, 2009 with leave valid until April 1,  2012.
    On March 30, 2012 he made an application to vary his leave and on April
    19, 2013 the respondent refused his application and at the same time  a
    decision to remove him by way of directions was made under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on May 7, 2013 under section 82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid  on
    December 5, 2013 and in a decision promulgated on December 9,  2013  he
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal.  The  appellant  lodged  grounds  of
    appeal on December 16, 2013 submitting the FtTJ had erred and Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett gave permission to appeal. The  matter
    came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Monson on February 6, 2014 and  in  a
    determination promulgated on February 13, 2014 he found an error in law
    and remitted the appellant's appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant's  appeal  came  back  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Dean (hereinafter referred to as the FtTJ) on October 29, 2014
    and in a decision promulgated on  November  12,  2014  he  refused  the
    appellant's appeal.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on November 19, 2014 but
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholson refused this on December 31,
    2014. The appellant renewed his grounds of appeal and on April 24, 2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty gave permission on a limited basis.



 6. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  the  appellant  was
    represented as set out above and present at the hearing.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Aslam adopted the grounds of appeal and argued the FtTJ had erred by
    failing to have regard to  the  emotional  attachment  the  appellant's
    grandmother had to the appellant. She suffered  from  various  ailments
    but the evidence  before  the  FtTJ  demonstrated  that  the  appellant
    provided both social and psychological  support.  The  FtTJ  failed  to
    address this in his  decision  and  in  doing  so  failed  to  properly
    consider the appeal outside of the Rules.

 9. Mr Parkinson submitted there was no error because  the  omission  would
    not make any material difference to the FtTJ's decision because he  had
    given ample reasons for refusing the appeal. The appellant did not live
    with his grandmother and whilst the FtTJ noted the support he  gave  he
    found this was limited and that the grandmother's needs  were  properly
    catered for either by the family she lived  with  or  it  could  be  by
    additional support from social services. She had family present and the
    FtTJ was entitled to make the findings she did. The appellant was  here
    as a student and his stay was precarious and he had no expectation that
    he would be allowed to remain. The FtTJ did not have to  make  findings
    on every part of the appellant's claim.

10. Mr Aslam reminded me that the FtTJ had not considered  the  appellant's
    case in full and that was why there was an error.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. Permission to appeal had been given on a limited basis.  The  appellant
    did not attend the hearing before the FtTJ and he therefore dealt  with
    the appeal on the evidence presented.


12. Contained in a bundle was a two page medical report but in  truth  this
    merely listed the appellant's grandmother's  symptoms  and  medications
    she was taking. The report did not provide the FtTJ  with  any  insight
    into the appellant's grandmother's problems or  quality  of  life.  The
    appellant provided a witness statement, as did  Mohammed  Abdul  Quddus
    and Mohamed Abdul Wodud (his uncles).

13. The FtTJ had regard to these documents as he engaged with them  in  his
    determination.  He  was  aware  the  appellant  provided  care  to   is
    grandmother but as the appellant did not live with her  he  viewed  his
    involvement as limited. He noted what Mr Quddus and Mr Wodud  said  and
    that they were the appellant's grandmother's children.

14. The FtTJ found that there was no breach of family or  private  life  in
    removing the appellant because her immediate  family  catered  for  the
    appellant's grandmother's needs and there was also help available  from
    social services.

15. Whilst the FtTJ did not specifically make findings about her  level  of
    emotional attachment I do not find this amounted to an  error  in  law.
    The FtTJ quite properly considered  the  whole  picture  and  both  the
    appellant and his grandmother are adults. At paragraph  [20]  the  FtTJ
    noted that the appellant provided care but at paragraph [22]  the  FtTJ
    further found that she was adequately cared for by others with whom she
    lived. The appellant did not come within the Immigration Rules for  the
    purposes of private or family life and whilst he did provide assistance
    he was not the only family member and importantly he did not even  live
    with her. Neither the appellant nor his witnesses attended the  hearing
    and the appellant invited the Tribunal to deal with  the  case  on  the
    papers. This is what the FtTJ did and I am satisfied that the FtTJ  did
    consider all the evidence and any failure to specifically consider  the
    appellant's emotional bond to his grandmother was not material  as  the
    FtTJ gave ample reasons for finding article 8 was not  engaged  outside
    of the Rules.

16. For these reasons I dismiss the appeal.









    DECISION


17. There was no material error in respect of the article 8 ECHR  decision.
    I dismiss the appeal

Signed:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
