
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15007/2014
                                                               IA/15068/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 27 October 2015                 |On: 9 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs agharese florence fisher
                         Mr rowland olumuyiwa fisher
                       (ANonymity directioN not maDE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Charlton, Bhogal Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of
    Ms Fisher and her husband against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
    their applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Fisher and  her  family  as
    the appellants, reflecting their positions as they were in  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are wife and husband and are citizens of Nigeria.   They
    were born respectively on 31 March 1954 and 8 April  1955.   The  first
    appellant entered the UK during 2002 (having been refused a visit  visa
    in August 2002).   In  February  2005  she  submitted  an  unsuccessful
    application for indefinite leave to remain  and  on  31  March  2007  a
    further application for indefinite leave to remain under the seven year
    concession.  Both applications were refused on 18 June 2008.  The first
    appellant's appeals  against  these  decisions  were  dismissed  on  22
    October 2008 and a subsequent High Court Review  refused.   The  second
    appellant was issued with a multiple visit visa on  20  February  2003,
    valid until 21 February 2005.  The appellants  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights on 6 June  2013.   Both  appellants
    were in the  UK  unlawfully  at  the  time.   Also  included  on  their
    application were their two adult children.

 4. The applications for both appellants were  refused  on  7  March  2014.
    Their appeals, and that of their two adult children who were refused on
    25 March 2014, came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dineen  on  19
    January 2015. The judge heard oral evidence from the two appellants and
    from their two adult children who were  appellants  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge found that the appellants' younger adult child met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) as she was over 18 and under
    25 at the date of the application and had spent at least half her  life
    living continuously in the UK.  In addition and in the alternative  the
    judge found that both adult children met the requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  In relation to Mr and Mrs Fisher (who  were  the  first
    and second appellants in the First-tier Tribunal)  although  the  judge
    was of the view that there would not be a compelling case under Article
    8 outside of the Immigration Rules, the  judge  allowed  their  appeals
    under paragraph 276ADE as the judge was satisfied that  the  appellants
    had no ties, including social, cultural or family ties with Nigeria.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the  judge  had  misdirected  himself  and  or  had
    provided inadequate reasoning in relation  to  the  appellants'  family
    ties in Nigeria.  It was submitted that the judge had failed  to  carry
    out an objective  assessment  of  the  ability  of  the  appellants  to
    reconnect to family members in Nigeria and  to  give  reasons  why  the
    presence of these family members could not result in effective support.
     The grounds relied on  the  decision  of  Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE:
    suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC).

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 13 July 2015. Thus the appeals came
    before me

Appeal Hearing

 7. Although Mr Whitwell initially indicated that he was seeking  to  argue
    that the appellant's eldest child  was  included  in  the  request  and
    therefore the grant of permission, it was clear from the papers  before
    me which included two separate appeal forms  (with  identical  grounds)
    for just Mr and Mrs Fisher (the first and second appellants before  the
    First-tier Tribunal) that permission had only been sought (and granted)
    in respect of the two appellants.  Mr Whitwell conceded that this  must
    be the case.

 8. Mr Whitwell argued that paragraph [30] of the decision  referred  to  a
    sister in Nigeria who is a widow  and  paragraph  [31]  referred  to  a
    former printing business which had now been taken over by other  family
    members.  Mr Whitwell argued that there was also the second appellant's
    line of family in Nigeria.  Mr Whitwell argued that Bossadi  cannot  be
    distinguished as the appellants had sought  to  do  in  their  Rule  24
    response.  The judge had fallen  into  the  error  of  approaching  the
    matter  of  family  ties  as  a  purely  subjective  one,  rather  than
    undertaking an objective assessment.

 9. Ms Charlton relied on the Rule 24  response.   Although  she  initially
    argued that Bossadi was not  promulgated  until  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, the First-tier Tribunal decision was not  promulgated
    until 28 April 2015 significantly after  the  decision  was  issued  in
    Bossadi.  There is no merit in that argument and Ms  Charlton  conceded
    as much before me.  Ms Charlton submitted that the judge had found  all
    witnesses credible.  Whilst he does mention a widow and a  family  home
    he accepted they had departed due to bad  experiences.   She  submitted
    that the respondent's argument is in effect  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings which was based on subjective and objective findings.

10. I reserved my decision.   Although  Ms  Charlton  indicated  that  both
    appellants were available to give evidence as to their lack of ties  in
    Nigeria, both Mr Whitwell and Ms  Charlton  indicated  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence and information before me (including in the judge's
    record of proceedings) to enable me  to  remake  the  decision  without
    further evidence should I find an error of law.

Consideration and Findings

11. At the relevant dates of application and  decision  in  this  case  the
    relevant Immigration Rule read as follows:

    '276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
    on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
    application, the applicant:

      i) Does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section  1.2
         to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM; and

     ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds  of
         private life in the UK; and

    iii) Has live continuously in the UK for at least 20 years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or

     iv) Is  under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
         for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and
         it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK;
         or

      v) Is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
         less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has
         no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
         which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.'

12. The argument in the appellants' Rule 24 response that in effect Bossadi
    had no application as it related to the  inapplicability  of  paragraph
    276ADE to foreign criminals and therefore what was said in relation  to
    276ADE and ties, was plainly obiter, is  misconceived.   Bossadi  is  a
    reported decision of the Upper Tribunal and as such  what  it  says  in
    relation to the requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE(vi) (in  force
    from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014) has general application and is to  be
    followed.  I note Ms Charlton, correctly in my view, did  not  seek  to
    persuade me of this line of argument at the hearing.

13. The judge clearly  made  no  reference  to  Bossadi  and  set  out  the
    authority of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 (IAC).  Having set out paragraph [123] of that decision  the
    judge at paragraph 64 went on to find as follows:

    'I am satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  first  and
    second appellants having, albeit unlawfully and in  a  blatant  manner,
    been in the UK since respectively 220 and 2003, shown on  the  evidence
    which I accept, that they satisfied at the material time the  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE91)(vi) which  were  applicable  at  the  time  of  the
    respondent's decision.'

14. It was incumbent on the judge to have regard to the principles set  out
    in Bossadi which confirmed that the requirement set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) from 9 July 2012 to 27  July  2014  requires  a  'rounded
    assessment as to whether a  person's  familial  ties  could  result  in
    support to him in the event of his return, an  assessment  taking  into
    account  both  subjective  and  objective   considerations   and   also
    consideration of what lies within the choice of a claimant to achieve.'

15. It is clear however, considering the judge's decision in its  entirety,
    that he did make this rounded  assessment,  taking  into  account  both
    subjective and objective  considerations  and  'what  lies  within  the
    choice of a claimant to achieve'.

16. Although the judge's reasoning at paragraph 65 was brief, crucially  he
    accepted the evidence which was before him.  This finding must be  read
    therefore in conjunction with all the evidence and the judge's findings
    at paragraph 52 that:

    '... notwithstanding the poor immigration  history  of  the  first  and
    second appellants, the evidence of the witnesses  is  credible  because
    that of each witness is consistent within itself, with the evidence  of
    the other witnesses; and with the available documentary evidence'.

17. That evidence included, as recorded at paragraph 35 of the decision:

    'The first and second appellants state that  they  have  severed  their
    ties with Nigeria.  If they were  to  return  there,  they  would  have
    nothing and they would be homeless and destitute.   Nigeria  is  not  a
    safe country, and their most recent  departure  from  it  followed  bad
    experiences there, although they did not apply for asylum'

18. Although Mr Whitwell initially argued that paragraph 35 was  in  effect
    an 'embryonic asylum claim' which had not being argued, nevertheless he
    conceded that the judge's findings  that  the  evidence  was  credible,
    encompassed all the evidence before the judge.

19. Whilst clearly not an asylum claim,  the  judge  did  accept  that  the
    appellants left Nigeria 'following  bad  experiences'   and  there  was
    evidence  before  the  judge  including  in  witness   statement   form
    including of trauma experienced by the appellants at the hands of armed
    robbers.

20.  In finding the appellants credible, the judge accepted  that  evidence;
although perhaps a generous finding, it was one that was open to him on  the
evidence: in accepting this evidence  the  judge  necessarily  assessed  and
discounted therefore the line of reasoning set out in Balogun  v  UK  app.no
60266/09 [2012] ECHR 614 at [51]  that  the  ties  that  existed  'could  be
pursued and strengthened by the applicant if he chose'.  As  the  judge  had
found that the appellants had been credible in relation  to  their  negative
experiences in Nigeria, it was open to him to  find  that  objectively  they
could not pursue and strengthen ties, such that remained in Nigeria.

21.  I am satisfied therefore that the judge did not err in his findings  in
relation to paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi).  In the alternative any error  in  not
expressly considering the reasoning of Bossadi and Balogun is  not  material
as the judge made a wider assessment than  just  the  appellants'  objective
evidence of no ties, but considered that they  had  left  Nigeria  following
bad experiences which would have involved an  objective  consideration  that
such ties that remained dormant could not be revived.

DECISION

22.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
an error on a point of law  and  shall  stand.   The  Secretary  of  State's
appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  Dated: 2 November 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
