

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/15105/2015

                                      IA/17928/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 27 October 2017                       |     On 30 October 2017           |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between


                             LOLA ESTHER DANIEL
                                     OHO
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                        Appellants

                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:      No legal representation
For the Respondent:     Ms. P. Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The 1st Appellant, who  was  born  on  16  March  1973,  and  the  2nd
      Appellant, who was born on 23 June 2008, are citizens of Nigeria.  The
      1st Appellant married her husband, who is a national of Poland, on  27
      June 2009 and the 2nd Appellant is a Polish citizen.


   2. On 31 March 2015, the 1st Appellant was refused a residence  card  and
      the  2nd  Appellant  was  refused  a  registration  certification   as
      confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom.
   3. The Appellants appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish allowed
      their appeals in a  decision  promulgated  on  20  January  2017.  The
      Appellants appealed against this decision and on 8 March  2017  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald refused them permission to appeal on the
      basis that they had not identified any errors  of  law  in  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Frankish's decision.


   4.  Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission on 11 July 2017  on
      the basis that it was "arguable that he did not consider  whether  the
      1st Appellant had a permanent right of residence and the findings  are
      arguably confined to consideration  of  the  appeal  under  regulation
      15A".

Error of Law Hearing




   5. The Appellants were not legally  represented  and  I  asked  the  Home
      Office Presenting Officer to make her oral submissions first in  order
      to assist the Appellants. I  also  gave  the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer permission to ask some additional question  so  as  to  better
      understand the basis upon which the Appellants were seeking to appeal.
      The 1st Appellant then responded. I have referred  to  this  exchange,
      where relevant, in my findings below.

Findings

   6. As noted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald,  the  grounds  relied
      upon by the Appellants did not identify any specific errors of law  in
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish's decision. It was also clear  that
      the 1st Appellant's level of understanding of  the  relevant  law  was
      very limited. This had led her to appeal against a decision which  was
      allowed in her favour.


   7. The basis of her case appeared to be that she believed  that  she  was
      entitled to a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 of  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations. She relied upon  the
      fact that she had previously had a residence  card,  which  was  valid
      from 6 February 2010 to 6 February 2015, as the family  member  of  an
      EEA national.


   8. However, this was not the basis on which she had applied for permanent
      residence in November 2014. On the contrary, she had  applied  on  the
      basis that she was divorced and  her  marriage  had  come  to  an  end
      because of domestic violence. The Respondent did not  err  in  law  in
      refusing this application  as  she  had  no  evidence  of  any  decree
      absolute at that time. There was similarly no basis upon which  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Frankish could have found that she was entitled to
      a  permanent  residence  as  a  divorcee  who  had  suffered  domestic
      violence.


   9. Furthermore, at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
      the 1st Appellant did not submit that she was  entitled  to  permanent
      residence on the basis of five years residence as the wife of  an  EEA
      national.


  10. It was not disputed that the 1st Appellant married a  Polish  national
      and paragraph 13 of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish's  decision
      indicates that the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing
      conceded that he had been working in the United Kingdom. But there was
      insufficient evidence to establish  that  he  had  been  exercising  a
      Treaty right, as a worker, for the necessary five year period. .


  11. At the hearing before me the 1st Appellant disclosed that her  husband
      had not been working between 2011 and 2013  as  he  had  been  looking
      after their daughter after the Appellants had been  rendered  homeless
      and destitute and the local authority had intervened. Therefore, there
      is no basis upon which the 1st  Appellant  is  entitled  to  permanent
      residence on the basis of her marriage and previous residence.


  12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish allowed the appeal under regulation
      15A(3) of the EEA Regulations on the basis that the 2nd Appellant  was
      the daughter of an EEA national, was living in the United  Kingdom  at
      the same time as that parent and is in education and was in  education
      at a time when her EEA national was in  the  United  Kingdom  .  As  a
      consequence, the 1st Appellant was entitled to a derivative  right  of
      residence for as long as she  remained  the  2nd  Appellant's  primary
      carer and the 2nd Appellant remained a child  and  in  school  in  the
      United Kingdom.


  13. This is a derivative right of residence and does not provide  the  1st
      Appellant with permanent residence. It will also only  persist  whilst
      the 2nd Appellant is an EEA national as opposed to a British citizen.


  14. In the grounds of appeal, it was asserted that the 2nd Appellant is  a
      British citizen by reason  of  her  birth  but  she  would  only  have
      acquired British citizenship by reason of birth in the United  Kingdom
      under section 1(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981 if  her  father
      was settled here at the time of her birth. It would  appear  from  the
      evidence given today  that  her  father  had  not  acquired  permanent
      residence at the time of her birth. I also  note  that  she  was  born
      before her parents were married and,  therefore,  paternity  may  also
      have to be proved.


  15. As a consequence, I find that there were no errors of  law  in  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Frankish's decision.


  Decision


  16. The appeals are dismissed.


  17. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish's decision stands.










 Date:  27 October 2016


    Nadine Finch


Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
