
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15010/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 24 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                ZAINAB HARUNA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Alabi, counsel instructed by Kingscourt
solicitors


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

    1.     The Respondent, to whom I shall refer  as  the  Claimant,  is  a
    national of Nigeria, born on 1 January 1990. She arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 12 December 2008 with entry clearance as a  domestic  worker
    and subsequently extended her leave until 20 March 2015. On 24  January
    2015, she applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain as a domestic  worker.
    This application was refused on 24 March 2015 with regard to  paragraph
    159G(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  she  appealed  against  that
    decision.

    2.     Her appeal came before Judge  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  CM
    Phillips for hearing on 22 December 2015. The Claimant and her Sponsors
    attended to give evidence but as the evidence was not  in  dispute  the
    appeal proceeded on the  basis  of  submissions  only.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 January 2016, the Judge allowed the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. She found at [19]-[23] that the  evidence  that  the
    Claimant provided did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  domestic  worker  under
    paragraph 159G(v) of the Rules but at [24]-[25] that it was open to the
    Respondent to consider the exercise of  discretion  under  4.3.(iv)  of
    Appendix KoLL  because  the  Claimant  failed  to  submit  a  specified
    document and thus the decision was not in accordance with the law.

    3.     The Secretary of State for the Home Department submitted an  in-
    time application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  12
    January 2016. The grounds in support of the application submitted  that
    the First tier Tribunal Judge erred in misinterpreting the requirements
    of paragraph 4 of Appendix KoLL in relation to the application  of  the
    Respondent's discretion as no such discretion applied on the  facts  of
    the case. There was no basis for the Judge considering  that  the  City
    and Guilds Entry 3 qualification  can  fall  within  the  discretionary
    elements of Part 4 of Appendix KoLL at 4.5.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Heynes on 25 May 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the  Judge
    erred in finding that the Immigration Rules  allowed  a  discretion  in
    relation to the English language requirement.

    Hearing

    5.     Mr Whitwell made submissions in line with the grounds of appeal.
    He accepted that under Appendix KoLL at  4.3.  that  the  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  can  contact  a  Claimant  in  certain
    circumstances and at 4.4. she may decide  not  to  request  a  document
    under 4.3. where s/he does not anticipate that supply of  the  document
    will lead to a grant of leave to enter or remain. However,  given  that
    there was no ESOL level 3 certificate  there  was  no  reason  for  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department to seek further documents on
    this occasion.

    6.     In her response, Mrs  Alabi  submitted  that  the  Claimant  had
    provided a Life in the UK test  and  this  had  been  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State and the First tier Tribunal. She drew  my  attention
    to the fact that the application had been made before 6 April 2015  and
    as of that date the guidance note that applied,  which  the  Claimant's
    Sponsor relied on, stated that A2 was the level of English  acceptable.
    The guidance notes were provided to the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Tribunal at the hearing. The Claimant submitted various  other  English
    test results and a Life in the UK test and the Judge held at [24]  that
    there was a discretion for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  request  the
    documents and her submission was that there was a discretion  to  write
    to the Claimant that she needed to produce the test result and give her
    a number of days to produce the document. She submitted that the  Judge
    allowed the appeal to the extent of finding that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law and sent it back for a proper  decision  for
    the Claimant to have the opportunity to pass the test.

    7.     In his reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that this was not the  point
    and was not relevant. The substantive requirements of  the  Rules  were
    not  met.  When  Appendix  KOLL  is  considered  in  its  entirety  and
    particularly part 4, the Secretary of State for the Home Department has
    to believe that the evidence exists and the Claimant's evidence is that
    it does not exist. He asked me to set the determination aside  and  re-
    make and dismiss the appeal, which would not preclude the Claimant from
    making a decision within 28 days. I reserved my decision, which  I  now
    make with my reasons.

    Decision

    8.     I find that the First tier Tribunal Judge  had  jurisdiction  to
    allow the appeal on the basis that the decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department was not in accordance  with  the  law  by
    virtue of 2015 No. 371 (C. 18) The Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement
    No. 4, Transitional and Saving Provisions and  Amendment)  Order  2015,
    because the amendments to section 82 of the NIAA 2002  that  came  into
    force on 6 April 2015 do not apply to decisions made after that date in
    respect of applications made before that date. The application in  this
    case was made on 24 January 2015 and refused on 24 March 2015 prior  to
    the coming into force of the  amended  appeal  provisions,  which  have
    removed jurisdiction to allow an appeal on the basis that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law. The question is whether  the  Judge
    was correct as a matter of law to find that the decision  of  24  March
    2015 was not in accordance with the law by reason of the failure by the
    Secretary of State to exercise her discretion and contact the  Claimant
    to provide her with the opportunity to take and provide  a  certificate
    of completion of an ESOL test at the requisite level.

    9.     The version of Appendix KoLL in force at the  date  of  decision
    provides:
         "2.2     ...
             vi) the applicant has taken and passed in  England,  Wales  or
             Northern Ireland a qualification in English  for  Speakers  of
             Other Languages (ESOL) which:
                  (aa) includes speaking and listening;
                  (bb) is at ESOL Entry level 3, level 1, level 2  or  level
                  3...
                  or
         (b)      the applicant-
             (i) has limited leave to enter or remain in the UK, and
             (ii)      that leave (or a grant of leave  which  preceded  it
             provided any periods of leave since have  been  unbroken)  was
             given on the basis that the applicant had an English  language
             qualification at a minimum level of B1 on the Common  European
             Framework of Reference for Languages.
             (iii)     at the date of application,  the  provider  of  that
             qualification continues to be approved  by  the  Secretary  of
             State as specified in Appendix O to these Rules...
         4.3      Where an applicant has submitted:
             (i) a document in the wrong format (for example, if  a  letter
             is not on letterhead paper as specified); or
             (ii)      a document that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
             document, or
             (iii)     a  document  which  does  not  contain  all  of  the
             specified information, or
             (iv)      fails to submit a specified document,
             the decision-maker may contact the applicant  or  his  or  her
             representative (in writing  or  otherwise),  and  request  the
             document or the correct version of the document. The  document
             must be received by the Home Office at the  address  specified
             in the request  within  such  timescale  (which  will  not  be
             unreasonable) as is specified.
         4.4      A decision-maker may decide  not  to  request  a  document
         under paragraph 4.3 where he or she does not  anticipate  that  the
         supply of that document will lead to a grant of leave to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom because the application may be refused
         for other reasons."

    10.    The Home Office guidance  in  respect  of  domestic  workers  in
    private households does not assist in  terms  of  the  criteria  to  be
    adopted in terms of the level to be  achieved  in  respect  of  English
    language. It does not state, contrary to Mrs Alabi's  submission,  that
    Level A2  is  acceptable.  Similarly,  the  guidance  on  Knowledge  of
    Language and Life in the UK provides at page 32 that it  was  necessary
    at the time the Claimant made  her  application,  she  had  an  English
    language certificate which included  speaking  and  listening  at  ESOL
    Entry level 3, level 1, level 2 or level 3. I have been unable to  find
    any reference in the guidance to a requirement that an applicant obtain
    only up to ESOL Level A2 and the First tier Tribunal Judge clearly made
    her decision on the basis of  the  guidance  that  Entry  Level  3  was
    required.

    11.    The evidence before the Secretary of State and  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge was a Life in the UK  test  certificate  dated  26  July
    2014; Cambridge ESOL Entry  Level  certificate  in  ESOL  International
    (Level 2); City & Guilds certificates: Entry Level Certificate in Adult
    Literacy, Functional Skills qualification in English  at  Entry  3  and
    English Skills Generic Awards. The Respondent's position is  that  ESOL
    Level A3 was required and the Claimant attained only ESOL Level A2.

    12.    The difficulty with the Claimant's  representative's  submission
    in respect of 2.2.(b)(ii) of Appendix KoLL is that  paragraph  159A  of
    the Rules does not require an English language qualification at minimum
    level B1 in order for leave to be granted as a  domestic  worker  in  a
    private household. Consequently, it was not possible for her to qualify
    under these provisions of  Appendix  KoLL,  which  means  that  it  was
    necessary for her to show that she had an English language  certificate
    which included speaking and listening at ESOL Entry level 3,  level  1,
    level 2 or level 3. It is the case and I  find  that  at  the  date  of
    application, the date of decision and the date of hearing, the Claimant
    did not have the requisite level  of  ESOL  certificate  but  only  A2,
    albeit she had other English qualifications issued by  City  &  Guilds.
    However, at the date of decision I find that the Secretary of State was
    unaware of whether or not the Claimant had passed ESOL Entry level 3.

    13.    The question then is whether the Secretary of State should  have
    exercised discretion and contacted the  Claimant  requesting  that  she
    provide an English language certificate  which  included  speaking  and
    listening at ESOL Entry level 3 or above,  pursuant  to  Appendix  KoLL
    4.3. and 4.4. 4.3.(iv) which does permit the Secretary of State  so  to
    do where an applicant  has  failed  to  submit  a  specified  document,
    however, 4.4. provides a further  discretion  not  to  request  such  a
    document where it is anticipated that even if provided, that would  not
    lead to a grant of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.

    14.    I note that the application form at page 61 provides, in respect
    of "Knowledge of language and life in the UK" that it is  necessary  to
    provide: "a relevant speaking and listening qualification, as described
    in the guidance on our website" and a web address is provided. The  web
    address takes the reader to the current version of the guidance  so  it
    is not possible to ascertain whether  the  guidance  at  the  date  the
    application was made was different,  however,  it  is  clear  from  the
    current guidance that the criteria applied prior to November  2015  are
    different from that applied subsequently and that the refusal  decision
    reflects the guidance in force at the material time  viz  the  date  of
    decision. It is clear that the Claimant was not fully appraised of  the
    English language requirement because she has provided a number of  City
    & Guilds certificates from Bromley College, however, these are not ESOL
    qualifications.

    15.    Given the lack  of  clarity  as  to  guidance  at  the  date  of
    application and the fact that it is clear that  the  Claimant  was  not
    fully aware of the exact  documents  needed  in  order  to  fulfil  the
    English language requirement, I find that the First tier Tribunal Judge
    did not err materially in law in finding that the  decision  to  refuse
    the application based solely on the level  of  the  Claimant's  English
    language was not in accordance with the law. I  agree  with  the  Judge
    that paragraph 4.3.(iv) of Appendix KoLL can be invoked. Given that the
    Claimant met all the other requirements of  the  Rules,  I  accept  the
    Judge's finding it would have been appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to have exercised discretion and to have contacted  the  Claimant
    asking whether in fact she had an ESOL certificate at Entry Level 3.

    16.    I note from [10] of the decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge that the Claimant's passport has been withheld and she could  not
    therefore attend lectures or take any tests. It is clearly  appropriate
    for the Claimant's passport to be returned to her in order that she can
    now complete ESOL Entry Level 3 and I would request that  this  now  be
    done expeditiously.

    Notice of decision

    17.    I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First
    tier Tribunal Judge and I uphold her decision  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing to grant the  Claimant  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain was not in accordance with the law. The effect of this  decision
    is that the matter is remitted back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    further consideration. This consideration should take place  after  the
    Claimant's passport has been returned  to  her  and  she  has  had  the
    opportunity to take the ESOL Entry Level 3 examination in speaking  and
    listening in the English language, if she has not already done so.




    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    23 August 2016
