
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15528/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2014                              |On 30 May 2014               |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    P  F

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (the Secretary of State):  Mr G Saunders, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (P F): Ms J Norman, instructed by Immigration Advice
Service


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Adio promulgated on 21 February  2014  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 3 February 2014.  For ease  of  reference  I
    shall throughout this determination refer to the Secretary of State who
    was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State" and to P F, who
    was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Cameroon who was born on 15 January 1988.
     She first arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 June 2011 as  a  Tier  4
    Student with appropriate permission. She applied, while here  lawfully,
    for leave to remain in the UK on 26 February  2013,  which  application
    was refused on 30 April 2013.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  made  a
    decision to remove the claimant by way of directions under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The chronology  of  the  claimant's  immigration  history  is  set  out
    helpfully at page 2 of the skeleton argument prepared on her behalf for
    this hearing.  While in this country, very shortly after  arrival,  she
    married one K L, a British citizen, and the following month she applied
    to change her immigration status and for a grant of leave to remain  as
    a spouse. However, on 12 September 2012 she was diagnosed as being  HIV
    positive and after this diagnosis  her  marriage  broke  down  and  she
    returned to live with her sister, S, who is resident in  this  country.
    She is still married to K L  but  it  is  not  a  subsisting  marriage.
    Thereafter on 15 October 2012 she started on what is  said  within  the
    skeleton argument to be "first line anti-viral drugs" prescribed by  Dr
    Helen Mullin, and it is said on her behalf  that  by  29  October  2012
    these drugs had caused severe side effects such that she was unable  to
    continue with this medication. She was  then  started  on  a  different
    course of medication  which  it  was  argued  on  her  behalf  was  not
    available in Cameroon.

 4. Throughout this period she was continuing  her  MBA  course  which  she
    completed on  30  October  2012.   Thereafter,  in  January  2013,  the
    claimant withdrew her application to remain as a  spouse,  because  she
    acknowledged that the marriage was  not  subsisting,  but  applied  the
    following month for leave to remain on the basis of  her  rights  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on 30 April 2013,
    as noted above, and the claimant appealed against this  decision  which
    appeal came before Judge Adio sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  3  February
    2014.  As already noted, in a determination promulgated on 21  February
    2013, Judge Adio allowed the appeal. He allowed it under both Article 3
    and Article 8.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  against  this
    decision pursuant to permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Astle on 10 March 2014.

 6. I shall summarise the basis upon which Judge Adio allowed the appeal as
    set out in his determination. He recorded the evidence which  had  been
    put before him and in particular at paragraph 6 that the  claimant  had
    not had any contact with her husband recently and  that  that  marriage
    was at an end.  She said she had a brother and sister in Cameroon.

 7. The claimant told the Tribunal that her family in Cameroon did not know
    about her HIV status and that they would probably blame  her  but  that
    her sister in the UK was supportive.  Her sister had lived  in  the  UK
    for a long time "and her mentality about certain  things  has  changed"
    (paragraph 6).

 8. At paragraph 7 the judge records that the claimant had  said  that  she
    had been  diagnosed in September 2012 and that her doctor had said that
    she could not have known when she had contracted HIV.  No other  direct
    family members had this condition although her aunt and uncle from  her
    mother's side had it and a paternal cousin and  distant  relative  also
    had it.

 9. The claimant's sister gave evidence and confirmed that  their  siblings
    did not know about the HIV diagnosis of  the  claimant  and  that  "her
    brother would likely disown her sister".  She also said  that  she  and
    her sister, the claimant, had a closer relationship than other siblings
    and she said that HIV was "spoken about with disgust" in  Cameroon  and
    her sister needed medication more than anything else.

10. Reliance was made in submission on the leading  authority  of  N  v  UK
    [2008] ECHR 453 although  the  claimant's  representative,  Ms  Tinubu,
    argued that this case could  be distinguished on the basis that in that
    case there was availability of  treatment  in  Uganda  whereas  on  the
    claimant's case the evidence suggested that there was "no treatment and
    there is shortage of treatment in Cameroon" (paragraph 10).  It is  not
    entirely clear whether or not it was being suggested that there was  no
    treatment at all or whether the treatment was scarce.

11. The judge recorded the submission that the claimant  needed  consistent
    access to treatment and that (at paragraph 11) "Her body  is  resistant
    to the first line of treatment.  If  she  goes  back  to  Cameroon  her
    condition will deteriorate quickly  ... The [claimant's]  health  would
    suffer and she will die."  The judge recorded the submission  as  being
    that her condition "reaches the threshold  of  Article  3  and  if  not
    Article 3, Article 8".  Reliance was placed on behalf of  the  claimant
    on the decision of this Tribunal in GS (India) [2012] UKUT 00397.

12. Reliance was also placed on the assertion that this claimant contracted
    the condition whilst in the UK and that applying the  case  of  Okonkwo
    (legacy - Hakeni; health claim) [2013] UKUT 401 Article 8 was  engaged.



13. The judge then made findings of fact. He first of all stated that "each
    appeal is to be decided on its  own  facts".   In  considering  whether
    Article 3 applied, he stated with regard  to  the  decision  in  N,  at
    paragraph 14, that "I note that the case of N was dismissed on  Article
    3 grounds because the HIV treatment was found available in Uganda".

14. At paragraph 15, the judge found as follows:

         "15. In the present case I accept that the [claimant] was diagnosed
             in September 2012 that she was HIV positive.  In  her  witness
             statement the [claimant]  states  that  this  was  before  she
             finished her MBA course.  The [claimant]  stated  that  before
             she was diagnosed she contracted an infection and went to  the
             hospital for a check.  The hospital discussed an HIV test with
             her and it came back  positive.   I  find  that  there  is  no
             evidence before me that the [claimant] had HIV  before  coming
             to the UK.  The evidence before me is that the medical  checks
             did not reveal that it could be stated  as  a  fact  that  the
             [claimant] had HIV before coming to the UK".

15.  With regard to the claimant's claim under Article 3, the   judge  said
    as follows, with regard to the position in Cameroon, at paragraph 18:

         "18. I have considered the evidence before me.  I note  that  there
             is a severe shortage of HIV medication. The report on page  15
             of the [claimant's] bundle with  regard  to  HIV  patients  in
             Cameroon states that the  government  says  it  cannot  supply
             antiretrovirals to  half  of  the  patients  who  needed  them
             because of a drastic shortage of the drug.  It also goes on to
             state that health officials say  that  the  number  of  people
             receiving the anti-AIDS drug has soared from about  28,000  in
             1990 to 200,000 in 2013 but  the  government's  assistance  to
             treat HIV-AIDS has remained stagnant.  The background material
             at page 21 of the [claimant's] bundle  shows  that  there  are
             worrying rate of second-line treatment failure and this  shows
             that patients with HIV on second-line antiretroviral treatment
             are significantly more likely to experience treatment  failure
             than those on the first-line treatment."

16. Then at paragraph 19,  referring  to  a  report  contained  within  the
    claimant's bundle, the judge continues as follows:

         "19.  There  is  without  a  doubt  a  shortage  of  medication  in
             Cameroon. This  is  borne  out  by   the  background  material
             before me."

17. Then at paragraph 20 the judge accepts that  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the claimant that her "case reaches the threshold of  Article
    3 because  of  the  severe  shortage  of  medication  in  Cameroon  [my
    emphasis] and because of the serious consequences of inconsistencies of
    access to the second-line of treatment she requires to survive".

18. The judge then considered the claimant's case under Article 8 "in terms
    of her physical and moral integrity" (at paragraph 21).  He applied the
    case of Okonkwo as well as the case of Rose Akhalu (Health claims: ECHR
    Article 8) [2003] UKUT 400 and made findings as follows:

          "In the present case the [claimant] came to the UK  as  a  student
         and was diagnosed in the UK.  The UK has taken up her treatment and
         she would not be able to access  treatment  if  she  goes  back  to
         Cameroon.  I find that removing the [claimant] from the UK  affects
         significantly the quality of her life in  terms  of  her  survival.
         The private life she has in the UK has a bearing on her  prognosis.
         The [claimant] has support from her sister who is the  only  member
         of the  family  willing  to  understand  her  position  [again,  my
         emphasis]. I find that the [claimant] is therefore likely to suffer
         loneliness in addition to the physical pain of  her  condition.   I
         find  that  removing  the  [claimant]  from  the  UK  would  be   a
         disproportionate interference with her private life.   I  therefore
         find that the [Secretary of State's] decision amounts to  a  breach
         of the [claimant's] rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the [ECHR]."



Grounds of Appeal

19. In the grounds the Secretary of State relies on  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal (which was in fact referred to in the  recent  Tribunal
    cases which will be discussed briefly below) of  MM  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 279 which

         "found that the lack of equivalent medical  care  in  the  person's
         country of origin might engage Article 8 but only in cases where it
         is an additional factor to be weighed in the  balance,  with  other
         factors, which by themselves engage Article 8"(at  paragraph  1  of
         the grounds).

20. At paragraph 2 of the  grounds  reference  is  made  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's approach in MM  where the court had found as follows:

         "supposing ... the appellant had established firm  family  ties  in
         this country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
         here coupled with his dependence on the family  here  for  support,
         together establish 'private life' under Article 8."  (at  paragraph
         23 of MM).

21. The submission is made in the grounds that it is clear from  this  that
    medical care "is only  relevant  to  Article  8  when  an  individual's
    personal ties to the UK have a direct bearing on their prognosis".   It
    is submitted that "the question of ongoing support from friends, family
    or community support or a relationship in the UK does not arise in such
    a case".  It is said that "in MM the context [of] family support in the
    UK is a key factor in  the  prognosis  of  the  appellant,  as  he  was
    suffering from schizophrenia and he was far more likely to stay well if
    he had family support."  The Secretary of State then submits  that  "in
    light of that it is submitted that this is not the  type  of  case  the
    Court of Appeal had in mind, and that this case falls to be  considered
    under Article 3 alone".

22. It is also submitted that the Tribunal

         "has failed to apply correctly the  test  set  out  in  GS  and  EO
         (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT  00397  (IAC),  namely
         that "it may be that although, in principle, the scope of Article 8
         is wider than that of Article 3, in practical terms ... in  a  case
         like this where the claimant has no right to remain it  will  be  a
         'very rare case' indeed where such a claim could  succeed".

23. With regard to the finding under  Article  3  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    grounds it is submitted that the judge "has failed to provide  adequate
    reasons for [his] findings that the [claimant's] Article 3 rights  will
    be breached if she returns to Cameroon" because "it is  submitted  that
    there is treatment available to her and she has family there who  could
    support her if needed".  It is submitted  further  "that  there  is  no
    evidence that her family would not support her, especially  given  that
    her aunt and uncle suffer from HIV and there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    discrimination by her family towards her and no evidence that they  are
    unable to obtain medical treatment."

     Furthermore,

         "even if she does suffer  discrimination  from  her  family  it  is
         submitted that she may be able to rely on the support of her  uncle
         and aunt who also suffer from HIV and  who  would  have  a  greater
         understanding of her  illness  and  how  to  get  adequate  medical
         treatment".

24. With regard to the decision on Article 8, the Secretary of State relies
    made on the Court of Appeal decision in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192 in which it is said that the Court of Appeal

         "confirms that the Immigration Rules are a complete code that  form
         the starting point for the  decision-maker"  and  that  accordingly
         "any Article 8 assessment should only be made  after  consideration
         under these Rules" which "was not done in this case".

25. Furthermore, (it is argued at paragraph 8)

         "It was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, that the Article 8
         assessment should only be carried out where  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not recognised by these Rules".  It is submitted that
         "in this  case  the  Tribunal  did  not  identify  such  compelling
         circumstances and its findings are therefore unsuitable".

26. Then, at paragraph 10 of the grounds, it is submitted as follows:

         "10.  It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal has failed  to
             provide  adequate  reasons   as   to   why   the   appellant's
             circumstances are either compelling  or  exceptional.   It  is
             submitted that the appellant has spent  the  majority  of  her
             life in Cameroon and could  fully readapt to life  there.  Any
             private  life  she  may  have  established  here  during   her
             residence since June 2011 will be extremely limited and  there
             is no reason why she  cannot  continue  her  private  life  in
             Cameroon. It is submitted that there is no evidence  that  the
             appellant is dependent upon the care of her sister to  survive
             and there are  family  members  in  Cameroon  who  could  help
             support her.  If she does suffer discrimination from them,  it
             is submitted that she would have friends she could rely on  if
             needed."



The Hearing

27. I heard submissions on behalf  of  both  parties  which  are  contained
    within the Record of Proceedings. Accordingly I will not in the  course
    of this determination set out everything which was said to me but shall
    refer below only to such of the submissions as are  necessary  for  the
    purposes of this  determination.    I  have,  however,  had  regard  to
    everything which was said before me as well as  to  all  the  documents
    which are contained within the file.

28. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Saunders relied on the  decision
    in GS and EO primarily with regard to Judge Adio's finding that removal
    of this claimant would be in  breach  of  her  Article  3  rights.   In
    particular, he referred the Tribunal to what is set out  at  head  note
    (i) as follows:

         "(i) The fact that life expectancy  is  dramatically  shortened  by
             withdrawal of medical treatment in the host state is in itself
             incapable of amounting to the  highly  exceptional  case  that
             engages the Article 3 duty."

29. Mr Saunders submitted that this encapsulated what was said in the House
    of Lords in N.  In GS and EO both the applicants were within  weeks  of
    dying if the treatment was stopped.  At paragraph 85 of that case there
    was a long exposition of the legal effect of the decisions in  D  v  UK
    and also N v UK, and particular reference was made to what was said  at
    paragraph 85(7) where examples were given as to what  might  amount  to
    exceptional circumstances such that the "high threshold of  Article  3"
    might  be  reached.  These  included  at  85(7)(b)  "where   the   non-
    availability of  the  treatment  in  the  home  country  is  due  to  a
    discriminatory policy of the state, for example, on racial,  ethnic  or
    other probative grounds."   Then at (c) it is considered that

         "a further potential factor may  be  where  the  individual  to  be
         returned is a young child.  There  may  be  a  potentially  greater
         effect on that child of enduring the dying process and again may as
         a  consequence  elevate  the  indignity  of   those   circumstances
         sufficiently  to  reach  the  high  threshold  under   Article   3.
         Likewise, a parent forced to witness the dying process of her young
         child may amount to  the  level  of  suffering  greater  than  that
         confronted by an adult dying in such  circumstances and  amount  to
         inhuman and degrading treatment."

30. As is clear from  the  determination  in  GS  and  EO,  Article  8  was
    specifically not argued in that case  as  (as  the  Tribunal  notes  at
    paragraph 85(8)(a) of  its  determination)  "we  were  invited  not  to
    consider the application of Article 8 in cases of this  sort.   Neither
    appellant before us relied upon Article 8. In those circumstances we do
    not express any conclusions on the issue".

31. The Tribunal in GS and  EO  specifically  left  open  the  question  of
    whether or not Article 8 could be  relied  on  in  circumstances  where
    Article 3 could not, and at paragraph 85(8)(b) stated as follows:

         "However, in principle Article 8 can be relied on in cases of  this
         sort.  The removal of the individual would,  on  the  face  of  it,
         engage Article 8(1) on the basis of an interference with his or her
         private life as an aspect of that individual's 'physical and  moral
         integrity' (see: Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 10).   Unlike  Article
         3, however, Article 8 is not absolute and the legitimate aim of the
         economic wellbeing of the country would be relevant in  determining
         whether a breach  of  Article  8  could  be  established  given  ..
         financial implications that continued treatment  in  the  UK  would
         entail.  (See also R (on the application of Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]
         2AC368)."

32. It is right to record that at paragraph 85(8)(c) the Tribunal did go on
    to note that although in principle the scope of Article 8 is wider than
    that of Article 3, in practical terms "in a case like  this  where  the
    claimant has no right to remain it will be a 'very  rare  case'  indeed
    where such a claim would succeed".  It is right to record that there is
    a distinction between the facts in that case where the applicants  were
    not in the country lawfully and the present case where  this  applicant
    was in the country lawfully and where the  judge  found  that  she  was
    unaware  when  she  arrived  in  this  country  that  she  had  a  life
    threatening disease. This will be discussed below.

33. Mr Saunders then addressed  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  application  of
    Article 8 and very fairly conceded that the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 was  "not  unfavourable  to
    the claimant".   In particular, he referred the Tribunal  to  what  the
    Court of Appeal in that decision said at paragraph 22:

         "Thus the courts have declined to close the door on the possibility
         of establishing a breach of Article 8 but  they  have  never  found
         such a breach and have not been  able to postulate circumstances in
         which such a breach is likely to be established. Since  Bensaid  in
         2001 there has been no example of a successful Article 8 claim in a
         mental health case.  The courts  and  tribunals  have  merely  been
         left with the difficulty of identifying a 'flagrant  denial'  or  a
         'truly exceptional' case, neither of which provide any standard  of
         measurement."

34.  The  Court  of  Appeal  then  at  paragraph  23   postulated   certain
    circumstances in which an Article 8 claim could  succeed even though an
    Article 3 claim could not as follows:

         "23. The only cases I can foresee where  the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8.  Suppose in this
             case, the appellant had established firm family ties  in  this
             country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
             here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
             support, together establish 'private life'  under  Article  8.
             That conclusion  would  not  involve  the  comparison  between
             medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe.  Such a finding
             would not offend the principle expressed above that the United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the appellant is to be deported."

35. Mr Saunders then referred the Tribunal to the  subsequent  decision  of
    this Tribunal in Rosaleen Akahalu (Health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013]
    UKUT 00400 and in particular that it was a relevant  factor  (again  in
    this  case  assisting  this  claimant)  whether  or  not  an  applicant
    discovered the illness when here or knew about it before he  came.   It
    was accepted in this case  that  the  judge's  finding  was  that  this
    claimant had not discovered she was HIV positive until she was  present
    in this country.

36. It having been established and accepted now on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State that an applicant could succeed on Article 8  grounds  relying
    on medical grounds among other grounds, the first question  had  to  be
    how does one get to Article 8 on private life grounds if  this  is  not
    established under the specific Rules relating to Article 8.  That could
    be referred to as the Gulshan question, in respect of the  decision  of
    this Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.

37. Following discussing with the Tribunal  Mr  Saunders  appreciated  that
    this would be a matter which the Tribunal would deal with before making
    its  decision.   However,  he  asked  that  the  Tribunal  record   his
    submission that the decision in Gulshan had to be considered.

38. What then had to be determined was whether the medical consequences  in
    conjunction  with  the  rest  of  this  claimant's  circumstances  were
    sufficient to render her removal disproportionate. That depended on the
    sustainability of the factual findings which  the  Secretary  of  State
    attacked at paragraph 10 of  the  grounds  (which  have  been  set  out
    above).

39. It was the Secretary of  State's  case  that  if  the  facts  had  been
    properly considered this would have resulted in a decision that removal
    was proportionate, but on this aspect of the appeal Mr Saunders did not
    wish to expand on the grounds.

40. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Norman invited the Tribunal to find  when
    looking at paragraph 10 of the grounds of  appeal  that  the  arguments
    advanced there did not amount to more than speculation.  There  was  no
    evidence that there were family  members  in  Cameron  who  could  help
    support the claimant or that she would have friends she could  rely  on
    if needed.  Although the Secretary of State had  submitted  that  there
    was no evidence that the claimant was  dependent  on  her  sister,  the
    judge had found that she did have support from her sister and that  she
    was the only family member who understood her position.  These findings
    were open to the judge.

41. Furthermore, it did not appear to be the case (and reference  here  was
    made to paragraph 9 of the determination) that any submissions had been
    made on behalf of the Secretary of State before the First-tier Tribunal
    that there were any friends in Cameroon  who  could  support  this  the
    claimant and  it  does  appear  that  it  had  been   accepted  by  the
    Presenting Officer at that hearing that there was a close  relationship
    between the claimant and her sister.

42. With regard to the finding on Article 3, although it was the claimant's
    case that this finding was sustainable, following discussion  with  the
    Tribunal, in the event that the Tribunal considered that the finding on
    Article 3 was not sustainable, but that the finding regarding Article 8
    was, the claimant did not seek any  further  adjournment  in  order  to
    obtain an expert report with regard  to  precisely  how  available  the
    antiretroviral second line drugs were in Cameroon.



Discussion

43. I start first of all by considering the findings on Article 3.  I  note
    that at paragraph 20 of his determination  the  judge  refers  to  "the
    severe shortage of medication in Cameroon". He also refers  earlier  to
    the statement contained within a report within  the  claimant's  bundle
    with regard to HIV patients in Cameroon, "that the government  says  it
    cannot supply antiretroviral to half of the patients  who  needed  them
    because of the drastic shortage of the drugs".

44. In other words, it is not the case that the drugs which  this  claimant
    would need are not available at all, but that the reality is she  would
    be unlikely to get them.  In my judgement the facts in this appeal  are
    not distinguishable from those which were present in N and I  am  bound
    by the decision in that case.  The basis upon which  the  decision  was
    made  in  that  case  was  that  it  would  only  be   in   exceptional
    circumstances that an applicant such as this claimant would be entitled
    to remain under Article 3 effectively because this country is  not  the
    health service of the world and cannot be expected to  provide  medical
    assistance  to  every  person  who  comes  here   regardless   of   the
    circumstances in which they have come, merely because  they  themselves
    would find it hard to obtain medical treatment in their home  countries
    which could be available if they were richer or better connected. As  I
    say, N is a decision which is binding on me.

45. However, that is not the end of the matter.  It was made clear  by  the
    Court of Appeal in  MM  and  this  has  been  confirmed  by  subsequent
    decisions of this Tribunal in Akhalu and Okonkwo that a claim might  in
    certain circumstances arise under Article 8  even  though  the  medical
    circumstances on  their  own  would  not  be  sufficient  to  pass  the
    threshold required before a claim under Article 3 would succeed. In  MM
    in particular, the Court of Appeal considered that one of  the  factors
    to which regard should be had was whether  or  not  the  private/family
    life which an applicant had in this country was such that it  could  be
    said that the medical circumstances when coupled with a  dependence  on
    this family life would be such as to make removal of an  individual  in
    any particular case disproportionate.

46. The decision in such a case is always going to be a finely balanced one
    which must be made by the judge who hears the evidence.  It is only  in
    circumstances where the findings that that judge makes were not open to
    him that a decision can properly be interfered with by  this  Tribunal.
    In this case although Judge Adio, as I have found, was not entitled  to
    allow the appeal under Article 3, nonetheless he has found  clearly  on
    evidence which was before him that the reality was that this  appellant
    would be unlikely to receive the drugs she needed for her  survival  or
    at any rate for her proper medical care in Cameroon, and  he  was  also
    entitled to find as he did that the  only  family  member  "willing  to
    understand her position" was her sister  who  is  at  present  in  this
    country.  I agree with Ms Norman that the suggestion at paragraph 10 of
    the grounds that there are family members in Cameroon  who  would  help
    support her and that she would have friends she could rely on if needed
    is not supported by any evidence at all; the evidence in this case went
    the other way and the judge was entitled to accept it.

47. We also in this case have a clear finding which the judge was  entitled
    to make that unlike the position in GS and EO, this  claimant  was  not
    only in this country lawfully but she had arrived here unaware that she
    suffered from any serious medical condition.   So she is in a  position
    where as a lawful visitor going about her activities in  the  way  that
    she said she would when she came (that is she was  completing  an  MBA)
    she became ill.  She depends on her sister for a considerable amount of
    support. She certainly has a private/family life  here  to  the  extent
    that Article 8 is engaged.  In my judgement  the  judge  was  entitled,
    having weighed all the factors together, to find that her  removal  now
    would be in breach of her Article 8 rights  because  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.  While this is not necessarily the decision which  would
    be made by every judge, it was nonetheless a decision which was open to
    him and accordingly should not be interfered with by this Tribunal.

48. It follows that although the decision  of  the  judge  with  regard  to
    Article 3 must be set aside and remade, there is no proper  basis  upon
    which his decision on Article 8 should be  set  aside  and  I  will  so
    order.



Decision

I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal
under Article 3 and remake the decision as follows:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed under Article 3.

With regard to the decision under Article 8, I find that there was no  error
of law in the making of this decision, and the decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal  under  Article  8  is  accordingly
affirmed.




Signed:                                 Date:  27 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


