
[pic]
Self-Typed

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 November 2014                             |On 24 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           miss mabel opoku ayiku
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Courtney  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  13
    August  2014)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 17 March 2014 to refuse to issue her with  a
    permanent residence card as confirmation that she had acquired a  right
    of permanent residence under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  as
    a dependant family member of her father. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not make an anonymity order, and I do not consider that such  an  order
    is required for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  1  October
    2014 by Judge Andrew on the ground that the judge had arguably erred in
    law in failing to consider Article 8 in the alternative.

 3. At the hearing before me, Mr Andy Boateng supported  the  appellant  in
    presenting her case as a McKenzie friend.  The  appellant,  who  was  a
    Ghanaian national, had been  here  since  2006.  She  had  two  British
    citizen children by Isaac Kofi Owusu, a Ghanaian national who had  ILR.
    He was still in the UK, but was estranged from the appellant and not in
    contact. She was thus the sole carer for the children, and so qualified
    for  a  derivative   right   of   residence   under   Regulation   15A.
    Alternatively, she was eligible for Article 8 relief.

Discussion

 4. Although the appellant had legal representation at the time her  appeal
    was lodged, there was no suggestion in the Grounds of Appeal  that  she
    was eligible for a derivative right of residence. While recognising her
    potential eligibility, the judge declined to decide  the  point  as  no
    evidence had been adduced before her to confirm that the appellant  was
    the primary carer of the two girls, nor that they would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK if the appellant was required to leave. The judge gave
    adequate reasons for not finding that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a
    derivative right of residence  under  Regulation  15A  on  the  limited
    evidence that was before her, and in circumstances when it had not been
    the appellant's case by way of appeal that she enjoyed such a right  of
    residence. The appellant had unsuccessfully pursued  with  her  brother
    (who was legally represented at the same hearing before Judge Courtney)
    the case that they were both still dependant on their  father,  despite
    the appellant having moved out of her father's household  in  2010  and
    despite her having no received financial support from her father  after
    she moved out.

 5. I note from reviewing the file that the appellant instructed solicitors
    after the hearing who made representations. But these did not reach the
    judge until after she had sent her decision  for  promulgation.   These
    representations were to the same effect as those made  at  the  hearing
    before me, and were backed up by some documentary  evidence,  including
    the  children's  birth  certificates.  But   the   evidence   was   not
    determinative of the issues in controversy, and in one respect  it  was
    troubling: no father was identified  on  the  second  daughter's  birth
    certificate, raising the question of how she had been issued a  British
    passport on the premise that she was the daughter of Mr Isaac Owusu. So
    in all the circumstances I find that there was no procedural unfairness
    in the judge maintaining the position she had taken in the  draft  sent
    for promulgation.

 6. The judge explained why she was declining to  consider  an  alternative
    claim under Article  8:  the  appellant  had  a  putative  claim  under
    Regulation 15A and she was not facing  removal.  It  was  a  reasonable
    exercise of the judge's case management powers not to consider  whether
    the appellant was eligible for Article 8 relief in circumstances  where
    she had clearly not exhausted her remedies under the Regulations  2006.
    Furthermore, the facts which needed to  be  determined  in  a  putative
    claim under Regulation 15A were going to  be  highly  relevant  to  the
    resolution of an alternative claim under Article 8.  So  there  was  no
    error of law in the way that  the  judge  disposed  of  an  alternative
    Article 8 claim.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal  did  not
    contain an error of law, and the decision stands.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing      |Mr A J Monson                     |
|approval:                         |                                  |
|Appellants' Names:                |                                  |


Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



