

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15023/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 January 2014                            |On 5 February 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                               Harjinder Singh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Malik, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
                  Chambers, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 7 January  1964.
       He appeals against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Chamberlain promulgated on 15 November 2013  dismissing  his  appeal
       against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his  application
       for leave to remain on compassionate grounds outside the Immigration
       Rules and on the basis that removal would violate his human  rights.
       The appeal to the Tribunal was on  different  grounds  alleging  the
       Secretary of State's decision was unlawful  and  that,  accordingly,
       removal would violate the appellant's human rights.


    2. The compass of the appeal is very limited.  In essence,  it  centres
       upon the remedy to which an appellant is entitled when the Secretary
       of State has made an error of law in the decision.  The  Judge  made
       the same error in his determination but it is not, principally,  the
       Judge's error that is the focus of this appeal;  rather  it  is  the
       lawfulness of the Secretary of State's decision.

    3. The facts are simply stated and, for the purposes of  this  hearing,
       uncontroversial. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27
       September 2001, some 12 years ago, as a visitor with leave to remain
       until 6 March 2002. He did not return to India at the expiration  of
       the time permitted to him and  remained  as  an  overstayer.  On  18
       November 2010, by which time he had been in the United  Kingdom  for
       over 9 years, he applied for further leave to remain  on  the  basis
       that removal would violate his human  rights.  The  application  was
       refused on 18 December 2010. On 5  July  2012,  by  which  time  the
       appellant had been in the United Kingdom for  almost  11  years,  he
       sought  leave  to  remain   outside   the   Immigration   Rules   on
       compassionate grounds which the respondent considered but ultimately
       concluded did not merit the grant of leave and, as the variation  of
       leave to enter or remain was being sought for a purpose not  covered
       by the Rules, was subject to mandatory refusal pursuant to paragraph
       322(1).

    4. The appellant was served with an IS151A on 24 April 2013 in which he
       was  informed  of  his  immigration  status  and  his  liability  to
       detention and removal. On the same day, the  respondent  decided  to
       remove the appellant as an illegal  immigrant  and/or  as  a  person
       subject to administrative removal under section  10  of  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 1999.

    5. In her decision letter, the respondent then went on to deal with the
       appellant's human rights by  reference,  amongst  other  things,  to
       Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 276ADE to DH.  It
       is apparent that the assessment of the appellant's Article  8  claim
       was conducted by the respondent  entirely  in  accordance  with  the
       Statement of Changes to the Rules that had been introduced on 9 July
       2012. There was no further consideration of whether the respondent's
       decision violated his human rights outside a  consideration  of  the
       factors enumerated by the respondent in the new rules.

    6. The appellant's application was, as we have said,  made  on  5  July
       2012. The changes to the Immigration Rules set out in the  Statement
       of Changes took effect on 9 July 2012 (HC 194).  The  changes  were,
       however, subject to transitional  implementation  such  that  if  an
       application for entry clearance, leave to remain or indefinite leave
       to remain had been made before 9 July 2012 and the  application  had
       not then been decided, it was to be decided in accordance  with  the
       Rules in force on 8 July 2012.

    7. Accordingly, the decision of the Secretary of State was not made  in
       accordance with the law and this expression includes not being  made
       in accordance with the policies embodied by the Secretary  of  State
       in the Immigration Rules.

    8. This point does not seem to have  been  raised  by  the  appellant's
       counsel who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal (but not  before
       us).   There  is  no  reference  to  the  point   in   the   Judge's
       determination; the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  do  not
       allege that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  deal  with  it.
       Nevertheless, it was the sole ground relied upon by the appellant in
       his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It is not suggested  by
       the respondent before us that the appellant is prevented from taking
       the point now.

    9. It is, however, important to mention the  way  in  which  the  Judge
       dealt with the claim on 6 November 2013. He relied upon the decision
       of the Upper Tribunal in MF (article 8-new rules) Nigeria [2012]  UK
       UT393 (IAC) without thereby referring to the subsequent decision  of
       the Court of Appeal MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 decided
       on 8 October 2013.

   10. Accordingly, the Judge did not confine himself to  the  question  of
       whether the appellant came within the provisions of Appendix FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE pointing out in paragraph 7  of  the  determination
       that the respondent did not consider  the  appellant's  case  'under
       Article 8 more generally'. We construe this to mean a  consideration
       of the Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  He found  that  the
       appellant did not meet the requirements of the new  rules  but  also
       found, in paragraph 11, that  there  was  a  need  to  consider  the
       appellant's Article 8 claim more generally. He went  on  to  do  so,
       recounting the appellant's  immigration  history  and  the  evidence
       given by the appellant. He said in paragraphs 16 to 19:


         "The appellant gave evidence of his ties  in  the  community  which
         form the basis of his private life. He gave evidence  that  he  has
         been involved in a voluntary capacity with the Gurudwara since  his
         arrival. In his witness statement to paragraph 12 he said  that  he
         "played a  vital  role  in  the  various  religious  functions  and
         programmes". At the hearing his representative asked  him  what  he
         did at the Gurudwara  and  said  that  he  helped  in  the  kitchen
         cleaning dishes and serving food, he cleaned shoes, he  showed  the
         children how to wear a turban, he taught the children  in  Punjabi,
         he opened the door for old people and helped them to get to the bus
         stop, and, if the priest was not there, he read the holy  book.  He
         said that he performed these tasks daily. I do not find that  these
         activities constitute  "a  vital  role  in  the  various  religious
         functions". He said in his witness statement that  he  performed  a
         vital role in religious functions, yet at the hearing  he  said  he
         only read the holy book "if the  priest  was  not  there".  In  the
         appellant's bundle was a letter from Daljit Singh Saggu,  who  also
         gave evidence at the hearing.  In  his  letter  he  said  that  the
         appellant "participates in most of our religious  programmes  as  a
         congregation". This does  not  support  the  appellant's  claim  to
         perform "a vital role in the various religious functions".


         While I acknowledge that the Gurudwara also provides a  service  to
         the community as a  community  centre,  I  do  not  find  that  the
         appellant's role there is vital. I do not find that  the  appellant
         is  bringing  particularly  unique  or  special  qualities  to  the
         Gurudwara that could not be performed by someone  else.  I  do  not
         find that anyone at the Gurudwara has a dependency on the appellant
         which could not be met by someone else. Furthermore I find that the
         appellant would be able to perform these tasks at  a  Gurudwara  in
         India. I find that there  is  nothing  to  stop  him  offering  his
         services to the community in India  in  a  similar  way.  He  could
         continue his service in India.


         The only other evidence given at any private life was evidence that
         he had assisted in cleaning up after the riots...


         I find that at its highest the appellant has  formed  relationships
         with other adults through his involvement with the Gurudwara ...

   11. The Judge then went on to deal with the evidence the  appellant  had
       provided of family and friends  in  India.  Although  the  appellant
       initially said there were none, he went on to talk of  his  wife  in
       India, from whom he was not divorced  and  his  mother  and  brother
       living there. The Judge found the appellant had strong  family  ties
       in India and would be able to receive support from his family there.
       Furthermore, his sister and nephew and niece in the  United  Kingdom
       who had supported  him  both  financially  and  emotionally  neither
       attended the hearing nor offered letters  of  support  enabling  the
       Judge to conclude,  notwithstanding  the  evidence  from  a  distant
       cousin,  that  the  appellant   did   not   have   any   significant
       relationships sufficient to render his removal a  violation  of  his
       private or family life. He did find, correctly in our judgment, that
       the respondent's decision would interfere with his private life.


   12. We had rather hoped the necessity of again setting out the words  of
       Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 had long passed,  so  familiar
       are they to all decision-makers.  However, in the  context  of  this
       appeal, it becomes necessary to do  so.   In  paragraph  17  of  his
       opinion, Lord Bingham identified the 5 questions - or stages - in  a
       case where removal is resisted in  reliance  on  Article  8  that  a
       decision-maker is likely to ask himself:
         (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?
   13. We construe the  determination  as  including  a  finding  that  the
       appellant had no protected family life but that removal would be  an
       interference with his private life;  notwithstanding  this,  removal
       was in accordance with the  law  "as  being  a  regular  immigration
       decision taken by UKBA in accordance with the Immigration Rules". He
       then went on to deal with proportionality and concluded that removal
       would be a proportionate response having balanced all  the  material
       factors together.


   14. The significance in this appeal lies in the third of Lord  Bingham's
       fives questions ('is the interference in accordance with the  law?')
       which acts as  a  threshold  criterion  for  the  operation  of  the
       remaining  two  and,  most   importantly,   the   operation   of   a
       consideration of proportionality.  It is to be noted that the  issue
       is whether the interference is  in  accordance  with  the  law,  not
       whether the decision to interfere is in  accordance  with  the  law.
       Nevertheless, submitted Mr Malik, this is one and the  same  as,  if
       the  decision  is  an  unlawful  one,  the  interference  which   is
       contemplated within it, must also  be  unlawful.    He  submits  the
       Tribunal  is  therefore  prevented  from  even  embarking   upon   a
       consideration of proportionality  and  is  confined  to  taking  the
       single step open to it: to declare that the appellant's  application
       has yet to receive a lawful decision by the Secretary of  State  (on
       which a lawful appeal is predicated) and to state (it has  no  power
       to direct) that the application awaits a fresh and lawful  decision.
       The process is sometimes inaccurately  said  to  be  'remitting  the
       matter back to the Secretary of State'.


   15. For the reasons we have already given, we accept that  the  decision
       of the Secretary of State (a) directed as it was towards  the  wrong
       Immigration Rules and (b) omitting a decision on Article  8  in  its
       scope outside the Immigration Rules was not in accordance  with  the
       law. That is uncontroversial.

   16. Whilst the Judge did not  appreciate  that  the  new  rules  had  no
       application,  he  provided  a  comprehensive  consideration  of  the
       appellant's private and family life by reference to a  detailed  and
       specific consideration of the material. No criticism is made of this
       in the grounds of appeal because it is said that the  appeal  should
       never have reached a consideration of these factors.  The  decision,
       it is said, was an unlawful one and the Judge should not  have  gone
       on to deal with the consideration of Article 8 on its merits because
       this first required a lawful decision to have been made.

   17.  This singular jurisdiction of the Tribunal now  has  a  long  legal
       history, first identified by the Court of  Appeal  in  Abdi  v  SSHD
       [1996] Imm AR 148.  Mr Malik  contends  that  where  a  decision  is
       unlawful, there is only a single remedy open to the Tribunal: it has
       to exercise the power identified in Abdi and require  the  Secretary
       of State to make a fresh and lawful decision, a process which  might
       have to be repeated if the Secretary of  State  makes  a  series  of
       successive unlawful decisions.  In such a case, the Tribunal's hands
       are tied; the decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  the
       Secretary of State has to make  a  fresh  appealable  decision,  the
       appellant is permitted to appeal if the decision is adverse and  the
       machinery of justice rolls on.

   18. The range of unlawful decisions is broad.  For example, a failure to
       take into account  a  medical  report  or  a  piece  of  documentary
       evidence  may   render   the   decision   unlawful   or   Wednesbury
       unreasonable.   Were  the  Tribunal  permitted  only   to   make   a
       declaration to that effect and require the  Secretary  of  State  to
       make  a  fresh  decision,   the   Tribunal's   function   would   be
       substantially emasculated and its original jurisdiction  to  make  a
       decision for itself (or, on appeal, to re-make a decision), would be
       significantly reduced.  It would  be  a  surprising  result  if  the
       Tribunal and the Courts have, in the past, overlooked what Mr  Malik
       submits is the central importance of first identifying  whether  the
       Secretary of State's  decision  is  lawful  and  only  when  it  has
       concluded that it is, going on to consider whether it is the correct
       one.

   19. The issue raised in Mr Malik's submissions is, essentially, in  what
       circumstances is the Tribunal  permitted  to  conclude  the  process
       initiated by the Secretary of State, notwithstanding the  fact  that
       the Secretary of State's decision is unlawful?

   20. Abdi was a case in point.  The Somali family reunion policy was  not
       part of the Refugee Convention; nor could it be brought  within  the
       ambit of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of  State's  decision
       not to depart from the Rules carried with it no right of  appeal  to
       the Tribunal and the Tribunal had not been vested with the power  to
       review the Secretary of State's  application  of  the  policy.   The
       respondent had, however, applied  the  policy  on  the  basis  of  a
       misapplication of the facts, thus his decision was not in accordance
       with the law.  The Tribunal was permitted  to  say  so,  effectively
       quashing the decision and sending the  matter  back  to  him  for  a
       decision to be made on the basis of the true facts.  It was  a  case
       in which the application depended upon the exercise  of  a  function
       vested in the Secretary of State which the Tribunal did not  possess
       on appeal.  Accordingly, there was no alternative but to  require  a
       decision from the Secretary of State.   In  broad  terms,  the  Abdi
       remedy was required because the Tribunal could not decide the matter
       for itself whereas returning the application  to  the  Secretary  of
       State provided the appellant with a remedy that went beyond what the
       Tribunal was able to offer on appeal.


   21. The matter was touched upon in Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)
       [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) in which the Tribunal  (the  Vice  President
       and Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan)  spoke  of  circumstances  where  a
       decision maker in the purported exercise of a discretion  vested  in
       him notes his function and reaches a decision in accordance with it.
        In such a case, the decision is  a  lawful  one  and  the  Tribunal
       cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide  that
       the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently  (see  s
       86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002).   In
       contrast,  where  the  decision  maker  has  failed  to  exercise  a
       discretion vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on  appeal  is
       limited to a decision that the failure renders the decision 'not  in
       accordance with the law' (s 86(3)(a)).  Because  the  discretion  is
       vested in the Executive, the appropriate  course  must  be  for  the
       Tribunal to require the decision  maker  to  complete  his  task  by
       reaching a lawful decision on the outstanding application.

   22. In such a case, the Tribunal  is  required  to  limit  its  function
       because it is not permitted to usurp the role accorded in law to the
       Secretary of State.  That, however, is a limited  jurisdiction;  the
       limitation arising from the existence of a specific function  vested
       in the Secretary of State, and her  alone,  and  not  given  to  the
       Tribunal to exercise afresh pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Acts  on
       appeal.

   23. The fact that the Secretary of State  always  retains  a  discretion
       outside the Immigration Rules, outside the Refugee Convention or the
       ECHR or European law does not mean the Tribunal has to divest itself
       of jurisdiction where an unlawful decision is made by the  Secretary
       of State.  Since, by reason of his immigration history and the facts
       of his case,  the  appellant  had  no  right  to  remain  under  the
       Immigration Rules, his application for leave to remain was  perforce
       made outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  seeking  a  discretionary
       remedy.  The Secretary of State reached a decision  to  refuse  that
       application and, disjunctively  as  it  were,  reached  an  unlawful
       decision on the  appellant's  human  rights'  claim.   That,  alone,
       however, does not cause the need to arise for the Secretary of State
       alone  to  re-make  her  decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,   in
       assessing the wider Article 8 claims of the appellant, is capable of
       righting the error that has crept into the  decision-making  process
       and where (as happened here) the First-tier  Tribunal  inadvertently
       fell into error, the Upper Tribunal is able to correct the error.


   24. There are obvious advantages for a litigant who wishes to remain  in
       the United Kingdom to prolong his presence here  in  an  attempt  to
       improve his ultimate chances of remaining. We do  not  suggest  that
       such a cynical attitude to litigation was involved  in  this  appeal
       because the issue merited consideration, as established by the grant
       of permission. However, the Tribunal is alive to the advantages to a
       litigant of requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  multiple
       decisions. Clearly this is not merited unless there is  a  necessity
       for doing so. The overriding objective enshrined in paragraph  4  of
       the Rules to secure the proceedings before the Tribunal are  handled
       as fairly, quickly and efficiently as possible in the interests both
       of the parties to the proceedings and to the wider public  interest,
       as well as the breadth of scope of the Article 8 considerations,  is
       sufficient to ensure that where  an  error  has  been  made  by  the
       Secretary of State in her decision-making process, the error can  be
       rectified  by  the  Tribunal  without  unfairness,  save  where  the
       Tribunal's function is limited by law.

   25. In his submissions to us, Mr Malik referred to SC (Article  8  -  in
       accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC), in  which
       the Upper Tribunal (Blake J, President  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Juss) considered the  appeal  of  one  who  had  made  further
       representations in support of an asylum claim for  herself  and  her
       family based on the developing case law since her  appeal  had  been
       dismissed.   On refusal by the Secretary of State,  her  appeal  was
       allowed  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  heard   the
       Secretary of State had a policy not to remove failed asylum  seekers
       to  Zimbabwe and so the intended removal  was not in accordance with
       policy and therefore not in accordance  with  the  law.   The  panel
       found it was wrong for the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that  the
       decision to remove was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   In  the
       course of its determination, the panel said:


         10. We recognise that there are cases where a decision to refuse an
         extension of stay or remove a  person  may  be  so  contrary  to  a
         requirement contained in an established policy or practice as to be
         not in accordance with the law. In such a case  the  analysis  does
         not move on  to  justification  for  Article  8  purposes  and  the
         decision must be re-made in accordance with the law, either by  the
         Secretary of State or the judge. However, in our judgment this  was
         not such a case.


   26. This no more that re-iterates that there are cases where a  decision
       classified as 'not in accordance with the law'  may  result  in  the
       Tribunal requiring the Secretary of State to make a  fresh  decision
       upon it.  That is one of the several permissible outcomes in appeals
       heard before the Tribunal.  However, the case does not  support  the
       contention that this is the inevitable, or  indeed  normal,  outcome
       where the Tribunal finds a decision of the Secretary of State is  so
       contrary to a requirement contained  in  an  established  policy  or
       practice as to be not in accordance with the law.  If  justification
       for this approach were needed, we need  look  no  further  than  the
       closing words of the passage  that  we  have  set  out  above:  'the
       decision must be re-made in accordance with the law, either  by  the
       Secretary of State or the  judge.'    A  decision  that  is  not  in
       accordance with the law does not automatically need go back  to  the
       drawing-board; this will depend upon what additional purpose  is  to
       be served by doing so.   Whilst  Blake  J's  acknowledgment  of  the
       principle that a decision that is not in accordance with the law may
       stop the Article 8 consideration in its tracks, it does not  support
       Mr Malik's wider contention that it must do so,  far  less  that  it
       will  always  do  so.    We  do  not  therefore  read   the   words,
       '...[in]cases where a decision...[is] not  in  accordance  with  the
       law... the analysis does not move on to justification for Article  8
       purposes' as bearing the general implication that this will  be  the
       norm.


   27. This is demonstrated in  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal.   The
       substance of the Article 8 claim, using the widest possible approach
       to  the  scope  of  the  balance  to  be  operated  (including   the
       compassionate circumstances necessarily attracting to an  individual
       in the appellant's position) was that removal was a disproportionate
       interference with his human rights. We agree that the  Secretary  of
       State's approach was constrained by her self-denying ordinance  that
       consideration was limited to the Immigration Rules and this may have
       skewed the balance by improperly attaching weight  to  the  need  to
       meet the requirements of the new rules.  Although we  consider  that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge expressed himself in much wider terms,
       it may be the case that his consideration of  the  Article  8  claim
       'more generally' (as he  described  it)  was  also  tainted  by  his
       understanding that the new, more restrictive, rules applied.

   28. For the first time in the decision-making process, we  approach  the
       appellant's case on the basis that the new rules had no  bearing  on
       the appellant's appeal and that the Article 8 claim was no more  and
       no less than a consideration that this appellant was owed a right to
       respect for his private and family life and that there shall  be  no
       interference with the exercise  of  this  right  by  the  respondent
       except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary  in  a
       democratic society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
       safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention
       of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for
       the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

   29. We see no reason to depart from the Judge's summary of the facts  of
       this appeal which we have set  out  in  paragraph  10  above.   Even
       adopting the widest margin to the private  life  developed  by  this
       appellant, it did not approach  a  case  where  removal  was  not  a
       proportionate response.  Whilst the appellant might well be entitled
       to a decision based upon the correct legal rules, the outcome from a
       consideration of the correct ones was never in doubt.   The decision
       to remove the appellant was, in our view, a proportionate one.  This
       conclusion reinforces, but does not prompt, our conclusion that  the
       sole purpose in requiring the Secretary of State to  reach  a  fresh
       and lawful decision would be to reach the same ultimate  conclusion,
       albeit by a different and lawful route and that her re-consideration
       of the application has no realistic prospect of a  different  result
       although it would, or might,  give  rise  to  a  further  appealable
       decision.  That appeal would have the same inevitable result.  There
       would therefore be no discernible benefit to the appellant  in  this
       process, save  the  accumulation  of  further  time  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  It would not provide him with a benefit that the  Tribunal
       is unable to offer.  In refusing this remedy to the  appellant,  the
       process nevertheless accords with the operation  of  the  overriding
       objective.  These are powerful reasons why Mr  Malik's  attempts  to
       enlarge the category of cases which require the Secretary  of  State
       to decide afresh are not warranted.


   30. We have found that the Secretary of State made a decision which  was
       not in accordance with the law  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge was similarly in error.  In both cases, however, the  ultimate
       decision would have  been  the  same  even  if  the  error  had  not
       occurred.  In accordance with section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts
       and Enforcement Act 2007, having found the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge involved the making of an error on  a  point  of
       law, we decline to set aside his decision.

DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             31 January 2014

