
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15426/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 January 2017                        |On 7 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETART OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr David Adeyinka Shittu
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G S Peterson, Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Anthony promulgated on 3 June 2016.  The appeal relates to a family unit
whose family originating from Nigeria.  The principal appeal concerned the
infant son of the family and it is accepted the claims in relation to his
parents and siblings are parasitic upon his.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals the decision to the Upper Tribunal
today pursuant to a grant of permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever,
on the grounds of what are said to be contradictory findings made in
respect of the child.

3.   The grounds drew specific attention to an apparent contradiction
between the content of paragraphs 55 and 56 of the decision and it is
appropriate that I read both those paragraphs into this determination.

"55. On the other hand, taking into account Aaron's tender age coupled with
his educational achievements, intellectual ability and the support of a
stable family unit, Aaron would, foreseeably, adapt over time.  There is no
suggestion that his health would be detrimentally affected or that there
would be any irreparable rupture in his academic progress.  Nor is it
claimed that his career aims could not be achieved in his country of
origin.  This is a stable and healthy family unit.

56.  However, I remind myself that the test to be applied is that of
reasonableness.  Therefore, the factors to which I give determinative
weight are his deep immersion in all aspects of life in this country and
his minimal connections with his country of origin.  I conclude that it
would be unreasonable for Aaron to return to Nigeria."

4.   The appeal was advanced before me on a slightly more extended basis
and the particular criticism that account was not taken of the decision of
this Tribunal in the case of Kaur (children's best interests / public
interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014, which was promulgated after the
First-tier Tribunal decision in this case.  It is a decision of the
President l and I need simply quote from the head note to the reported
version.  It makes reference to the provisions of Part 5A of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and states:

"(3) In the proportionality balancing exercise, the best interests of a
child must be assessed in isolation from other factors, such as parental
misconduct.

(4)  The best interests assessment should normally be carried out at the
beginning of the balancing exercise."

5.   It is apparent from reading this determination, and indeed it is
fairly conceded by Ms Peterson on the respondents' behalf, that the
decision does not set out the arguments in the most ideal order. Clearly,
as a counsel of perfection, what is commended by the President in Kaur
should be followed. But the issue for me to determine is whether the fact
that issues were taken in a different order is indicative of a material
error of law in this judge's otherwise detailed and exhaustive detailed.

6.   It is said on behalf of the Secretary of State that the balancing
exercise was not undertaken at the appropriate time and that insufficient
regard was given to a number of factors which include issues of
credibility, issues of embellishment of evidence on the part of the
parents, and their poor immigration history.  It is argued that those
should have been taken at a different time in the determination and should
have assessed independently.

7.   I accept that the order of the determination is not ideal but in my
view, when the decision is read in its entirety, the judge has quite
properly looked at all relevant and material factors, has carried out the
balancing exercise, the proportionality exercise and the assessment of
reasonableness in an appropriate way.  The findings are clear and cogent
and they are based upon clear and unimpeachable findings on the evidence.

8.   The conclusions to which the judge came were properly open on the
evidence and on the law and I can detect no material error of law. It
follows that this appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

