
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15829/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th June 2014                               |On 10th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                           ms Vicky Adeyike wilson
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ogbonna
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 12th September 1960 is a citizen of Nigeria.  The
    Appellant  who  was  present  was  represented  by  Mr  Ogbonna.    The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Nath a Home Office Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside of the Immigration Rules based on Article 8 of the ECHR.   That
    decision had been refused by the Respondent on 29th April 2013.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Fletcher-Hill sitting at Hatton Cross on 10th January
    2014.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules and under human rights.

 4. The Appellant had appealed that decision on the basis  that  the  judge
    had  considered  Immigration  Rules  post  9th  July  2012   when   the
    Appellant's application had been made on 30th January 2012 and arguably
    had therefore applied the wrong case law.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page on 8th May 2014 found there was an arguable error of law  in  this
    respect and permission to appeal was granted.  The matter comes  before
    me in accordance with directions following from that permission.

The Appellant's Submissions

 5. Mr Ogbonna submitted in terms of the Grounds of Appeal that  the  judge
    had looked at the wrong Rules and had the  judge  applied  the  correct
    test it was probable that there would have been  a  different  decision
    made.  There was a concession that the Appellant's case  did  not  fall
    within the Immigration Rules themselves.

The Respondent's Submissions

 6. Mr Nath also accepted this case did not  fall  within  the  Immigration
    Rules but said regardless of the approach that my have  been  taken  by
    the judge the Article 8 decision was sound and there was  no  error  of
    law made such that there would have been a material difference  to  the
    decision reached.

 7. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider this case.  I  now
    provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The Appellant claimed to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2002
    illegally and had  remained  throughout  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   Her
    application had been made on 30th January 2012 predating the change  to
    the Immigration Rules brought  in  on  9th  July  2012.   It  has  been
    conceded and has always been the case that the Appellant could not have
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules as they were pre 8th July 2012 or
    postdating the new Rules introduced on 9th July 2012.   The  Respondent
    in their refusal of the application on 29th April 2013  had  looked  at
    the Appellant's claim within the terms of  the  new  Immigration  Rules
    i.e. under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  those  Rules.   Having
    concluded the Appellant did not fall within the Immigration Rules  they
    had considered the Appellant's case and had concluded that  there  were
    not exceptional circumstances that justified her remaining in  the  UK.
    There  have  been  no  reference  within  the  refusal  letter  to  any
    particular case law that has arisen since the introduction of  the  new
    Immigration Rules.

 9. The judge had noted the Respondent's approach to a consideration of the
    case under the  new  Immigration  Rules  and  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant did not fall within the terms of those Rules.  The judge  had
    then  clearly  given  careful  consideration  to  all  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and her evidence in respect of her claim to be allowed to
    remain in the UK outside of the Immigration Rules.

10. In this respect at paragraph 65 of  the  determination  the  judge  had
    correctly identified the burden and standard of proof.  At paragraph 66
    of the determination the judge had stated:

         "In relation to Article 8 ECHR issues raised by the Appellant it is
         for the Appellant to show at the date of the appeal hearing and  as
         the balance of probability standard  that  she  has  established  a
         family and/or private life in the UK and that her removal from  the
         UK as a result of the Respondent's decision  would  interfere  with
         those rights.  It  is  then  for  the  Respondent  to  justify  any
         interference  caused.   The  Respondent's  decision  must   be   in
         accordance with the law and must be a proportionate response in all
         the circumstances.  The leading case on this  subject  remains  the
         House of Lords decision in Razgar."

    The judge had then given consideration of the  evidence,  her  findings
    and her ultimate decision.

11. The new Immigration Rules laid before Parliament and approved and which
    came into force on 9th July 2012  in  part  set  out  to  codify  those
    circumstances in which an Article 8  claim  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on either family or private life grounds would be allowed.   In
    part the purpose of such codification was to set  out  the  Executive's
    directions as to what would be regarded as the sufficiency  of  grounds
    for allowing an individual to remain in  the  UK  under  the  terms  of
    Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The  case  law  that  has  arisen  since  the
    introduction of those Rules has directly or inferentially  acknowledged
    that as a result of those Rules the  judiciary  need  to  give  greater
    weight or be reminded of the need to give  appropriate  weight  to  the
    public interest when considering such cases.  Such public interest  was
    always inherent within Article 8(2) of the ECHR but without  any  clear
    or detailed guidance the interpretation has perhaps  led  to  disparate
    views and interpretation over the years.  A number of  cases  from  the
    higher courts and  the  case  of  Gulshan  have  now  provided  clearer
    guidance as to the circumstances in which an individual may be  granted
    leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

12. As indicated above  in  this  case  this  Appellant  could  never  have
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules either as they stood at her  date
    of application or post July 2012.  The Respondent in the refusal letter
    had correctly considered her case outside of the Rules and for  reasons
    provided refused that application.  It is noteworthy that the judge  at
    the First-tier Tribunal whilst making reference to the new  Immigration
    Rules and in that sense echoing the approach taken by the Respondent in
    the refusal letter made no reference to the recent case  law  including
    Gulshan identifying the approach that she then took when examining  the
    case outside of the Rules under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  only
    reference to case law is that which is quoted above where at paragraphs
    65 and 66 of the determination the judge  having  correctly  identified
    the burden and  standard  of  proof  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent's  decision  must  be  a  proportionate  response  and  made
    reference to the case of Razgar.  Essentially therefore the  judge  was
    referring herself to the approach and the leading authority in terms of
    considering Article 8 of the ECHR prior to the  implementation  of  the
    new Immigration Rules.

13. Thereafter the judge had given clear and careful consideration  to  the
    evidence and the Appellant's circumstances and gave proper reasons  why
    in her view the removal of the Appellant would not be disproportionate.
     There is a reference in paragraph 70 to the  judge  having  considered
    recent case law in relation to whether the Appellant continues to  have
    ties with her country whether social, cultural or family.  There is  no
    specific mention of any individual case law and it is  not  necessarily
    clear therefore which cases she had in mind.  However  a  consideration
    of the circumstances that would face the  Appellant  in  Nigeria  would
    have  been  an  entirely  proper   consideration   on   any   test   of
    proportionality and in terms of whether the  Respondent's  decision  to
    remove her to Nigeria would be a disproportionate response  in  all  of
    the Appellant's circumstances.

14. I find therefore that in the judge's consideration  of  Article  8  the
    approach that she  took  and  the  matters  that  she  considered  were
    entirely compatible with the approach taken in Article 8 cases pre  9th
    July 2012.  To that extent if the judge had perhaps incorrectly assumed
    that she needed to deal with this case in  accordance  with  post  July
    2012 case law she had not approached her consideration in  practice  on
    that basis.  She essentially applied the test  in  Razgar  and  reached
    conclusions  that  were  entirely  proper  and  open  to   her   on   a
    consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR in the manner adopted for  those
    cases prior to the introduction of the new Immigration Rules.  To  that
    extent if there was an error it had no material effect  on  either  her
    consideration  of  the  evidence  or  the  decision  reached.   I  find
    therefore that there was no material error of law in this case.

Decision

15. There was no material error of law made by the judge and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
