
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/15643/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August, 2016                    |On 9th August 2016                   |
|Signed 4th August, 2016                |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                              MST LOVELY AKTHER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, a solicitor with Liberty Legal,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Bangladeshi national who was born on  20th  October,
    1991.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 17th  January,  2011
    on a multi visit visa valid from 21st  December,  2010  to  21st  June,
    2011.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on a second occasion on
    4th October, 2014 on a multi visit visa valid from 26th August, 2014 to
    26th February, 2015.  She made application  to  vary  her  leave.  That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on  1st  April,  2015
    and the appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard in Birmingham on 10th  November,  2015
    by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  R  Hopkins.   In  his  determination,
    promulgated on 23rd November, 2015, he noted  that  the  appellant  had
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  partner  of
    Noin Uddin Ahmed ("the sponsor") a British citizen.   On 18th  January,
    2015 the appellant and sponsor underwent a religious  wedding  followed
    by a civil ceremony on 19th January, 2015.  The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant was expecting the sponsor's child and that they had a home in
    the United Kingdom at [West Bromwich], a property owned by the sponsor.
    The judge noted that the removal  of  the  appellant  would  leave  the
    sponsor with a difficult decision as to whether  to  accompany  her  to
    Bangladesh or to remain in the United Kingdom, carrying on  his  family
    life with her at long distance  until  such  time  that  she  is  in  a
    position to obtain entry clearance to rejoin him.

3.    The  judge  considered  the  evidence  before   him   carefully   and,
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant was expecting a child to be
    born in February 2016 and that the child would be British, he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's removal  prejudiced  her  and  that  the
    sponsor's family life in a sufficiently serious manner to amount  to  a
    breach of the rights protected by Article 8.  He found the decision  of
    the Secretary of State was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining effective immigration control.

4.   The appellant appealed and leave was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer who said:

         "It is arguable that the FTT should have taken  greater  care  when
         analysing the  proportionality  of  removal  of  the  appellant  in
         circumstances where it was agreed that she  would  imminently  give
         birth to a British child and as such the correct test to be applied
         in the near future is that set out in Sanade  and  Others  (British
         children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).  This  makes
         it clear that where the child is a British citizen and therefore an
         EEA citizen, it is not possible to require them to relocate outside
         the EEA or to submit that it would be reasonable to do so."

5.   Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer found that the remaining grounds were  not
    arguable.

6.   In addressing me today Mr Chowdhury pointed out that the appellant  had
    now given birth to a British child and, as such, the judge had erred in
    law in applying the proportionality test.  He should  have  taken  into
    account the fact that the appellant  was  about  to  give  birth  to  a
    British child. He suggested that the judge should also have  considered
    Section 55 of the Borders Act.

7.   I drew to Mr Chowdhury's attention the fact that in his  determination,
    Judge Hopkins had on several occasions noted  that  the  appellant  was
    about to give birth to a child who would be  British,  but  nonetheless
    found that the appellant's removal would be proportionate. Mr Chowdhury
    responded by suggesting that what the judge failed to do  was  properly
    apply the proportionality test.

8.   I suggested that perhaps Mr Chowdhury may like a little time to  enable
    him to collect his  thoughts  and  to  take  further  instructions.   I
    suggested that he could take fifteen minutes  and  that  if  he  needed
    longer he should tell the usher. Following a brief adjournment of  some
    ten minutes Mr Chowdhury told me he was ready to proceed.

9.   He reminded me that the sponsor enjoys Article 8 rights in  the  United
    Kingdom. He was born in the United Kingdom and had only  ever  been  to
    Bangladesh twice in his life. He is the principal carer for his  mother
    and his Article 8 rights had to been considered by the judge.  He  also
    suggested that the judge should have considered the  matter  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.  Mr Jarvis suggested that Mr Chowdhury had appeared to  move  away  from
    the grounds on which permission had been granted.  At the date  of  the
    hearing before the judge the child had not been born and the judge  was
    entitled on the evidence before him to make the decision  he  did.   He
    did not believe that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.
     Nothing in the grounds or in Mr Chowdhury's submissions has identified
    any error of law on the part of Judge Hopkins; there is  no  suggestion
    that the decision is in any way perverse.   Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that
    there could be no consideration of  Article  8  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, since of course the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.

11.  Responding, Mr Chowdhury asked me to remit  the  appeal  for  rehearing
    given that the appellant had now given birth to a  British  child.   He
    told me that if the appellant were to return to  Bangladesh  she  could
    not make  an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the
    sponsor's income did not meet the required level.

12.  I reserved my decision.

13.  I have carefully read the  determination  of  Judge  Hopkins  and  have
    concluded that the appellant's challenge to the  determination  amounts
    to nothing more than a simple disagreement  with  the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant's removal would not be disproportionate to the  need
    to maintain immigration control.  The judge does take into account  the
    Article 8 rights of both the sponsor and appellant at some length.  The
    judge found that the sponsor is not the principal carer for his  mother
    as had been claimed. The sponsor could, if he wished to, accompany  the
    appellant.  The judge's decision was based on the evidence  before  him
    and was not irrational. He was concerned with the facts as they were at
    the date of the hearing before him and at that time the child  had  not
    been born.  There was no need  for  him  to  consider  section  55.  He
    considered the important elements of the sponsor's mother's health  and
    the fact that the appellant  was  expecting  a  baby.   The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude as he did and his decision is not perverse.

14.  I find that there is no error of law  in  the  determination  of  Judge
    Hopkins and  his  decision  shall  stand.  The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee being paid or payable there is a question of a fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
