

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13th March 2015                           |On: 19th May 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            Mr Rana Muhammad Amin
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, Counsel instructed by MA Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, date  of  birth  1st  January
      1954.  He appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) to dismiss his appeal against a decision  to
      remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 1999. That  decision  had  followed  rejection  of  the
      Appellant's claim to be permitted to stay  in  the  UK  on  Article  8
      grounds.

   2. The basis of the Appellant's case was that his  removal  from  the  UK
      would be a disproportionate  interference  with  the  family  life  he
      enjoys with his two sons who are in the UK with their mother,  who  is
      seeking asylum. He also relied on his own poor health.

   3. Judge Cruthers very frankly described the Appellant's 'health case' as
      a "no-hoper". He refers to the decision in N(FC) v  SSHD  [2005]  UKHL
      31. On the facts there can have been no error  in  this  approach  and
      none is alleged in the grounds.

   4. The subject of this challenge is the approach taken to Article  8.  It
      is submitted that in dealing with this "classic Article  8"  case  the
      Tribunal wrongly took into account the new rules, and the  Appellant's
      failure to meet them.  It is further submitted that the Tribunal erred
      in apparently attaching weight to  immaterial  matters,  such  as  the
      Appellant's inability to financially support his own sons, his earlier
      separation from them, and whether the Appellant has a daughter  living
      in Pakistan.  Finally it is submitted that there was material evidence
      that was not adequately dealt with: it is submitted that the  Tribunal
      should have given greater weight to the evidence  that  the  Appellant
      had only been reunited with his sons by chance whilst in the street in
      Bolton and that this good fortune had been something that meant a  lot
      to all of them.

   5. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.

      My Findings

   6. In refusing permission Judge French made reference to the decision  in
      Haleemudeen[2] to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal was  obliged
      to take the new  Rules  into  account.  That  decision  has  now  been
      overtaken by the  guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Singh  and
      Khalid[3]. This application was made in June 2010 and the decision  to
      refuse was served on the  19th  March  2012.  Given  those  dates  the
      parties before me agreed that this was  a  straightforward  Article  8
      appeal and that there was no obligation on the Tribunal to  conduct  a
      two-stage test  as  per  the  guidance  in  MF[4].   That  said,  both
      representatives agreed that an applicant's  ability  or  otherwise  to
      meet  the  Rules  had  always  been  in  some  way  relevant  to   the
      proportionality balancing exercise. In this case  Mr  Holt  challenges
      the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  it
      impermissibly relied on the Appellant's failure under the new Rules to
      find the decision to remove proportionate [at 44]:

          "I also have to give some weight to the  fact  that,  with  effect
          from 9 July 2012, parliament  laid  down  new  rules  relating  to
          "Article 8 cases" and the appellant clearly does  not  meet  those
          new Article 8 rules..."

   7. It is clear from a holistic reading of this  determination  that  this
      mention of the new Rules at paragraph 44 played little if any part  in
      the Tribunal's  decision.  That  is  because  in  the  preceding  nine
      paragraphs the determination sets out clear  sustainable  reasons  why
      the Appellant fails "under classic Article 8  principles".  These  are
      that the family life the Appellant claims to share with his  two  sons
      in the UK was severed by him when he sent them away from Dubai;  there
      was no evidence that he had ever supported them  financially;  in  any
      event they have only limited leave to remain in the UK and it is by no
      means certain that they would be permitted to stay;  the Appellant has
      never had any basis for remaining  permanently  in  the  UK  and  that
      should have been apparent to him and his advisors at  all  times;  the
      Appellant was "deliberately evasive"  about  the  whereabouts  of  his
      daughter and in the view of the Tribunal he was hoping to conceal  the
      fact that she is currently in Pakistan; similarly  the  Appellant  had
      initially tried to conceal that he had at least two siblings alive  in
      Pakistan, a matter about which another witness  lied;   the  Appellant
      has had extensive recourse to  NHS  treatment  to  which  he  was  not
      entitled; if allowed to remain  it  would  be  very  likely  that  the
      taxpayer would soon be supporting him in his housing  and  maintenance
      as well as his health needs. All  of  those  factors  considered,  the
      Tribunal found, and was entitled to  find,  that  the  Respondent  had
      shown the decision to be proportionate.

   8. The second ground of appeal is that some of those matters listed above
      were not relevant to the matter in hand.  It  is  submitted  that  the
      Appellant's inability to support his sons was irrelevant. That is  not
      so. The point Judge Cruthers  was  making  is  that  it  went  to  the
      strength or otherwise of his family life with these  adults.  Nor  was
      the presence  of  a  daughter,  brother  and  sister  in  Pakistan  an
      irrelevant factor. The case being presented was that this is  a  frail
      and unwell man who requires the support and love of his family in  the
      UK: that he could receive such love and support from  close  relatives
      in  Pakistan  was  plainly  pertinent  to   the   Tribunal's   overall
      assessment.

      Decisions

   9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error
      of law and it is upheld.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             12th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission refused on the 30th September 2014 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge French, granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal
Judge Warr on the 16th January 1015
[2] Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558
[3] Khalid v SSHD; Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74
[4] MF v SSHD (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC)


