

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15400/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd May 2014                              |On 27th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ADEOLA ADEFUNKE FOWOKAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance and no legal representation

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Permission to appeal the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  was
      granted on the grounds that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  may  have
      erred in law in recording that the presenting  officer  accepted  that
      the documents presented  by  Ms  Fowokan  had  been  accepted  by  the
      appellant (hereafter the SSHD) as adequate evidence that she  met  the
      requirements of the Rules for variation of leave to remain as a Tier 1
      (Entrepreneur). Attached to the grounds seeking permission to  appeal,
      the SSHD had attached a 'minute' prepared by  the  presenting  officer
      after the conclusion of the hearing which stated


                  "PO relied on refusal reasons, and reminded IJ that  there
                  is no near miss under PBS (case of  Miah);  and  that  the
                  explanatory memorandum to the statement of changes to  the
                  Immigration Rules dated 31.01.2013 shows the importance of
                  applying the  evidential  requirements  in  this  category
                  (Tier 1 Entrepreneur) rigidly."




   2. Although the grant of permission to appeal clearly  states  the  basis
      upon  which  permission  has   been   granted   Ms   Fowokan's   legal
      representatives did not file a Rule 24 response rejecting  the  SSHD's
      contention and neither her counsel, who  represented  her  before  the
      First-tier  Tribunal,  appeared  before  me  and  nor  did   she.   No
      explanation for their absence was given.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal judge's record of proceedings notes

                  "PO  accepts  that  A's  statement  is  supported  by  the
                  evidence.
                  He relies on the decision."

   4. It is not clear from that exactly what was being accepted.


   5. The application for variation was refused on the grounds that

   a. The only evidence  produced  to  demonstrate  she  was  active  was  a
      printout of an advertisement on www.mylocalservices.co.uk  which  does
      not, on the screenshot taken on 24th September 2012, show her name  or
      confirm that she is providing services as a management consultant;
   b. The contract produced was not signed and dated by herself and nor  was
      it signed by a representative of her client's organisation Momenta and
      nor does it show the company's full address, landline phone number and
      any email address
   c. The contract does not detail the services that she provides to Momenta
      in support of their contract to Deloitte.


   6.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  records  that  the
      advertisement at  C1  in  the  respondent's  bundle  does  provide  Ms
      Fowokan's name and description  of  her  business.  That  is  in  fact
      incorrect. The advert screenshot (which is on C2 of  the  bundle,  not
      C1) does not give her name; it gives her address and that her business
      type is "Consultant and Specialist". There is  no  reference  in  that
      advert to her name or that  she  provides  services  as  a  management
      consultant. The document at C1 is dated 25th November 2012 and  is  an
      'editor log in screen'. Her  name  appears  at  the  top  of  that  as
      'owner'; and under a heading of 'services' states


                  "assesses the functions objectives and requirements of the
                  organisation seeking advice and using  expertise  to  find
                  information".


   7. The First-tier Tribunal determination also records that the absence of
      a  signature  from  the  contract  is  not  relevant   because   email
      correspondence shows that a binding contract has been agreed.

   8. The First-tier Tribunal determination does not address two significant
      matters raised in the refusal decision namely the lack of any  address
      or landline for Momenta and secondly fails to  identify  the  services
      that Ms Fowokan is required to provide.

   9. Although the judge's record of proceedings is not clear it is apparent
      that by relying upon the decision letter the SSHD did not accept  that
      the evidence referred  to  in  that  letter  had  been  satisfactorily
      provided. It may be that the lack of signature on a contract which  is
      evidenced by an email exchange is sufficient to show  that  a  binding
      contract has been entered into and it may be that the  combination  of
      the log in screen and the advert are sufficient together but there  is
      a clear lack of evidence as to Ms  Fowokan's  business  operation  and
      what she is doing for Momenta.

  10. I am satisfied that on the basis of the combination  of  the  'minute'
      from the Presenting Officer, the judge's  record  of  proceedings  and
      examination of the documents before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
      refusal letter, that no concession was made. I am satisfied  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in mistakenly thinking that the
      presenting officer had accepted that the documentation met all of  the
      SSHD's objections as set out in the decision letter.

  11. I set aside the decision to be remade.

      Re-made decision

  12. The documents before me are as set out and referred to above. For  the
      reasons I have given above I am satisfied  that  Ms  Fowokan  has  not
      provided the required evidence in particular contractual  evidence  of
      the services she  is  providing  despite  the  contract  for  services
      referring to  "following  services".  These  appear  on  the  contract
      services  to  relate  to  'business  review  and  complaint   handling
      services' but this bears little relation to  the  description  of  her
      services in C1


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I allow the appeal of the secretary of State  thus  the  appeal  of  Ms
    Fowokan against the decision of the Secretary of State is dismissed.







                                   Date 27th May 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
