
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th September, 2013                        |On 22nd October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               Mr Idris Ciftei

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by Kilick & Kilick
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was  born  on  20th  February,
    1979.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor  with  a  six
    month visa on 7th October, 2011.  His visa  expired  on  7th  February,
    2012.  Before his visa expired,  the  appellant  made  application  for
    leave  to  remain  under  the  Turkey-European  Community   Association
    Agreement on 22nd January, 2012.  That application was refused  by  the
    respondent on 16th July, 2012.  The appellant  appealed  that  decision
    and his appeal was heard on 19th September, 2012, but  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd October, 2012.  On 18th October, 2012,
    application was made for permission to appeal.  On 28th November,  2012
    that application was refused.

3.   On 2nd March, 2013, the appellant underwent  an  Islamic  wedding  with
    Keely  Ann  Parkinson  ("Ms  Parkinson").   On  18th  April,  2013  the
    appellant was encountered and detained and  served  with  form  IS151A.
    The following day, on 19th April, 2013, representations  were  made  to
    the Secretary of State suggesting that he be allowed to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom because his rights  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    would be breached.  Further evidence was submitted on 20th April,  2013
    and on 8th  May,  2013  those  representations  were  rejected  by  the
    Secretary of State who decided to remove the appellant  as  an  illegal
    entrant thereby giving the appellant a right of appeal.

4.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  the  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands on 13th June,  2013  at  North
    Shields.  In a determination promulgated on 25th June, 2013, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge considered the appellant's rights under  Article  8
    of the European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms and concluded that the  appellant's  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would not be disproportionate, given the  legitimate
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds are lengthy, but at paragraph 7 assert  that  the  judge  erred
    because at paragraph 28 of her determination she said,  "The  entry  of
    persons is necessary in a democratic society when  one  takes  a  wider
    view of immigration Regulation" and suggests that that is difficult  to
    fathom.  It suggested that at paragraph 29  of  the  determination  the
    judge concentrated on the fact that the appellant  was  an  overstayer,
    but there was nowhere any analysis of  the  positive  factual  findings
    made by the  judge.   The  grounds  suggested  that  the  analysis  and
    assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  appellant's  removal  and
    separation from his pregnant wife is "bare and wholly inadequate".

6.   Paragraph 8 of the grounds suggests that the judge  adopted  a  "wholly
    erroneous approach in effect disqualifying a person  succeeding  in  an
    appeal on Article 8 grounds because they were  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without permission" because at paragraph 34 of  the  determination  the
    judge accepted that it is, "... not reasonable  to  expect  someone  to
    leave the country if they are only returning to their  own  country  to
    apply to return in a lawful capacity ..." but then  goes  on  to  state
    that the appellant "... should not gain from his illegal actions."

7.   Paragraph 9 of the grounds suggests that the judge's  analysis  of  the
    reasonableness  of  the  appellant  leaving  the  United  Kingdom   and
    returning  to  Turkey  was  inadequate  and  flawed.   It  referred  to
    paragraph  13  of  the  determination,  where  the  judge  quoted   the
    respondent as saying that if the couple were in a genuine  relationship
    they  could  live  in  Turkey  together  and   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles.

8.   At paragraph 10 of the lengthy  grounds  it  is  suggested  again  that
    there is no balanced judgment of what reasonably can be expected in the
    light of all material facts and relied on Sanade  and  Others  (British
    children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048.   Paragraph  11
    suggested that any assessment of the reasonableness of the spouse being
    expected to leave the United Kingdom when she is a British  citizen  is
    one that needs cogent and rigorous analysis which is lacking  from  the
    determination.

9.   Mr Collins submitted that the judge had simply failed  to  act  in  all
    her findings  when  making  her  assessment  of  proportionality.   The
    appellant has at all times been aware that he was required to leave the
    country.  It is simply not reasonable to expect his wife to  return  to
    go to Turkey with the appellant.  For  the  respondent  the  Presenting
    Officer suggested that the first ground was a failure on  the  part  of
    the judge to apply  his  findings  set  out  at  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination  onwards  but  when  one  reads  paragraph  29   of   the
    determination the judge makes it clear that she  has  applied  all  the
    facts as she  has  found  them.   Of  course  she  has  considered  the
    appellant's immigration history, but she is obliged to do that.

10.  The grounds  criticise  paragraph  34  of  the  determination  but,  Mr
    Kingham submitted, the judge was not simply saying that the  fact  that
    the appellant should  not  gain  from  his  illegal  actions  outweighs
    everything else.  It is clear, he submitted, when the determination  is
    read as a whole that  the  judge  has  taken  fully  into  account  the
    findings she made.  At paragraph 35 the judge has simply suggested that
    it was open to Ms  Parkinson  for  her  to  move  to  Turkey  with  the
    appellant.  He points out that she may prefer  not  to  but  there  was
    insufficient evidence laid before her to establish  that  Ms  Parkinson
    could not live with the appellant in Turkey.  That is something for her
    to decide and the judge makes it clear that it was a  matter  for  her.
    The judge is simply pointing out that  interference  with  family  life
    could be avoided by the parties should Ms Parkinson  choose  to  go  to
    Turkey with the appellant and  there  is  no  evidence  before  her  to
    suggest that she could not live with him.  He was not  suggesting  that
    as a British  subject  Ms  Parkinson  should  go  to  Turkey  with  the
    appellant.

11.  Mr Collins pointed out that Ms Parkinson had made  it  clear  that  her
    position was that she did not wish to go to Turkey and on the  evidence
    before the judge it was, he submitted unreasonable to expect her to  go
    and live there.

12.  I reserved my determination.

13.  The first five paragraphs of the grounds of appeal set out  information
    which is apparent from reading the determination and are, with respect,
    otiose.  At paragraph 6 it is suggested that the judge's attempt at  an
    analysis of the facts pursuant to the guidance of the House of Lords in
    Razgar was inadequate and confused.  Paragraph 7 makes criticism  of  a
    sentence in paragraph 28 of the determination.  What the judge said  at
    paragraph 28 was this:-

         "Returning now to the questions to be asked in terms of Article  8,
         I find that there will be  an  interference  with  the  appellant's
         private and  chosen  family  life.   The  decision  to  remove  the
         appellant is in accordance with the law since the appellant has  no
         legitimate basis to enter the United Kingdom after the  outcome  of
         his appeal.  The entry of persons  is  necessary  in  a  democratic
         society when one takes a wider view of immigration Regulation.  The
         issue then becomes  whether  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  is
         proportionate in these particular circumstances."

    I agree, the penultimate sentence in that paragraph is clearly  missing
    several words.  What the judge was attempting to do, I believe, was  to
    answer question 4 posed  by  Lord  Bingham  in  paragraph  17  of  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004]  UKHL
    47.  It is regrettable that  the  judge  did  not  carefully  read  her
    determination and correct it before it was promulgated, but  I  do  not
    believe that it amounts to a material error, since it is not capable of
    altering the outcome of the appeal.

14.  In paragraph 7 of the grounds, criticism was made of  the  analysis  of
    proportionality  of  the  appellant's  removal  and  suggests  that  at
    paragraph 29 the judge has concentrated on the fact that the  appellant
    is an overstayer.  Paragraph  7  of  the  grounds  argue  that  reading
    paragraph 29 of the determination, one might think that  the  appellant
    had absconded, "and gone to ground".  It is suggested that there is  no
    analysis anywhere of the positive findings made and  the  analysis  and
    assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  appellant's  removal  and
    separation from his pregnant wife is, "bare and wholly inadequate".

15.  At paragraph 18 of the determination the judge  records  that  she  has
    heard oral evidence from the sponsor and found her to be  credible  and
    reliable.  At paragraph 19 the judge concluded that the  appellant  and
    Ms Parkinson are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant had now taken three English ability tests from
    ESOL and that  the  sponsor  could  not  speak  Turkish  or  any  other
    languages spoken in Turkey.  The judge noted also that the sponsor  was
    pregnant and pointed out that the appellant's  removal  would  have  no
    impact on the child's life at this stage because the baby  was  unborn.
    She noted that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  (paragraph  276ADE  of  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 395, as amended).  She noted  that  the  appellant
    works in a takeaway business owned by the  appellant  and  run  by  the
    appellant's  brother  and  she  heard  evidence  as  to   accommodation
    available for the couple with the appellant's brother.  At paragraph 28
    she reminded herself that it was necessary for her to consider  whether
    the appellant's removal would be proportionate.

16.  At paragraph 29 the judge said this:-

         "I bear in mind the test as  set  out  in  paragraph  20  of  Huang
         applying the facts as I have found them.  Having considered all the
         evidence before me I find the following facts:

         (a)  The appellant has remained in this country illegally  from  28
             November, 2012.  He has been fully aware of  his  status.   He
             would have been aware  therefore  that  any  relationships  he
             established would, of necessity, be interrupted by his removal
             from this country.  He has shown no respect or  observance  of
             the laws of the land by remaining in  the  country  after  his
             appeal rights were exhausted.


         (b)  The appellant did not bring himself to the  attention  of  the
             authorities and had to be encountered by them.  I note that it
             was in fact the authorities who found  the  appellant  at  his
             brother's home in what is colloquially known as 'a dawn raid'.
              There is no dispute that the appellant was encountered in bed
             and that the sponsor was there with him.


         (c)  The appellant and the sponsor have participated in an  Islamic
             marriage ceremony and  this  has  not  been  disputed  by  the
             respondent.  The sponsor advised  me  that  the  ceremony  was
             explained to her and the purpose of it but the actual ceremony
             was undertaken in a language she did not understand.  Mr Keane
             [the  Presenting  Officer  appearing  before  the   First-tier
             Tribunal Judge] has made an  issue  of  the  ceremony  in  his
             submissions as the evidence is restricted to  two  photographs
             and the fact that her father did not attend.  The  photographs
             show that  it  was  not  an  elaborate  affair.   The  sponsor
             explained that they had hoped to marry under English  law  but
             as the appellant's passport was retained by the UKBA they were
             unable to  do  so.   Having  heard  from  both  parties  I  am
             satisfied that they  believe  they  have  been  married  under
             Islamic law.


         (d)  The appellant's family other than  his  two  brothers,  is  in
             Turkey and he remains in contact with them."

17.  Pausing there for a moment, what the judge has done at paragraph 29  is
    to set out the facts as she found them.  They are all findings that she
    was entitled to make on the evidence before her.  Criticism is made  in
    paragraph 7 of the grounds that reading paragraph 29  one  might  think
    that the appellant had absconded and gone to ground.  With respect, all
    the judge was doing was pointing out that having  had  application  for
    permission to appeal refused by the Upper Tribunal  in  November,  2012
    the appellant had  no  right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    overstayed.  He did nothing about bringing himself to the attention  of
    the authorities, even after having undergone an Islamic wedding with Ms
    Parkinson on 2nd March, 2013.

18.  At paragraph 30 the judge noted advice downloaded from a UK  government
    website in respect of Turkey, advising against all but essential travel
    to parts of the country, mainly in respect of those areas close to  the
    Syrian border.  She points out that it  was  not  blanket  advice.   At
    paragraph 32 the judge reminded herself that she  had  found  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor was  genuine  but  noted
    that they had only started living together two days before the  hearing
    although they spent several  nights  a  week  together  either  in  the
    appellant's home or at her home prior to that.  The  judge  noted  that
    the relationship between the appellant and Ms Parkinson became  serious
    since March, 2012.  Ms Parkinson  was  aware  that  the  appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor and hoped  to  remain  as  a
    businessman.  She discovered that she was  pregnant  in  January,  2013
    following which the parties underwent  an  Islamic  wedding.   She  was
    aware of the appellant's status  and  upset  when  he  was  taken  into
    custody and detention.

19.  The  judge  noted  at  paragraph  33  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant and Ms Parkinson had been in a relationship for some  fifteen
    months and then, at paragraph 34 the judge said this:-

         "Whilst I am aware it is not reasonable to expect someone to  leave
         the country if they are only returning  to  their  own  country  to
         apply to return in a lawful capacity, I have weighed  this  against
         the fact that a person should not gain from  his  illegal  actions.
         The appellant failed to leave the United Kingdom when he  ought  to
         have done.  Other than  this,  he  has  not  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities and there is an avenue  through  which
         he would be able to support himself and  his  partner  ('the  pizza
         shop').  A couple do not have the right to choose where  they  make
         their life.  The appellant entered this relationship at a time when
         he knew his sojourn in the United Kingdom was temporary.  He had no
         guarantee or expectation that  he  would  be  given  permission  to
         remain in the United Kingdom to run a business.  He failed to  meet
         the requirements  and  his  appeals  were  dismissed.   Whilst  his
         relationship with Keely  Ann  [Ms  Parkinson]  at  this  stage  was
         ongoing, he did not claim it was at the stage it is  now,  however,
         he chose to continue to progress his relationship with her  despite
         knowing he was now living in the United Kingdom illegally and  that
         it was during his illegal stay that he has brought the relationship
         to the stage it is at now.  I am satisfied that the interference in
         the appellant's family  and  private  life  is  proportionate  when
         weighed against the aim of proper immigration control."

20.  When that paragraph is read in the context of the whole  determination,
    it is clear that the judge was  not  saying  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant should not gain from his illegal actions outweighs everything
    else but it was, with respect, necessary for the  judge  to  take  into
    account in assessing proportionality the fact that the appellant was an
    overstayer who failed  to  leave  after  having  exhausted  his  appeal
    rights.  I believe that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    interference with the appellant's family life was proportionate as  she
    did at paragraph 34.

21.  I do not believe that paragraph 8 of the grounds identifies  any  error
    of law on the part of the judge, because what the judge said  does  not
    disclose any  erroneous  approach.   The  judge  clearly  was  weighing
    positive aspects on behalf of the appellant  against  negative  aspects
    which had to be considered to give effect to the interests of the wider
    public in the maintenance of effective immigration control.

22.  Paragraph 9 makes no properly reasoned criticism of  the  determination
    at  all.   It  simply  suggests  that  the  judge's  analysis  of   the
    reasonableness of the appellant's leaving the United Kingdom and moving
    to Turkey was inadequate and flawed.  And that the  suggestion  by  the
    respondent's representative recorded by the judge in paragraph 13  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the parties  living  together
    in Turkey it was the  wrong  approach.   So  far  as  paragraph  10  is
    concerned, what the judge said at paragraph 34 was after having already
    concluded that interference with the  appellant's  family  and  private
    life would be proportionate.  The judge simply pointed out that it  was
    open to Ms Parkinson to move with the appellant to Turkey if she  chose
    to do so.  The judge recognised that Ms Parkinson may prefer not to  do
    so but the evidence before her did not suggest that Ms Parkinson  could
    not live in Turkey with the appellant.  She noted that Ms Parkinson had
    been to Turkey on holiday but what the judge did not do at paragraph 35
    is suggest that Ms Parkinson should go with the appellant  to  live  in
    Turkey.

23.  As I have pointed  out,  the  judge  had  already  concluded  that  the
    interference with the appellant's family  and  private  life  would  be
    proportionate.

24.  I believe that the making of the decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not involve the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.   I
    uphold the judge's decision.  The appellant's human  rights  appeal  is
    dismissed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
