

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/15666/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 25 September 2014         On 26 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rawal Singh
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                                     and
              NOTICE THAT APPEAL IS BEING TREATED AS ABANDONED
        (Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 r.18


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Burnett promulgated on  25  June  2014,  allowing  Mr  Singh's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  20  March  2014  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain as a Tier 5 Temporary Worker  (Creative
      and Sporting) Migrant and to  make  a  removal  decision  pursuant  to
      section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Singh is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr  Singh  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.


   3. In the particular circumstances of this case I do not propose  to  set
      out the Appellant's personal or immigration histories, or the  history
      of these proceedings. All  relevant  matters  are  summarised  in  the
      determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and/or  are  otherwise  a
      matter of record.


   4. One issue is raised,  and  one  only,  by  way  of  challenge  to  the
      favourable decision of Judge Burnett. The Respondent  identifies  that
      the Appellant had sent a communication to the Respondent on  23  April
      2014, indicating that he wished to withdraw his appeal and  return  to
      India. The Appellant did indeed then  depart  the  UK  voluntarily  27
      April 2014. For reasons that  are  unclear,  these  matters  were  not
      communicated to Judge Burnett (who  dealt  with  the  appeal  'on  the
      papers' as had been requested in the Appellant's Notice of Appeal).


   5. Be that as it may, the effect of the Appellant's departure from the UK
      brought his appeal to a  conclusion,  and  necessarily  therefore  the
      Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine it. This is by virtue of  section
      104(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which
      provides "an appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person  while  he
      is in the United Kingdom shall be  treated  as  an  abandoned  if  the
      appellant leaves the United Kingdom".


   6. It follows that, unbeknownst to him, Judge Burnett lacked jurisdiction
      to consider and determine the Appellant's appeal:  to  do  so  was  in
      error. It is necessary therefore that I set aside the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   7. It is not appropriate to remake the decision in the appeal:  there  is
      no extant appeal. Accordingly this document also serves  as  a  Notice
      pursuant to rule 18 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)
      Rules 2005.


Decision

   8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


   9. The appeal is treated as abandoned. No further action is taken by  the
      Tribunal in relation to the appeal.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     25 September 2014
