



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/15685/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On: 2nd December 2014                    |On:  3rd December 2014            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                           Adolphe Nanguep Wandji
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Wainwright, Counsel instructed by the Law Klinic
                       LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Cameroon date  of  birth  3rd  September
    1975. He appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against a decision to  refuse  to  issue
    him with a residence card confirming his  right  of  residence  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.


 2. The Appellant had claimed to be  married  to  a  Ms  Rebecca  Makon,  a
    Spanish national. They submitted various documents which  purported  to
    demonstrate that they had been  married  according  to  the  custom  of
    Cameroon. The Respondent was  not  satisfied  that  this  marriage  was
    considered lawful and refused the application.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied as to  the  validity  of  the
    Cameroonian customary marriage. Furthermore the Appellant had  produced
    no evidence at all that  this  marriage  would  be  recognised  by  the
    authorities in Spain, the country from which Ms Makon derived her  free
    movement rights. This being contrary to the  requirements  set  out  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 the appeal was
    dismissed.

 4. Permission was granted on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal  may
    have erred in its  approach  to  whether  the  customary  marriage  was
    considered valid in Cameroon.  Specifically there is doubt raised as to
    whether the  validity  of  such  a  marriage  can  be  determined  with
    reference to the Civil Status Registration Ordinance.

 5. I make no finding about that matter, because I have no evidence  before
    me to indicate either way whether the validity of the marriage  can  be
    assessed with reference  to  the  civil  code.    Whether  or  nor  the
    Tribunal erred in its approach to this question is irrelevant,  because
    its findings on Kareem were perfectly legitimate. There was no evidence
    at all that this marriage would  be  recognised  by  the  Spanish.  The
    appeal had to be dismissed for that reason.

 6. I am told that the Appellant and Ms Makon would like to marry according
    to the laws of the United Kingdom but they are presently unable  to  do
    so because the Home Office  has  retained  his  passport.  There  would
    appear to be no good reason why that remains the case  and  Mr  Bramble
    assures me that there is no obvious obstacle to it  being  returned  to
    him. The Respondent will no doubt act expeditiously  upon  any  request
    made by the Appellant for his passport back.


      Decision

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd December
                                    2014
