
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15513/2014
                                                               IA/15517/2014
                                                               IA/15518/2014
                                                               IA/15519/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House,  Newport    |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

             HARSHANI NISHANI PATHIRANA WIJETUNGE JAYAWARDANAGE
                  JANAKA SUMITH KUMARA WIJENDRA ARCHARIYAGE
                       MALKI BHAGYA WIJENDRA ARCHARIGE
                      MALITH MIRANGA WIJENDRA ARCHARIGE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Davies, Counsel instructed by VMD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Knowles in which he  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,
    citizens of Sri Lanka, against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain.  This  appeal  is  not  subject  to  an
    anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal and neither party invited me
    to make such an order.

 2. The Appellants came to the United Kingdom on 10 October 2010, the First
    Appellant was granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student  and
    the Second, Third and Fourth  Appellants  were  granted  leave  as  her
    dependent spouse and children. On 28 January 2014 the  Appellants  made
    in time applications to vary leave to remain. These  applications  were
    refused on 14 March 2014 by reference to  paragraphs  245ZX,  319C  and
    319H of the Immigration Rules. The Appellants exercised their right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  is  the  appeal  which  came
    before Judge  Knowles  on  24  October  2014  and  was  dismissed.  The
    Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The
    application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 1  April  2015
    in the following terms

         "It is arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  relevant
         provision in the Tier 4 Guidance under the rubric "If your  Tier  4
         sponsor becomes a legacy sponsor ... Before you make an application
         to the Home Office" (version 08/2014, page 65 of 79). That  appears
         to recognise that a CAS will remain valid and can be  used  despite
         the downgrading of the sponsor. The Judge applied a subsequent part
         of the Guidance (page 66 of 79)  which  dealt  with  the  situation
         where  an  application  had  already  been  made   prior   to   the
         downgrading, which was not applicable to the first appellant."

Background

 3.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the First Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully as a student and that the Second, Third and Fourth  Appellants
    arrived at the same time as her dependents. Their application  to  vary
    leave to remain was made in time on 28 January 2014 and was accompanied
    by a confirmation of acceptance of studies  (CAS)  in  respect  of  the
    First Appellant. The CAS was assigned on 21 January 2014. At  the  time
    it was issued the sponsoring  college  (Tier  4  Sponsor)  held  Highly
    Trusted Sponsor status. On 22 January 2014  the  sponsor's  status  was
    downgraded to legacy status.

 4. The Appellant's  applications  were  refused  on  14  March  2014.  The
    application was refused because the First Appellant's CAS was issued by
    a legacy sponsor which, the Respondent said, would only be valid if  it
    was assigned to a student who is re-sitting or repeating  a  module  in
    order to complete a course  of  study  already  commenced  whereas  the
    course proposed by the First Appellant  was  a  new  course  at  a  new
    institution.

 5.  In  dismissing  the  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  examined   the
    Respondent's Tier 4 Policy  Guidance  and  considered,  in  particular,
    paragraph 116 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules and having done so
    came to the conclusion that the Respondent's decision was correct.  The
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenge the interpretation of
    the Guidance made by the First-tier Tribunal and it is  on  this  basis
    that leave to appeal has been granted.

Submissions

 6. Mr Richards  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  and  Mr  Davies
    represented the  Appellant.  A  rule  24  response  was  filed  by  the
    Respondent dated 27 April 2015 opposing the appeal.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Davies referred to his written skeleton  argument,
    the Tier 4 Policy Guidance (8/14) and the Tier 4 Guidance for Sponsors.
    There is no dispute over the  chronology.  Paragraph  116(da)  provides
    that the Sponsor must hold Highly Trusted Status where the  application
    is for a new course. Paragraph 116(db) shows that a  CAS  issued  by  a
    legacy sponsor will only be valid if it is issued for completion  of  a
    course already commenced. The Policy Guidance clearly  states  that  if
    the sponsor becomes a legacy sponsor after the CAS was  issued  and  it
    has not yet been used to support an application it will still be valid.



 8. On behalf the Respondent Mr Richards said that  having  considered  the
    skeleton argument and the Policy  Guidance  he  could  not  oppose  the
    appeal.

 9. I said that the appeal against the decision of the First -tier Tribunal
    would be allowed and  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Both representatives  agreed  that  the  decision  should  be
    remade allowing the appeal on the basis that the Respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

Error of law

10. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  concern  a  very  narrow
    issue. The facts are dealt with above. The chronology is clear. The CAS
    was assigned on 21 January 2014 at a time when the sponsor held  Highly
    Trusted Status. This status was downgraded  to  legacy  on  22  January
    2014. The application was made on 28 January 2014.

11. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal because at  the  time  the
    application was made the sponsor did not hold  Highly  Trusted  Status.
    The Appellants contend that this is a misinterpretation of the law. The
    reasons are clearly outlined in the grounds of appeal and the  skeleton
    argument and  were  not  challenged  by  Mr  Richards.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in considering paragraph 20 of the Guidance on the basis
    that the First Appellant already had an application under consideration
    when the sponsor's status was downgraded. The First Appellant  did  not
    have an application under consideration at this stage. Page 65 of 78 of
    the Policy Guidance states

         "If your sponsor becomes a legacy sponsor and you were  assigned  a
         CAS before the sponsor became a legacy sponsor which  has  not  yet
         been used to support an application for leave to enter the  UK  you
         will still be able to apply for leave using the assigned CAS"

12. On the basis of paragraph 116(db) of Appendix A and the CAS should have
    been considered as valid. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law to  find
    otherwise.  On this basis I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

13. Both representatives were content for me  to  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appeal on the basis that the Respondent's decision was not
    in accordance with the law.

Summary

14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

15. I remake the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the
    appeal.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
