
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15047/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2017                      |On 23 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS JCMM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed who, in a decision  promulgated  on  17
    November 2016, allowed the appeal of Ms JCMM.   To  avoid  confusion  I
    will refer to the Secretary of State as  such  throughout  and  to  the
    appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the  claimant  in  this
    appeal.

 3. The claimant is a Dominican national born on [ ] 2004.  She entered the
    United Kingdom in July 2014 on a visit visa with entry clearance  valid
    from 6 July 2014 until 6 January 2015.  On 6 January 2015 the  claimant
    made an application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the
    child of a parent with limited leave to remain.  The Secretary of State
    refused the claimant's application  on  the  basis  that  her  parent's
    application under Appendix  FM  had  been  refused  and  therefore  the
    claimant could not meet the eligibility criteria in E-LTRC.1.6(a),  (b)
    and (c).

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In the decision  promulgated  on  5  August  2016
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed allowed  the  claimant's  appeal.   The
    judge found that the claimant met the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore allowed her appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and on 24 May 2017  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne refused permission to appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    renewed her application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    and on 3  August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds of appeal  assert  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  are
    contradictory.  The claimant's  application  was  refused  because  her
    mother's leave to remain had expired.  The judge notes at  paragraph  9
    that it was the mother's evidence that her leave had  expired  in  June
    2016 and that she had made an as yet unresolved application.   However,
    the judge states at paragraph 10 that the respondent  has  produced  no
    evidence that the mother's leave has expired.  The judge then found, at
    paragraph 12, that at all relevant times the appellant's mother has had
    leave to remain.  This is very odd given that it does not seem to  have
    been in dispute that in fact her leave expired in June  2016.   It  was
    submitted that in terms of practicality it is very difficult to see how
    the Secretary of State can grant leave as a dependant when  the  person
    they are dependent on has no extant leave.  The second ground of appeal
    asserts that the judge found, at paragraph  12,  that  he  can  see  no
    reason why the mother would be refused leave but this was not a  matter
    before him.  He does not know exactly  what  was  submitted  with  that
    application  or  what  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  is  of   that
    application.  The third ground of appeal is that the judge's  reasoning
    in respect of sole responsibility is wholly inadequate.  It is confined
    to paragraph 14 and completely fails to address  the  position  of  the
    claimant's father.


 7. In oral submissions Mr Tufan submitted that  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter was wrong because at the date  of  that  letter  the  claimant's
    mother's application had not been refused.  Mr Tufan accepted  that  at
    the date of the application the claimant's mother had extant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom valid until 24 June  2016.   He  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding that the  claimant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules because the  judge  erred
    with regard to the mother's extant leave and  also  because  the  judge
    failed  to  make  any  or  any  adequate  findings  on  all  the  other
    requirements that the claimant had to meet  in  order  to  satisfy  the
    Rules.  He submitted that a judge has to  be  satisfied  that  all  the
    conditions have been met before a finding can be made that the claimant
    has met the Immigration Rules.  He submitted that the judge had  looked
    perfunctorily at the documents merely setting out documents  that  were
    in the bundle at paragraph 5 of the decision.  No  findings  have  been
    made as to whether or not the claimant meets the financial requirements
    of the Rules.  The judge has not considered whether  all  the  relevant
    documents that needed to be submitted in accordance with Appendix FM or
    whether they were in the specified form as required by  Appendix  FM-SE
    and no specific findings had been made by the judge  on  these  points.
    He submitted that the judge has not set out any or any adequate reasons
    with regard to the requirement that  the  claimant's  mother  had  sole
    responsibility for her.  He submitted that in E-LTRC.1.6, when  looking
    at the eligibility criteria, you have to look at  Part  8  which  deals
    with applications to remain in the United Kingdom.  With  reference  to
    paragraph 301 and 301(b) he submitted that the claimant had arrived  in
    the United Kingdom for a six month period as a visitor.  She  had  been
    living in the Dominican Republic with her grandmother.   He  asked  the
    question can a mother whose child is in the United Kingdom purely as  a
    visitor have sole responsibility.


 8. He submitted that at the date of the hearing the claimant's mother  did
    not have extant leave because it had expired by then.  The Secretary of
    State cannot grant dependent  leave  when  the  person  upon  whom  the
    dependent leave is made does not  themselves  have  extant  leave.   He
    submitted that the suggestion that the appellant's mother had 3C  leave
    cannot be relied upon.  He referred to the case of  QI  (Pakistan)  and
    submitted that extension of leave until the application is decided does
    not grant a person any specific form of leave. Mr Tufan referred to the
    case of Greenwood (No. 2).  He submitted that the judge  ought  not  to
    have concluded that the appeal was in accordance with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He submitted that the judge should have found that the decision
    was not in accordance with the law (put this in relevant place).

 9. Ms Childs submitted that the claimant's  mother  had  extant  leave  by
    virtue of 3C.  She submitted that the claimant could be  granted  leave
    in line with the sponsor's extant leave because leave could be  granted
    for a shorter period of time than requested.

10. She submitted  that  with  regard  to  the  sole  responsibility  issue
    permission had not been granted by Judge McWilliam on this issue. Judge
    McWilliam had very specifically granted permission only in relation  to
    the issue of extant leave.

11. Ms Childs submitted that the Secretary of State now  accepts  that  the
    mother had leave at the date of the decision.   In  QI  (Pakistan)  the
    extension of the leave until the application is decided  extends  leave
    on the same terms as was current at the date of the  application.   She
    submitted that at the date of the decision the appeal should have  been
    heard under the old Rules which enabled the judge to  consider  whether
    or not there was a breach of the Immigration Rules.  She submitted that
    the judge does go on to look at the date of the hearing.  The  claimant
    could still be granted leave  as  a  dependant  because  the  3C  leave
    extended the leave of the parent under its original terms and therefore
    the claimant could have been granted leave on the basis of her parent's
    3C leave.  She submitted that the judge had not reversed the burden  of
    proof but that in any event that could not be material.  Reference  was
    made to the case of QI (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  614  which
    confirms that Section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  afforded  the
    claimant's mother an extension of her original leave until such time as
    her application was decided.  The Secretary of State provided  evidence
    that the appellant's mother  was  refused  leave  to  remain  in  2013.
    However, the appellant's mother gave  evidence  that  she  subsequently
    returned to the Dominican Republic to make an application for leave  to
    enter as the spouse of her husband and was granted leave to enter on 24
    September 2013 to 24 June 2016.  Therefore  the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain in 2013 did not prevent the claimant's mother from having  leave
    at the date of the decision and the date of  the  hearing.   The  judge
    merely finds  that  they  have  not  provided  any  evidence  that  the
    appellant's mother was refused leave to remain after  this  date  which
    would be necessary in order for her to no  longer  have  had  leave  to
    remain.

12. It is asserted that if the judge has  erred  then  this  error  is  not
    material.  The decision of the judge  was  not  in  error.   Since  the
    hearing the Secretary of State has granted the claimant's mother  leave
    to remain in any event which confirms that she has had continuous leave
    since 24 September 2013.

13. In support of the submission that permission to appeal on the ground of
    sole responsibility has not been granted, reference  was  made  to  the
    case of VV (Grounds of  appeal)  Lithuania  [2016]  UKUT  53  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 23.  She submitted  that  even  if  the  matter  were  to  be
    considered in this appeal the reasons provided are adequate.  The  case
    of VV sets out the necessary considerations  when  deciding  whether  a
    judge provided adequate reasons.  Reference is made to paragraph 24  of
    VV .

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was substantial evidence
    that the appellant's mother has sole responsibility at paragraph 14  of
    the decision.  The evidence before the judge in relation to this is set
    out fully at paragraph 5 of his decision.  It is asserted  that  it  is
    not necessary for the judge to assess each  document  in  turn  in  his
    written decision.  Alternatively even if there is insufficient evidence
    of sole responsibility this was not material.  There is ample  evidence
    that the appellant normally lives with her mother and not her father as
    set out at paragraph 5 of the First-tier Tribunal decision.   Reference
    is made to E-LTRC.1.6(b):
         "The  applicant's  parent  has  had  and  continues  to  have  sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing or the applicant normally
         lives with this parent and not their other parent."

    Therefore  it  is  submitted  that  any  errors  in   terms   of   sole
    responsibility would not be material.  With regard  to  the  submission
    that the claimant might not be able to demonstrate other parts  of  the
    Rules were met, she submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    provided any evidence or raised that issue.   At  paragraph  5  of  the
    decision the judge sets out all the evidence that was considered.

15. An application for costs  against  the  respondent  was  made.   It  is
    submitted that the Secretary of State has the capacity to check whether
    the appellant's mother did have leave to remain before  submitting  her
    grounds.  It is asserted that the  grounds  appear  to  show  that  the
    respondent checked the status of the appellant's mother's  application.
    This check would have shown that the claimant's mother had 3C leave  at
    the time of the hearing as set out above.  It is asserted  that  it  is
    unacceptable that the respondent would submit grounds that they knew or
    should have known was not a material error.  Reference is made  to  the
    case of Nixon (Permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC)  at
    paragraph 9 where it was found that:

         "There can be no substitute for  properly  tailored  and  carefully
         crafted grounds of appeal which clearly reflect the  unique  facts,
         features and issues pertaining to the individual case."

16. It is asserted that the claimant has  alerted  the  respondent  to  the
    error in the Rule 24 response and  provided  proof  of  the  claimant's
    mother's immigration status.  The Secretary of State is covered by  the
    Civil Code of Conduct which requires them to  set  out  the  facts  and
    relevant issues truthfully and correct any errors as soon as  possible.
    This has not been complied with.  Furthermore, it was incumbent on  the
    respondent to review the grounds of appeal after receiving the Rule  24
    response as per VV (Grounds  of  appeal)  where  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McCloskey set out the following:

         "(3) Where permission to appeal is  granted,  an  Appellant  should
             review whether the grounds of appeal are genuinely arguable in
             light of any response  from  the  Respondent  to  the  appeal.
             Whether  or  not  the  original  grounds  are  pursued  it  is
             generally inappropriate to seek to raise new grounds of appeal
             close to the date of the hearing if  for  example  that  would
             cause unfairness to the Respondent or result  in  the  hearing
             being adjourned."

17. In light of the above it is submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    conduct is unreasonable.  The claimant has had to defend  and  fund  an
    appeal brought by the Secretary of State on an erroneous basis.



 Discussion

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out at paragraph 5 the documents that
    had been submitted.  The judge set out correctly, at paragraph 8,  that
    in immigration appeals the burden is on  the  appellant  and  she  must
    discharge that burden on the balance of probabilities.  This was a very
    short decision extending to only 14  paragraphs.  With  regard  to  the
    confusion regarding whether or not the  claimant's  mother  had  extant
    leave the judge sets out:

         "6.  The respondent has submitted a bundle of  documents  for  this
             appeal which includes a printout of the Home  Office  database
             for the appellant and her mother and the appellant's  mother's
             entry clearance details that show  that  entry  clearance  was
             issued to her for 33 months from 24th September 2013  to  24th
             June 2016.  I have taken all the  documents  into  account  in
             reaching my decision.

         ...

         9.   In evidence before me the appellant's mother claimed that  she
             had been granted entry clearance as a partner and entered  the
             UK in October 2013, which expired in June 2016.  She had  made
             an application for further leave to remain and had put in  her
             husband's documents that show that his business makes  profits
             in excess of �34,000.  The appellant's mother stated that  her
             daughter's father had not had any contact with her since  2006
             and that her mother was looking after her  daughter.   However
             her mother had slipped and disc and was no longer able to look
             after her daughter.

         10.  The decision letter is dated 31st  March  2015  and  thus  the
             appellant falls into the old regime of grounds  of  appeal  to
             include that the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
             Immigration  Rules.   The  sole  reason  that  the  respondent
             refused the appellant's application has been based on the fact
             that the appellant's mother/parent  does  not  have  leave  to
             remain.  I find that the respondent has produced  no  evidence
             of this.

         11.  I note that the respondent has  produced  an  extract  from  a
             database search which shows that leave to remain  was  refused
             in February 2013, but  I  note  that  the  appellant's  mother
             explained that and that after the refusal  she  went  back  to
             Dominica and applied for entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  from
             there which I have seen through the respondent's documents was
             issued in September 2013.  I note  that  there  are  no  other
             entries that the appellant's mother has been refused leave  to
             remain in 2015 or in 2016.

         12.  I  find  that  the  appellant's  mother  as  at  the  date  of
             application,  decision  and  date  of  hearing  at  all  other
             relevant times has had lawful leave to remain in the UK as the
             spouse of a British citizen.

19. The finding of the judge was correct (although it is not  clear  if  he
    considered that the reason, at the date of the hearing,  that  she  had
    lawful leave to remain was because it had been extended by section 3C).
    As became clear  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  the  claimant's
    mother's leave was extended by virtue of section  3C  because  she  had
    made an in time application to vary her leave. Mr Tufan  accepted  that
    the reasons  for  refusal  letter  was  incorrect  to  state  that  the
    claimant's parent's application had been refused. There was  a  refusal
    in February 2013 but limited leave to enter was  subsequently  granted.
    There is no error of law with regard to this ground of appeal.

20. With regard to the argument that leave could not be granted whilst  the
    outcome of the claimant's mother's application was unknown I accept  Ms
    Child's submission that a shorter period of time could be  granted  and
    that in accordance with  the  decision  in  QI  (Pakistan)  section  3C
    (paragraph 14) 'The leave as extended is not a new or different species
    of leave; the existing leave is extended' so leave could be granted  on
    the basis of the mother's original leave.

21. The second ground of appeal falls away as, even if it was an error  for
    the judge to consider what  the  outcome  of  the  claimant's  mother's
    application was likely to be, it is not  material  as  the  mother  had
    extant leave.

22. The third ground of appeal is that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons regarding the finding  on  sole  responsibility.  The  claimant
    argues that permission to appeal has not been  granted  in  respect  of
    this ground of appeal. Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  did  not  refuse
    permission on grounds 2 or 3. There was no specific restriction on  the
    grant of permission. If Judge McWilliam intended  to  refuse  to  grant
    permission on those grounds a specific indication was necessary.

23. The claimant asserts that the Secretary of State has not  produced  any
    evidence that this issue was raised at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    as a substantial issue between the parties referring to VV (Grounds  of
    appeal).  This was a very short decision and it is not clear  from  the
    decision itself what submissions were made as there  is  no  record  of
    them within the decions. However, it  is  clear  that  this  issue  was
    raised by  the  claimant's  mother  as  is  evidenced  by  her  witness
    statement where she sets out in detail why the  claimant's  grandmother
    can no longer look after her, how her biological father has  played  no
    role in her upbringing and how there is no other person  who  can  look
    after her (paragraphs 7-10 and 12). The judge  simply  states  'I  have
    also seen substantial evidence that the  appellant's  mother  has  sole
    responsibility for the appellant and that her grandmother  was  looking
    after her which she can no longer do'. In the grounds it is argued that
    the judge fails to address the position of the claimant's father.  This
    was a case of a child entering the UK purely as a visitor for 6 months.
    She had been  living  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  with  her
    grandmother before entry. With that background on the face of  it  this
    reasoning could be considered to be inadequate sufficient to amount  to
    an error of law. The judge does not set out in any detail  anywhere  in
    the decision whether the evidence was  disputed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in cross examination or in submissions. One has to infer that the
    judge  accepted  the  claimant's  mother's  evidence   and   that   the
    documentary evidence was also accepted. However, I  consider  that  the
    lack of reasoning is on the borderline as there was evidence before the
    judge, in the form of an affidavit from the claimant's father that  her
    mother  has  sole  responsibility,   evidence   that   the   claimant's
    grandmother has a slipped  disc  and  is  unable  to  look  after  her,
    together with the witness statement and oral evidence of the claimant's
    mother which was set out at paragraphs 5 and 9  of  the  decision.  The
    Secretary of State has not indicated that this evidence is insufficient
    to discharge the burden of proof. I consider that,  although  I  accept
    that the reasons for reaching the conclusion are not clear,  the  judge
    did have ample evidence to reach the conclusion and had  set  out  what
    that evidence was earlier in the decision  so  that  the  Secretary  of
    State can ascertain the  reasons  for  the  finding  from  reading  the
    decision as a whole.

24. The judge found that the claimant  met  all  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.
    Mr Tufan argued at the hearing before me that the judge  had  not  made
    findings  on  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    including whether the evidence was in the specified form. This was  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal and no application to amend the grounds
    of appeal was made. I have not considered these arguments. In any event
    the claimant's mother has been granted limited leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner.

25. An application was made for a wasted costs  order.  The  basis  of  the
    application is that the Secretary of State has  acted  unreasonably  in
    submitting grounds that they knew,  or  should  have  known,  were  not
    material errors. The claimant's representative alerted the Secretary of
    State to the error in the rule 24 response. The Secretary of State  has
    not corrected any errors after  receiving  the  rule  24  response  and
    therefore such conduct is unreasonable.

26.  Section  10  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules
    2008,provides:


         10.-(1) The Upper Tribunal may not make an order in respect of
         costs (or, in Scotland, expenses) in proceedings [transferred or
         referred by, or on appeal from,] another tribunal except-

         (3) In other proceedings, the Upper Tribunal may not make an order
         in respect of costs or expenses except-

         ....

         (c) under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act (wasted costs) [and costs
         incurred in applying for such costs];

         (d) if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party or its
         representative has acted unreasonably in bringing, defending or
         conducting the proceedings."


27. There must be a casual nexus between the conduct complained of and  the
    costs incurred.  It  is  for  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  the
    behaviour is unreasonable. In Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] Ch 205  the
    court set out what unreasonable means in the context  of  wasted  costs
    (paragraph 232 d-h):

         Unreasonable also means what it has been understood to mean in this
         context for at least half a century. The expression aptly describes
         conduct which is vexatious,  designed  to  harass  the  other  side
         rather than advance the resolution of the  case  and  it  makes  no
         difference that the conduct is the product of  excessive  zeal  and
         not  improper  motive.  But  conduct   cannot   be   described   as
         unreasonable  simply  because  it  leads  in  the   event   to   an
         unsuccessful  result  or  because   other   more   cautious   legal
         representatives would have acted  differently. The  acid  test  is
         whether the conduct permits of a reasonable explanation. If so, the
         course adopted may be regarded as optimistic and as reflecting on a
         practitioner's judgment, but it is not unreasonable ..........'


28. There has been confusion about the claimant's mother's leave - not just
    on the part of the Secretary of State. In  the  claimant's  solicitor's
    letter of 29 July 2016 it is stated that her 'leave to  remain  expired
    on 24 June 2016'. Her witness statement, as referred to by  the  judge,
    says that her leave expired on 24 June  2016.  In  granting  permission
    Upper Tribunal judge McWilliam considered that it was arguable that the
    claimant's mother did not have leave to remain and  arguable  that  the
    judge erred. There was no discussion or analysis of the  basis  of  the
    claimant's mother's leave after  it  had  been  said  by  her  and  her
    representative to have expired  on  24  June  2016  (i.e.  pursuant  to
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971) in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.


29. Further, there were also other grounds being pursued. The threshold  is
    described in Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal - new powers)  [2015]
    UKFTT 00059 (IAC)27 as being reserved to the clearest  cases.  A  party
    being wrong or misguided is not the same as being unreasonable.

30. I do not consider that the Secretary of State has acted unreasonably in
    this case. No order as to costs is made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed. There  were  no  material
errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal such that it should be  set  aside.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands. No  order  as  to  costs  is
made.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 22 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw











