
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2017                             |On 11 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         MOHAMMED MAFUZUL ISLAM KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cohen sitting at Taylor  House  on  15  June
    2016) whereby the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his human rights  claim
    under Article 8 ECHR, both by reference to Appendix FM and Rule  276ADE
    of the Rules, and also outside the Rules. The claim had been  triggered
    by the decision of the Secretary of State to remove him  for  obtaining
    his previous grant of leave by deception (reliance on an  ETS  language
    test result fraudulently obtained through  the  use  of  a  proxy  test
    taker).  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction,
    and I do not consider  that  the  appellant  requires  to  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 10  November  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for, in summary, the following reasons:

         1.   The judge arguably ought to have set out a  full  analysis  of
             the application of the criteria pursuant to s117, and a fuller
             analysis of the factors relating to proportionality.

         3.   The Judge referred to  the  question  of  whether  there  were
             insurmountable obstacles preventing the sponsor from returning
             with the appellant to Bangaldesh to continue with family  life
             there. But it  was  unclear  to  what  extent  the  Judge  had
             attached  weight  to  the  family  and  private  life  of  the
             appellant established in the UK, before  concluding  that  the
             appeal should be dismissed.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, the appellant appeared in person. He told me he  had  settled  the
    application for permission himself, without the assistance of a lawyer.
    Understandably, he had nothing to add by way of  legal  submissions  to
    the grant of permission. He  relied  on  the  reasoning  of  the  judge
    granting permission.

 4. He drew my attention to a witness  statement  which  he  had  made  and
    served on the Upper Tribunal. His wife had given birth to a daughter on
    26 September 2016. On 17 October 2016 his wife had applied for leave to
    remain consequential on the birth of the child, and her application was
    still pending. Although not mentioned by  him  in  his  statement,  the
    appellant said that their child had been born  two  months  prematurely
    and so required special  care.  The  medical  facilities  in  his  home
    country were "not good"; and so, he indicated, it would be contrary  to
    the child's best interests to require him, and  hence  his  spouse  and
    child, to return  to  Bangladesh  at  this  time  when  the  child  was
    accessing the superior medical treatment she required on the NHS.

 5. I explained to the appellant that the matters which he had raised  fell
    outside the scope of this appeal, which was whether the judge had erred
    in law in his disposal of the appeal on the facts as they stood at  the
    date of the hearing before him.

 6. After hearing from Ms Brocklesby-Weller, I ruled that no error  of  law
    was made out. I gave my reasons for so finding in  short  form,  and  I
    undertook to provide reasons in writing in due course.



Reasons for finding no error of law

 7. The relevant facts are adequately set out  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Cohen, and it is not necessary to repeat them. Having regard  to  these
    facts and to the  relevant  domestic  jurisprudence  on  the  topic  of
    Article 8 ECHR, the claim did not have a realistic prospect of success,
    even taken at its highest. No Tribunal  properly  directed  could  have
    reached any other conclusion than that the appeal should  be  dismissed
    upon the factual matrix as it stood at the date of the hearing.

 8. The appellant did not qualify for  leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules
    because inter alia he failed to meet the  suitability  requirement  and
    his spouse was not present and settled here. She had entered the UK  on
    a temporary basis as a  student.  In  his  witness  statement  for  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the appellant did not  dispute  that
    he had used a proxy test taker.  He simply relied on the fact  that  he
    had not been given 60 days' notice to find a new sponsor. But this  was
    irrelevant, as the judge held at paragraph [9]  of  his  decision.  His
    leave was revoked in December  2014  when  his  use  of  deception  was
    discovered. So he was not entitled to be given 60 days' notice to  find
    a new sponsor.

 9. The appellant could only succeed in a human rights  claim  outside  the
    Rules if there were compelling circumstances which meant that he should
    nonetheless be granted Article 8 relief,  despite  not  being  able  to
    satisfy  any  applicable  Rule.  The  evidence  did  not  disclose  any
    compelling circumstances. The judge did not discuss the public interest
    considerations arising under Section 117B, but this was not material as
    either the relevant consideration was adverse to his case or at best it
    was neutral.  If this  had  been  a  finely  balanced  case,  a  fuller
    analysis of issues pertaining to proportionality might well  have  been
    called for. But on the facts of this case  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    sufficiently clear, and he did not overlook any material  matter  which
    might have yielded a different outcome. The Judge gave adequate reasons
    for finding against the appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

