

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15081/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 January 2014                             |On 5 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MR ARPIT MALHOTRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Samra, Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher  dismissed  this  appeal  against
   refusal to vary leave.  A removal decision purporting to  be  made  under
   section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006  on  19
   April 2013 was withdrawn on behalf of the respondent at the hearing.

2) According to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  applied
   for leave to remain in the United Kingdom in  January  2013  outside  the
   Immigration Rules because he wanted  to  continue  his  studies  and  was
   awaiting a response from various universities.  As part  of  the  refusal
   decision a  one  stop  notice  was  issued.   An  appeal  was  submitted,
   following which a bundle of documentary evidence was served on behalf  of
   the appellant.  From this bundle it was apparent that the  appellant  was
   married in the UK to a British citizen on 25 July 2013.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could  not
   satisfy paragraph S-LTR.2.2 of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
   because he had failed to disclose a material  fact  in  relation  to  his
   application.  This was his marriage  on  25  July  2013.   This  was  not
   disclosed to the respondent until 10 October 2013.  Although the  refusal
   under paragraph S-LTR.2.2 was discretionary, there was no reason why  the
   normal course of refusal should not be followed.

4) The judge nevertheless accepted on the evidence  that  the  marriage  was
   genuine and subsisting.

5) The judge went on to consider the relationship  under  Appendix  FM.   He
   pointed out that the financial documents provided by  the  appellant  did
   not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   The  judge   further
   considered paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, in terms of which the appellant
   had to show that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
   his partner continuing outside the UK.  In  this  regard  the  judge  was
   referred to medical evidence in relation to  the  appellant's  mother-in-
   law.  The judge found, however, that this evidence was not up-to-date and
   did not state either the care she required or the overall prognosis.  The
   judge was not satisfied that if the  appellant's  mother-in-law  required
   care there was no-one else  who  could  perform  this  role.   The  judge
   accepted that as a British citizen the  appellant's  wife  could  not  be
   required to leave the UK.  On the other hand, she married  the  appellant
   at a time when he had no other status than  an  application  pending  for
   leave to remain outside the Rules.  Both parties should have  been  aware
   that the appellant's immigration status was precarious.   The  judge  was
   not satisfied on the available evidence that  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles to family life continuing in India.

6) The judge did not then proceed to consider  the  appellant's  private  or
   family life outside the Rules under Article 8.  This was because  Article
   8 was not specified in the original grounds of appeal.   The  appellant's
   representative was instructed late and did not have sight of the  grounds
   of appeal until the day of the hearing.  The  appellant's  representative
   made an application for the grounds to be varied to include Article 8 but
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal refused this application.  The judge
   did not consider it reasonable for  the  representative  to  have  waited
   until the hearing to make this application.  In addition, as the  removal
   decision had been withdrawn on behalf of the  respondent,  there  was  no
   prejudice to the appellant from not considering Article 8  as  Article  8
   grounds could be raised if and when the point arose when a lawful removal
   decision was made.

7) Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal arguable erred in refusing to allow  the  grounds  of
   appeal to be varied.  This was alleged to be  a  procedural  irregularity
   which made a material difference to the outcome of  the  appeal  and  was
   arguably unfair.

8) It was pointed out in the application for permission to appeal  that  the
   judge had accepted that the parties were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship.  The judge ought  then  to  have  considered  in  terms  of
   Appendix FM whether the appellant met the relevant criteria in EX.1.  The
   judge was wrong to consider the suitability requirement under  S-LTR  and
   should have gone on to  consider  the  financial  requirements  under  E-
   LTRP.3.1.

Submissions

9) A skeleton argument was lodged on behalf of the  appellant  in  which  it
   was stated that the proper approach for the  judge  would  have  been  to
   consider the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  then  to  make  an
   assessment under Article 8.  Reference was made to the case of Kabia (MF:
   para 298 -"exceptional circumstances") [2013] UKUT 00569.  Reference  was
   also made to the respondent's IDI on paragraph EX.1 in  relation  to  the
   meaning of exceptional circumstances.  The skeleton argument referred  to
   the case of MM [2013] EWHC (Admin) 1900  with  regard  to  the  financial
   requirements under Appendix FM.

10) At the hearing before me Mr Samra made a submission  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant.  He said that he was instructed for the hearing on 14  October
   before the First-tier Tribunal only on 27 September.   This  left  little
   more than two weeks for preparation.  He  did  not  see  the  grounds  of
   appeal until they were read out by the judge at the hearing.  The grounds
   included the Immigration Rules and referred to paragraph 276ADE.

11) Mr Samra submitted that the proper test was a two stage  test  in  which
   the Rules were looked at first and then Article 8.   The  judge  did  not
   properly consider either stage of this test, although the  judge  made  a
   positive finding on the relationship.  The judge found that there were no
   insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being  carried  on  in  India
   notwithstanding the appellant's  evidence,  including  medical  evidence.
   Since the hearing further medical  evidence  had  been  produced  as  the
   appellant's mother-in-law had been diagnosed with terminal cancer  and  a
   fresh application had been made.  Mr Samra submitted that the  judge  did
   not follow the two stage approach in accordance with Green (Article  8  -
   new rules) [2013] UKUT 00254.

12) The question arose as to whether the proper  approach  under  Article  8
   would have been to consider whether the appellant could return  to  India
   to apply for entry clearance.  Mr  Samra  responded  that  this  was  not
   satisfactory because the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  concluded
   that the appellant had  failed  to  disclose  a  material  fact  in  this
   application.  Mr Mangion confirmed that  this  would  count  against  the
   appellant under paragraph 320(7B).

13) In his submission for the respondent Mr Mangion referred to the  judge's
   reasoning at paragraph 3 of the determination, in which he said  that  as
   the Section 47 decision had been withdrawn the appellant  would  have  an
   opportunity at a later stage to assert his Article 8 rights.  Mr  Mangion
   referred to the case of Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ 159.  Mr Mangion was  asked
   if a section 120 notice had been served  on  the  appellant  but  he  was
   uncertain whether  it  had  or  not.   According  to  the  determination,
   however, at paragraph 13, the judge records that a "one stop notice"  was
   issued to the appellant with the refusal decision.

14) Mr Mangion referred to MF  (Nigeria)  on  the  issue  of  insurmountable
   obstacles.  He accepted that this could be  equated  with  reasonableness
   but said there was not an obvious error of law in  the  determination  in
   this regard.  He submitted that the judge did not err in failing to  make
   a freestanding finding under Article 8.

15) Mr Samra replied by pointing out that at the hearing  both  parties  had
   requested an adjournment and this was refused.  The  outcome  might  have
   been different if the appellant had had the opportunity of  showing  that
   his mother-in-law was largely dependent on the  sponsor.  An  application
   would be made, however, to lodge new evidence.  It was put  to  Mr  Samra
   that even if the appellant's case was taken at its highest, it would  not
   be disproportionate to expect the appellant to return to India  to  apply
   for entry clearance.  In response Mr Samra sought to  rely  on  Chikwamba
   [2008] UKHL 40 and Hayat EWCA Civ 1054.  He said there was also an  issue
   of delay, in relation to which he sought to rely on  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]
   UKHL 41.

Discussion

16) I was referred on behalf of the appellant to the case of Kabia in  terms
   of which an Article 8 claim outside the Rules is likely to  succeed  only
   where removal would resulting unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
   appellant or their family.  In an appeal like this, even where the  judge
   has found that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship between the
   appellant and his spouse, it would still need to be shown that there were
   unjustifiably harsh consequences, or  very  compelling  reasons,  in  the
   language  of  MF  (Nigeria),  for   finding   that   removal   would   be
   disproportionate.

17) Nevertheless, before a Tribunal can make a decision under Article  8  or
   under the Immigration Rules it is necessary to have a  fair  hearing.   I
   have considerable reservations about the course taken by the Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal in hearing this appeal.  There clearly was an Article
   8 issue before the judge, namely the appellant's marriage, but the  judge
   refused to allow the grounds to be varied to include Article  8.   Before
   examining the reasons given by the judge for refusing  the  variation,  I
   would observe that under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 the judge
   was bound to act in a way that was not incompatible with the Human Rights
   Convention.  It may be inferred from this that if there  was  an  obvious
   Article 8 point, the judge should have considered it.

18) Instead the judge considered that the appellant would be able  to  plead
   Article 8 in a later appeal if a  removal  decision  was  served  in  due
   course.  Mr Mangion considered that this was a proper course of action in
   accordance with the case of Mirza and he  was  uncertain  as  to  whether
   there had been a one  stop  notice  served  or  not.   The  determination
   provides the answer to this question, however, as the judge states  there
   was such a notice.  The appellant was therefore  entitled  to  raise  the
   issue of his marriage under the  one  stop  procedure  and  in  terms  of
   section 85(2) of the 2002 Act the judge ought to have considered it.

19) The case of Mirza is authority for  the  point  that  the  Secretary  of
   State is not required to make a removal decision  at  the  same  time  or
   shortly after the decision to refuse leave to remain.  As was pointed out
   by the Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 at paragraph 67, however,  a
   matter raised in response to  a  one  stop  notice  can  legitimately  be
   treated as constituting a ground of appeal even it was not raised  before
   or decided by the Secretary of State.  On this basis instead  of  relying
   on the Immigration Rules to justify leave to remain,  the  appellant  can
   rely on a Human Rights ground (paragraph 68).

20) Furthermore, had the  judge  followed  the  two  stage  approach  in  MF
   (Nigeria) then the judge should have considered the  appeal  outwith  the
   Rules.  This is a further indication that the proper approach would  have
   been to consider the appeal under Article 8.

21) I have an additional difficulty with the judge's decision in respect  of
   his finding under paragraph S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix FM.  This concerned the
   alleged failure by the appellant to disclose his  relationship  with  the
   sponsor in his application for leave to remain made in January 2013.  The
   point was raised only  at  the  hearing,  presumably  by  the  Presenting
   Officer, who did not receive the  appellant's  bundle  referring  to  the
   existence of the marriage until either shortly before the hearing  or  on
   the day of the hearing itself.  The Presenting Officer had in fact  asked
   for more time to consider the documentary evidence  given  that  the  new
   issue of marriage had been raised.

22) I note from the findings made by the  judge  that  the  application  for
   leave to remain was made in January 2013 but the marriage  did  not  take
   place until 25 July 2013.  It must be concluded from  this  that  at  the
   time the appellant made his application he was not married.  Furthermore,
   the appellant and sponsor do not appear to be been living  together  even
   at the date of the application as the judge referred at paragraph  15  to
   Facebook messages being passed between them.  Accordingly, if at the time
   of making the application the sponsor was neither the appellant's  spouse
   nor his cohabitee, the question arises whether the  appellant  was  under
   any obligation to mention  the  existence  of  a  relationship  with  the
   sponsor. Furthermore, if the issue addressed by the judge under paragraph
   S-LTR.2.2 had arisen prior to the hearing, the appellant would  have  had
   notice of it and been in a better position to respond to it.

23) I am satisfied that there has been procedural unfairness in the  conduct
   of this appeal amounting to an error of law by refusing  a  variation  in
   the grounds of appeal and by failing to consider Article 8.   I  consider
   also that there has been unfairness in relation to  the  judge's  finding
   under Paragraph S-LTR.2.2.

24) As I have already stated, even though a case may appear to be weak,  the
   appellant is entitled to a fair hearing in which to make out his case  as
   best he can.  In the circumstances of this appeal I am not satisfied that
   the appellant had a fair hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
   proper course is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
   under Practice Statement 7.2.  None of the findings made by the Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal should be preserved.  Although the judge  made  a
   finding in favour of the appellant to the effect that  his  marriage  was
   genuine and subsisting, I consider that in order for the  parties  to  be
   afforded a fair hearing following remittal none of the  findings  can  be
   allowed to stand.

Conclusions

25) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point
   of law such that it is set aside and will be remitted to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be remade before a judge other than Judge Fisher.

Anonymity

26) No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and I do  not
   consider that there is a need for an anonymity order at this stage.






Signed                                             Date 28/02/2014


Judge of the Upper Tribunal

