
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15707/2015
                                                               IA/15710/2015
                                                               IA/15712/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th October 2016                           |On 18th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GaganDEEP KAUR (1)
                             MANPREET SINGH (2)
                              SAMPAN SINGH (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Palmer of Counsel, instructed by Jasvir Jutla &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of  Judge  Garbett
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 5th November  2015.



 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FTT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are Indian citizens.  The First Claimant, born 30th April
    1970, is the mother of the Second and Third  Claimants,  born  9th  May
    1993 and 5th November 1997 respectively.   The  Claimants  are  adults,
    although the Third Claimant was a minor when the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was made and at the time of the FTT hearing.

 4. The First Claimant was granted a visit visa valid between 2nd May  2005
    and 2nd November 2005.  The Second and  Third  Claimants  were  granted
    visit visas between 1st July 2005 and 1st January 2006.  The  Claimants
    entered the United Kingdom together in August 2005, together  with  the
    husband of the First Claimant, the  father  of  the  Second  and  Third
    Claimants.  He is not a party to  this  appeal.   Home  Office  records
    indicate that he submitted an application for naturalisation  in  April
    2006 which was refused on 14th August 2006  because  he  had  submitted
    fraudulent documentation.  Three years later  he  submitted  a  further
    application for indefinite leave to remain  based  on  long  residency,
    which was refused in January 2015.

 5. On 28th January 2010 the Claimants applied for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom relying upon family and private life.  Both  the  Second
    and Third Claimants were minors when this application was made.

 6. The application was refused on 9th April 2015.  The Secretary of  State
    found  that  the  Claimants  could  not  satisfy  Appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules in relation to family life.  The Secretary  of  State
    also  found  that  the  First  Claimant  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1) in relation  to  private  life  because  she  had  not  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years, and there
    would be no very significant obstacles to her integration into India.

 7.  The  Second  and  Third  Claimants   could   not   satisfy   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) because although they  were  under  18  at  the  time  of
    application, they had not lived in the UK for at least seven  years  at
    the date of application.

 8. The Secretary of State considered Article  8  outside  the  immigration
    rules and did not accept that there were any exceptional  circumstances
    that would justify granting leave to  remain  outside  the  immigration
    rules.

 9. The Claimants appealed to the FTT and the appeals were  heard  together
    on 2nd November 2015.  The FTT found  the  appeals  could  not  succeed
    under the immigration rules, either in  relation  to  Appendix  FM,  or
    paragraph 276ADE(1).  The appeals were also considered under Article  8
    of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the  1950  Convention)
    outside  the  immigration  rules,  and  allowed,  the  FTT  finding  at
    paragraph 38;

         "38. In conclusion, I find that the  Appellants  have  built  up  a
             significant private life in the United Kingdom and have family
             life here.  They have lived here  as  a  close  loving  family
             since August 2005, for over ten years.  Throughout this period
             they have established strong  ties  within  the  community  in
             which they reside through regular participation  in  community
             functions;  they  are  part  of  a  close-knit  extended  Sikh
             community which provides emotional and  financial  support  to
             them and have developed a social life.  The  private  life  of
             Manpreet and Sampan is considerable."

10. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

11. At the hearing before me on 30th June 2016, I  heard  submissions  from
    both parties regarding error of law.  On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State it was argued that the FTT erred by  allowing  the  appeals  with
    reference to private life, making no reference to  the  fact  that  the
    Claimants had remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully  following  the
    expiry of their visit visas.

12. It was argued  on  behalf  of  the  Claimants  that  the  FTT  had  not
    materially erred in law.  It was accepted that the FTT had  found  that
    the First Claimant had an  abysmal  immigration  history,  but  it  was
    submitted that the Second and Third Claimants should not be blamed  for
    the conduct of their parents, and this was the approach adopted by  the
    FTT, which was the correct approach when assessing proportionality.

13. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of  law
    and setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         "14. The FTT allowed these appeals  with  reference  to  Article  8
             outside the  immigration  rules.   It  was  not  an  error  to
             consider Article 8 outside the rules,  and  the  Secretary  of
             State does not contend otherwise.

         15.  The appeals have been allowed on the basis of the private life
             built up by the Claimants,  and  the  FTT  has  attached  very
             substantial  weight  in  particular,  to  the   private   life
             established by the Second and Third Claimants.

         16.  The FTT set out section 117B of the 2002  Act  in  full.   For
             ease of reference I set out below section 117B(4);

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         17.  The FTT does not apply section 117B(4) even though it is found
             that the Claimants had been in the United Kingdom  unlawfully.
             It  would  appear  that  the  First  Claimant  had  been  here
             unlawfully since the expiry of a visit visa  on  2nd  November
             2005, and the Second and Third Claimants since the  expiry  of
             their visit visas on 1st January 2006.

         18.  The FTT failed  to  satisfactorily  explain  how,  if  statute
             states that little weight must be accorded  to  private  lives
             established while the Claimants have been here unlawfully,  it
             is  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeals  based   upon   their
             'significant' and 'considerable' private lives.

         19.  What caused me to reflect before making  my  decision,  rather
             than making my decision at the hearing, is  the  reference  by
             the FTT to section 117(6) at paragraph 31.  The Third Claimant
             was a minor when the Secretary of State's decision  was  made,
             and before the FTT.  Guidance has now been given on this issue
             by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon and Others [2015] UKUT 674
             (IAC), and PD and Others (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 00108  (IAC).
             Neither of these decisions had been  published  when  the  FTT
             decided these appeals so the FTT did not have the  benefit  of
             that guidance.

         20.  However, although the FTT made reference  to  section  117B(6)
             and also made reference to  the  best  interests  of  a  child
             (which was applicable to the Third Claimant) the FTT  did  not
             satisfactorily analyse and explain why this  was  relevant  to
             all three Claimants.  Paragraph 38 of the FTT decision does in
             fact make it clear that the appeals were allowed on the  basis
             of private lives established  when  the  Claimants  were  here
             unlawfully, and therefore I conclude that the  FTT's  approach
             to Article 8 outside the rules, and consideration  of  section
             117B is flawed  and  amounts  to  a  material  error  of  law.
             Therefore the decision is unsafe and needs to be remade.

         21.  When I announced at  the  hearing  that  I  was  reserving  my
             decision, both representatives agreed that if an error of  law
             was found as contended by the Secretary of State, it would  be
             appropriate  to  have  a  further  hearing  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal and there would be no need for further evidence.

         22.  In my view it is appropriate to have a further hearing  before
             the Upper Tribunal.  It is not  necessary,  having  considered
             paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice Statements, for
             these appeals to be remitted to the FTT.

         23.  The finding made by the FTT that these appeals cannot  succeed
             under the immigration rules is preserved.   The  issue  to  be
             decided at the next hearing will be whether the appeals should
             be allowed with reference to Article 8 outside the immigration
             rules."

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 6th October 2016

14. At the commencement of the hearing I ascertained that  I  had  received
    all documentation, upon which the parties intended to  rely,  and  each
    party had served the other with any documentation upon  which  reliance
    was to be placed.  I had the documentation that  was  before  the  FTT,
    that being the Secretary of State's bundle  with  Annexes  A-H,  and  a
    bundle submitted on behalf of the Claimants containing 93 pages.

15. In addition  I  received  a  supplementary  bundle  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimants comprising eleven  pages,  and  written  submission  from  Mr
    Palmer dated 5th October 2016.  Mr Palmer submitted  case  law,  Deelah
    [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC), and Rajendran [2016]  UKUT  00138  (IAC).   Mr
    Bates submitted Miah [2016] UKUT 00131 (IAC).

The Secretary of State's Oral Submissions

16. Mr Bates relied upon the refusal decision dated 9th April 2015.  I  was
    asked to take into account the very poor  immigration  history  of  the
    First Claimant.  Mr Bates pointed out that the Claimants  are  now  all
    adults although Mr Bates accepted family life existed between the three
    Claimants, which would engage Article 8.

17. Mr Bates submitted that the family would be returned to India as a unit
    and so there would be no disruption to their family life.  I was  asked
    to accept that English is  widely  used  in  education  in  India,  and
    although the Second and Third Claimants had entered the United  Kingdom
    as minors and were now adults, they had  clearly  retained  some  links
    with India, and Mr Bates pointed by way of example to a  reference  for
    the Third Claimant at page 69 of the Appellants' bundle, which referred
    to his responsibilities at his Gurudwara.

The Claimants' Oral Submissions

18. Mr Palmer relied upon his written submissions although he did not  rely
    upon 2.6 and 2.7 of those submissions, as the reference to  GEN.1.9  of
    Appendix FM did not apply to paragraph 276ADE(1).

19. Mr Palmer submitted that the Second and  Third  Claimants  now  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE(1), and this should be taken into  account.   If
    the Second and Third Claimants  could  succeed  under  the  immigration
    rules there was no public interest in their removal.  I  was  asked  to
    accept that the Third Claimant could succeed  under  sub-paragraph  (v)
    and  the  Second  Claimant  under  sub-paragraph  (vi)   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1).  I was asked to take into account the age of the Second  and
    Third Claimants when they entered the United Kingdom and that they have
    been educated in this country, and integrated into British society.

20. I was asked to find it would not be proportionate to remove the  Second
    and Third Claimants given the length of time they  have  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom, and to place substantial weight upon the fact that  the
    Second and Third Claimants could now satisfy the immigration rules.

21. I was therefore asked to allow their  appeals  pursuant  to  Article  8
    outside the immigration rules, and also to  allow  the  appeal  of  the
    First Claimant, on the basis of her family life with her sons.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Resons


23. The FTT found, correctly, that the  Claimants  could  not  satisfy  the
    provisions of Appendix  FM,  regarding  family  life,  nor  could  they
    satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration
    rules in relation to private life.

24. At the date of application, 28th January 2010,  the  Second  and  Third
    Claimants were minors, and they could not satisfy sub-paragraph (iv) of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) because they had not lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for a period of seven years.  They could not benefit  from
    any of the other sub-paragraphs.

25. The First Claimant had not lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  twenty
    years, so could not satisfy sub-paragraph (iii).   It  was  found  that
    there were no very significant obstacles to her integration into India,
    so she therefore could not satisfy sub-paragraph  (vi).   Therefore  as
    conceded by the Claimants' representative at the error of law  hearing,
    the issue before the Upper  Tribunal  was  whether  the  appeals  could
    succeed by reliance upon Article 8 outside the immigration rules.   For
    ease of reference I set out below Article 8 of the 1950 Convention;

         "Right to Respect for Private and Family Life

         (1)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         (2)  There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with
             the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
             interests of national security, public safety or the economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
             crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

26. I consider Article 8 with reference to the following factual findings.

27. The Claimants entered the United Kingdom in August 2005,  lawfully,  in
    possession of visit visas.  They  overstayed  and  have  been  in  this
    country unlawfully, in  the  case  of  the  First  Claimant  since  2nd
    November 2005, and in the case of the Second and Third Claimants  since
    1st January 2006.  The First Claimant was 35  years  of  age  when  she
    entered the United Kingdom, the Second Claimant 12 years  of  age,  and
    the Third Claimant 7 years of age.  The First Claimant is now 46  years
    of age, the Second Claimant 23 years of age, and the Third Claimant  18
    years of age.

28. The Second and  Third  Claimants  have  been  educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Second Claimant has obtained both a Bachelors and Masters
    Degree, and the Third  Claimant  has  started  the  first  year  of  an
    undergraduate Degree at the University of Derby.

29. The Claimants live together.  Very little evidence has been given about
    the status of the First Claimant's husband, the father  of  the  Second
    and Third Claimants.

30. I have considered the guidance in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  and
    note that in paragraph 33 it is stated  that  compelling  circumstances
    would need to be identified to support a claim for grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the new rules in Appendix FM.  This is not as strict  as
    a test of exceptionality or a requirement of very compelling reasons as
    referred to in MF (Nigeria).

31. When considering Article 8 I  have  adopted  the  five  stage  approach
    advocated in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  which  involves  answering  the
    following questions;

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights or freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

32. It is accepted that the Claimants have family life.   I  have  observed
    previously that very little evidence has been given in relation to  the
    husband of the First Claimant, the  father  of  the  Second  and  Third
    Claimants, who arrived in the United Kingdom with the Claimants.  It is
    not however contended that he has any right to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

33. In relation to the family life established by the Claimants, I  do  not
    find that there would be any interference with that family life if  the
    Claimants were removed, as they would be  removed  together  and  could
    continue their family life in India.

34.  In  addition  to  family  life,  I  accept  that  the  Claimants  have
    established a private life in this country.  I find that Article  8  is
    engaged on that basis, but I find that any proposed  interference  with
    the private lives of the Claimants, would be  in  accordance  with  the
    law.  This is because the  Claimants  cannot  satisfy  the  immigration
    rules in order to be granted leave to remain.

35. I find that it is necessary to maintain effective immigration  control,
    in the interests of the economic well-being of the country.

36. The main issue in  these  appeals  relates  to  proportionality.   This
    involves a balancing exercise.

37. I have taken into account the length of time that  the  Claimants  have
    been in this country, and that the Second and Third  Claimants  entered
    as minors and have been educated here.

38. The FTT described the First Claimant as having an  abysmal  immigration
    history and I reach the same conclusion.  The  First  Claimant  entered
    the United Kingdom as an adult, knew  that  she  was  overstaying,  and
    overstaying substantially.  No  attempt  was  made  to  regularise  the
    immigration status of the family until January 2010,  over  four  years
    after the visit visas expired.

39. The Second and Third Claimants are not to be blamed for the actions  of
    their parents.   I  accept  that  they  have  integrated  into  British
    society, and although they were not entitled to  be  educated  in  this
    country, they have been educated, and should be  commended  upon  their
    educational achievements.

40. I have taken into account the wishes of the Claimants to remain in this
    country, and the fact that they have  not  been  back  to  India  since
    August 2005.  I find that they still have links to India, as  they  are
    citizens of that country, I am satisfied that they speak  Punjabi,  and
    they, according to their evidence, have maintained  strong  links  with
    their Gurudwara.  There are no relevant medical issues.  The  education
    received  by  the  second  and  third  claimants  would  assist   their
    employment prospects in India.

41. In considering proportionality I take into account section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

42.  Sub-paragraph  (1)  confirms  that  the   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

43. Sub-paragraph (2) confirms it is in the  public  interest  that  people
    seeking to remain in this country can speak English, and  sub-paragraph
    (3) confirms that it is in the public interest that people  seeking  to
    remain here are financially independent.  I do not accept the Claimants
    have proved that they are financially independent.  There has  been  no
    legal employment, they have received donations and support from friends
    and family and their Gurudwara.  I accept that  the  Second  and  Third
    Claimants can speak fluent English though I do not find that the  First
    Claimant has proved this to be the case.  However, the  Upper  Tribunal
    found in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) that a claimant can  obtain
    no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from  either  section
    117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of their fluency in English, or  the
    strength of their financial resources.

44. Section 117B(4) states that little weight should be given to a  private
    life established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  The private lives  established  by  the  Claimants
    have been established when they have been in this  country  unlawfully.
    I therefore have no choice but to attach little weight to  the  private
    lives that have been established.

45. Therefore notwithstanding the length of time that  the  Claimants  have
    been in this country, nor the educational achievements  of  the  Second
    and Third Claimants, I find that the appeals cannot be allowed  on  the
    basis of the private lives they have established.  It was argued in the
    written submissions made on behalf of the Claimants that the Second and
    Third Claimants were minors for some of the time that they have been in
    the United Kingdom, but the Upper Tribunal in Miah  [2016]  UKUT  00131
    (IAC) confirmed that the factors set out at Section  117B(1)-(5)  apply
    to all, regardless of age.

46. It has also been argued in the written submissions that the Second  and
    Third Claimants now meet the requirements of the immigration rules.   I
    find that is not the  case,  as  the  relevant  date  is  the  date  of
    application not the date of hearing.  If the Second  Claimant  made  an
    application in reliance upon paragraph 276ADE(vi) he would have to show
    very significant obstacles to his integration into India.  In  my  view
    he would however need to make such an application.  The Third  Claimant
    if he made an application pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)  would  be
    able to succeed by showing that he is aged over 18, and under  25,  and
    has spent at least half his life living continuously  in  the  UK.   He
    would, in my view, need to make such an application.

47. I refer to paragraph 57 of SS (Congo) which I accept is not exactly  on
    point.  In that case was it maintained  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should take into account when deciding whether to grant leave to  enter
    outside the immigration rules, that the Sponsors may have a  reasonable
    prospect within a period of weeks or months of being  able  to  satisfy
    the rules.  The Court of Appeal stated;

         "In our judgment, however, this affords very  weak  support  for  a
         claim for grant of LTE outside the rules.  The Secretary  of  State
         remains entitled to enforce the rules in the usual way, to say that
         the rules have not been satisfied and  that  the  applicant  should
         apply again when  the  circumstances  have  indeed  changed.   This
         reflects a fair balance between the interests of the individual and
         the public interest.  The Secretary of State  is  not  required  to
         take a speculative risk as to whether the requirements in the rules
         will in fact be satisfied in the future when deciding what  to  do.
         Generally, it is fair that the  applicant  should  wait  until  the
         circumstances have changed and the requirements in  the  rules  are
         satisfied and then apply, rather than attempting to jump the  queue
         by asking for preferential treatment outside the rules in advance."

48. As I have already accepted, the above is not exactly the  same  set  of
    circumstances as in this appeal, but in my view the principle  is  that
    if it is said that the Second  and  Third  Claimants  can  now  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1) then they should make the  appropriate  application
    for leave to remain based upon that paragraph.

49. I have considered all of the evidence placed before me, and taken  into
    account the oral and written submissions made by both  representatives.
    I have taken into account the educational achievements  of  the  Second
    and Third Claimants, and the character references submitted in support.
     While I find that the appeal of the First Claimant  has  no  merit,  I
    regret that I must also dismiss the appeals of  the  Second  and  Third
    Claimants because the Secretary of State's decision does not  interfere
    with their family lives, as the family will not  be  separated,  and  I
    must attach weight  to  the  public  interest  in  enforcing  effective
    immigration control, and I must attach little  weight  to  the  private
    lives that they have established while they have been in  this  country
    unlawfully.  I find that the decision of the Secretary of State is  not
    disproportionate and does not breach Article 8 of the 1950  Convention.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT contained an error of law  and  was  set  aside.   I
substitute a fresh decision.  The Claimants' appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date    9th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.


Signed                              Date    9th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


