
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15446/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 7 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                          Miss Aubrey Tabares Hablo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                                        (Litigant in Person)


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Vaughan, Counsel instructed via Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who allowed the appeal of the appellant as I will continue  to
    call her,  Miss  Hablo,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    refusing to vary leave to remain and that was a  decision  made  on  17
    April 2013.

2.   Ms Isherwood has made the point that  the  application  seems  to  have
    been for discretionary leave for a year in order to allow the appellant
    to recover from depression and anxiety and it was refused on that basis
    but Mr Vaughan has been able to  clarify  the  position  that  she  was
    unrepresented at that stage and it was only when she sought his  advice
    that she became aware that the relationship she has with her nephew was
    a matter that could be raised and it is clearly a matter that could  be
    raised at the time of the hearing and was properly raised and the judge
    dealt with it.

3.   Essentially the judge at paragraph 24 concluded  that  at  the  present
    time the removal of the appellant would constitute  a  disproportionate
    interference with her right to respect for her private and family  life
    and that her removal would effectively rupture the  de  facto  parental
    relationship that the judge had found she had with her nephew,  prevent
    her from returning to her studies  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  would
    significantly impact on the  quasi-family  unit  of  which  she  is  an
    integral part and concluded that  these  factors  outweighed  the  more
    limited matters as being applicable to the maintenance  of  immigration
    control.

4.   So I think that the judge took into account the factors that had to  be
    balanced.  She set out the  relevant  legal  tests  from  paragraph  15
    onwards noting that the case was not covered by the  Immigration  Rules
    and it was arguable therefore that they required consideration  outside
    the Rules, referring to authorities such as Gulshan, Izuazu, Nagre  and
    Razgar.  She concluded that she had established family  life  with  her
    nephew and that to remove her would clearly interfere with this  family
    life, and, essentially as  so  often  it  came  down  to  a  matter  of
    proportionality.

5.   The Presenting Officer acknowledged that the  fact  that  she  had  all
    times remained with leave and was  a  victim  of  two  failed  colleges
    somewhat lessened the weight to be attached to the legitimate  aim  and
    the judge agreed with this.  She found  that  she  had  come  with  the
    reasonable expectation that she would gain the qualifications  she  had
    paid to study and had shown her ability to study  successfully  in  her
    home country and had clearly been let down by the two colleges  in  the
    United Kingdom which had caused her psychological illness.

         "Whilst", the judge said, "I do not approach this case as a  'near-
         miss' situation it is relevant to set out the relevant  immigration
         context behind this appeal.  So whilst there is some weight  to  be
         attached to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control I
         consider it to be lessened by these circumstances."


6.   The judge went on to make the findings that I have  referred  to  about
    the nature of the relationship she has  with  her  nephew,  the  quasi-
    parental relationship and the particular need for that in light of  the
    fact that his mother  sometimes  works  nightshifts  and  I  think  the
    evidence was that perhaps five or seven days a month her sister is in a
    position to collect him and drop him off at school but  otherwise  she,
    the appellant, does that.

7.   So the appeal was allowed under Article 8 and it is important  I  think
    to look at exactly what was said in the grounds because they are  quite
    brief and in my judgment quite narrow.  It is said that the judge erred
    in law by taking account of an irrelevant  consideration,  namely  that
    the appellant came here with the reasonable expectation that she  would
    gain the qualifications she paid to study.  The judge erred in  law  by
    placing weight on the above  consideration.   It  is  inherent  in  the
    nature of an assessed higher educational course that, for a variety  of
    reasons,  a  person  might  not  attain  their  desired  qualification.
    Accordingly, the judge erred in placing weight on this  factor  in  the
    proportionality evaluation, and then,  quoting  from  paragraph  57  of
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72, that "the opportunity for a promising student  to
    complete his course in  this  country,  however  desirable  in  general
    terms, is not in itself a right protected under Article 8."  Its weight
    would therefore be  diminished  as  a  factor  in  the  proportionality
    evaluation.  Further, admission  to  the  UK  as  a  student  does  not
    generate a legitimate expectation that an applicant might be  permitted
    to stay in the UK for other purposes, quoting E-A (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT
    315 (IAC), and those were the grounds.

8.   Permission was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    summarised the legitimate expectation study point and went on to say:

         "It was argued that there was an error of law in the assessment  of
         proportionality in the relationship between the appellant  and  her
         sister's child and because admission to the United Kingdom did  not
         permit the appellant to expect that she would be admitted to remain
         for other purposes."


    The judge considered that to be an arguable ground.

9.   The difficulty I have with that is that it is not a ground pleaded  and
    the judge has not granted permission on the ground that was put  before
    her, so that might raise questions as to exactly what the ambit of this
    hearing is.  I think it is probably sensible to take a relatively broad
    brush approach to this and perhaps  assume  that  at  least  the  judge
    granted permission in relation to the grounds that were put before  her
    but I accept that that is not a very solid basis on which to proceed in
    light of the fact that she did not specifically refer to that matter in
    paragraph 3 where she granted permission.

10.  But the matter is I think best dealt with by returning to paragraph  20
    of the determination where the judge said what he had to say about  the
    reasonable expectation of the appellant.  I do not read that  as  being
    part in any major sense of the proportionality assessment.   The  judge
    said towards the end of that paragraph: "It is relevant to set out  the
    relevant immigration  context  behind  this  appeal."   An  essentially
    weighty matter that the judge was persuaded by in  this  case  was  the
    relationship between the appellant and her nephew.  Certainly there  is
    a reference at paragraph 24 to the fact that removal would prevent  her
    from returning to her studies here but that is a part of the evaluation
    and in my view not a material part,  and  in  my  view  the  judge  was
    entitled in light of the rather limited grounds in  relation  to  which
    one can say permission was granted to conclude as she did  in  relation
    to that particular issue.  It was not a matter that gives rise  to  any
    error of law in the overall evaluation.  The judge came to  conclusions
    that were open to her and as a consequence the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 is maintained.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              6 November 2014


