
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/15374/2014
     IA/15369/2014
     IA/15357/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th October 2016                         |On 14th November 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    merl
                                    mfdl
                                    smjl
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Hawkin instructed by Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Mauritius born on 29th  June  2001,  7th
    March 1964 and 22nd October 1961. The Appellants are a dependent  child
    and two  parents.  They  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turquet, dated  2nd  September  2015,  dismissing  their
    appeals against the refusal of leave to remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on Article 8 grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  on  11th
    February 2016. It was arguable that in the judge's  brief  and  limited
    assessment of reasonableness of the youngest Appellant  being  required
    to leave the UK, the judge failed to sufficiently focus on the  private
    life the teenager had established, the  evidence  in  support  of  that
    private life and the evidence relating to the  impact  on  her  of  the
    proposed removal.

3.    The  appeal  was  initially  adjourned  awaiting  the  outcome  of  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705. In  a  decision  dated  22nd  September
    2016, I found that the judge had made an error of law in assessing  the
    best interests of the first Appellant. The judge  had  failed  to  show
    that she considered the Appellant's private  life  outside  the  family
    unit. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 2nd September 2015 and adjourned  the  hearing  to  24th  October
    2016.

4.   Prior to the error of law hearing there was an application to  withdraw
    the appeal of NJRL who was born on 21st March 1994 because she had been
    granted limited leave to remain on the basis of family and private life
    on 13th June 2016.   She  is  the  first  Appellant's  sister  and  the
    daughter of the second and third Appellants.  She still  lives  in  the
    family home and attends Queen Mary University.

The Appellants' Evidence

5.   SMJL, the third Appellant, gave evidence confirming his name  and  date
    of birth and relying on three witness  statements  dated  23rd  October
    2014,  a  supplementary  witness  statement  and  a  witness  statement
    produced for this hearing on 22nd October 2016.  In  oral  evidence  he
    stated that his mother was still living in Mauritius. She was his  only
    family member, she was 70 years old and  lived  in  a  care  home.  His
    father had passed away and he had no  brothers  or  sisters.  His  main
    concern about return to Mauritius was that he  was  55  years  old  and
    would find it difficult to find a job. All his family  were  here.  His
    eldest  daughter  was  studying  at  university  and  was   financially
    dependent on him. His youngest daughter was doing  GCSEs  and  did  not
    speak Creole.  It would be very difficult for the family to  return  to
    Mauritius.

6.   In cross-examination he stated that his daughter  at  university  lived
    at home and she would stay in the UK now that she  had  the  chance  to
    study, even if the rest of the family returned to Mauritius. She was 22
    years old.

7.   MFDL, the second Appellant, confirmed her name and date  of  birth  and
    relied on  her  statement  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was
    undated, but had been signed in  October  2014.  Her  mother  lived  in
    Mauritius and was 80 years old. She also had a brother who was  married
    with two children. Her father had passed away  a  few  years  ago,  her
    mother lived with her brother, sister-in-law and children  in  a  three
    bedroom house. All the children lived at home, there would be  no  room
    for her and her family to live there in Mauritius and she did not  have
    her own property.

8.   Her main concern was her youngest daughter MERL who had lived here  for
    the last eleven years. All her schooling from nursery had been  in  the
    UK and all her friends were here. MERL had created bonds with  teachers
    at school and friends and she was very dedicated to her schooling. This
    was her main concern because she did not want her daughter's dreams  to
    be shattered.  There was no cross-examination.

9.   MERL, the first Appellant, confirmed her name  and  date  of  birth  as
    29th June 2001. She relied on her statements of 16th October  2014  and
    24th  October  2016.  She  also  relied  on  educational  records   and
    certificates at pages 84 to 172 of the first bundle and at page 186  of
    the supplementary bundle. There were also updated school  documents  in
    the current bundle prepared for this hearing.

10.  MERL had seen a psychologist and since then had talked to teachers  and
    her form teachers who had supported her. There was a  letter  from  her
    tutor Mr U at page 13 of the current bundle. She had  taken  two  GCSEs
    and will take eight more in the summer. She spoke English and could not
    speak Creole. She could understand French if it was spoken slowly,  but
    she did not know enough to  have  a  proper  conversation.   She  spoke
    English with her parents.  She wanted  to  do  'A'  levels  and  go  to
    university to study law at Warwick. Her main concern was that  she  had
    no recollection of Mauritius. She had only been educated in the UK  and
    all her friends were  here.  There  was  nothing  waiting  for  her  in
    Mauritius.  There was no cross-examination.

Submissions

11.  Mr Kotas adopted the reasons for refusal letter and did not  make  oral
    submissions. Mr Hawkin relied on paragraphs 46 to 49 of MA  (Pakistan).
    The fact that a child had been in the UK for seven years would need  to
    be given significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
    related reasons. First because of  its  relevance  to  determining  the
    nature and strength of the child's best interest and second because  it
    established as a starting point that leave  should  be  granted  unless
    there were powerful reasons to the contrary.

12.   Mr  Hawkin  also  submitted  that  the  factors  referred  to  in   EV
    (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  were  relevant  to   the   first
    Appellant's best interests: her age; length of time   in  the  UK;  how
    long in education; stage of education reached; extent to which she  had
    become distant from the country of proposed return; how  renewable  her
    connection may be; to what extent she would have linguistic, medical or
    other difficulties in adapting to live in the country; and  the  extent
    to which the course proposed will interfere with her family and private
    life.



13.  Mr Hawkins submitted that generally speaking  all  the  factors  in  EV
    (Philippines) pointed to the conclusion that the first Appellant's best
    interests were to remain in the UK. Therefore, in this case,  more  was
    required in the way of countervailing factors to justify the refusal of
    leave.

14.  There was no criminality or misbehaviour on the part  of  the  parents.
    They came here lawfully and had stayed here lawfully until 2009.  As  a
    result of the change in the Immigration Rules their leave had  expired,
    but they had not gone underground. Instead they  had  made  significant
    efforts to regularise their status and the appeal process had  taken  a
    lot of time.

15.  The first Appellant had been in the UK since the age of  four  and  was
    now 15 years old. It was well known that seven  years'  residence  from
    the age of four should be given  more  weight  than  seven  years  from
    birth. The first Appellant had 11 years from the age of  four  and  she
    was currently at a critical stage of  her  education.  She  would  face
    significant difficulties on return because of  her  length  of  absence
    from Mauritius. She had never visited there and there were  few  family
    members remaining save for elderly grandparents and an uncle.

16.  There was ample documentation to show that the first  Appellant  had  a
    significant private life in the UK and of particular relevance was  the
    letter from her tutor at page 13 of the  current  bundle  in  which  he
    states:

         "[MERL] has already completed two of her GCSEs with passing results
         and is currently preparing to do another eight GCSEs that she  will
         sit in less than eight months, and due to the positive  comments  I
         receive about her from her teachers I have no doubt that  she  will
         also achieve exceptional results. By the end of this academic  year
         M is expected to achieve  10  passing  GCSE  qualifications  and  I
         firmly believe if M were to stop her studies here in the UK at this
         very essential and critical stage,  it  would  undoubtedly  have  a
         negative effect on her future and everything she has worked so hard
         to achieve thus far. In addition if she were to shift to an unknown
         environment with a different education system  it  would  certainly
         cause her difficulties to adapt and great distress."

17.  There were numerous documents at  pages  84  to  172  of  the  original
    bundle to show the Appellant's academic success at school.  There  were
    also documents and character  references  from  teachers,  friends  and
    family, and school reports at  pages  3  to  27  of  the  supplementary
    bundle. There was a 'memories album' which started at page 186  of  the
    supplementary bundle. Putting  all  this  together,  there  was  strong
    evidence that the first  Appellant  had  an  independent  private  life
    beyond the family unit.

18.  There were additional school documents in the bundle prepared for  this
    hearing and the first Appellant was  referred  to  four  times  in  the
    school newsletter which appeared at pages 12 to 21.  Her  older  sister
    was at university and had been given leave to remain.  Therefore, there
    cannot have been countervailing public  interest  factors  which  would
    have weighed against the granting of leave in her case.

19.  There was also evidence from Dr  Blincow  a  psychologist,  dated  14th
    August 2015, of the effect  of  removal  on  the  first  Appellant.  In
    summary, Dr Blincow stated that  MERL  was  suffering  from  clinically
    significant depressive disorder with prominent anxiety  and  persistent
    ruminations over the possibility of her having to leave  the  UK.  ....
    This will remain a chronic stressor for her and it  is  unlikely  that,
    with that remaining a possibility, she will be  able  to  make  a  full
    recovery even despite engaging with therapy.  She  may  learn  to  cope
    better with her symptoms but I would see it as  likely  that  she  will
    remain in  a  depressive  state  with  higher  than  normal  levels  of
    generalised anxiety if she were going to move to Mauritius against  her
    will.

20.  Dr Blincow stated that he could only comment  from  the  point  of  the
    mental health which was currently compromised and warranted  treatment.
    The prospect of forced removal to Mauritius  was  likely  to  remain  a
    significant and negative factor in terms of her emotional,  social  and
    educational development through adolescence into young  adult  life.  I
    have discussed the impact of this on her  future  education  on  career
    prospects above. Negative consequences are also likely  to  remain  for
    her across a wide range of  dimensions  of  her  adolescent  and  adult
    development.  These  dimensions   include   a   personality   formation
    (particularly she is  now  at  a  sensitive  age  as  far  as  this  is
    concerned), mental  health  (she  is  now  at  a  higher  risk  of  her
    depressive state becoming chronic or relapsing in the future)  as  well
    as  social  integration  (due  to  her  withdrawing  more   and   being
    compromised in terms of integrating into Mauritian  society,  should  a
    move come about).

21.  It was noticeable that her parents' overriding concern  was  the  first
    Appellant.  They  were  both  near  retirement  age  and   would   have
    difficulties in re-establishing themselves in  Mauritius.  They  ran  a
    care home business in the  UK  and  were  financially  self-sufficient.
    There was a reduced public interest and the factors  in  117B  were  in
    their favour.

Factual Findings

22.  The first Appellant is 15 years of age and has been resident in the  UK
    for the past 11 years. She came to the UK at the age of four and has no
    recollection of her life in Mauritius. She has been  in  education  for
    the past 11 years, starting in nursery when she came to the UK, and  is
    currently part way through her GCSEs. She passed two  GCSEs  last  year
    and is due to take a further eight GCSEs in the summer of 2017. She has
    no knowledge of Mauritius and has very few relatives living there  save
    for two elderly grandparents, an uncle, sister-in-law and cousins.  She
    has no renewable connections since she came here at such  a  young  age
    and has no memorable knowledge of Mauritius. She has been  educated  in
    English and speaks  English  with  her  parents.   She  clearly  has  a
    linguistic ability which is apparent from her school reports.  However,
    she confirms that she cannot speak  Creole  and  that  her  French  was
    limited. She was able to understand French if it was spoken slowly, but
    was not comfortable in having a conversation.

23.  The third Appellant came to the UK in August 2005 with entry  clearance
    as a student. The second Appellant joined him with their  two  children
    in November 2005. They were granted leave to  remain  until  30th  June
    2009. On 20th July 2009 they made an application for further  leave  to
    remain as a student and dependants which was refused on  7th  September
    2009. The decision was reconsidered and maintained. The Appellants made
    a  human  rights  application  in  August  2010  which   was   refused,
    reconsidered and maintained. They made a student application  in  April
    2011 (which was refused on 8th January 2013. The application  which  is
    the subject of this appeal was made on 2nd December 2013.

24.  The second and third Appellants have established a care  home  business
    and are financially self-sufficient. The business employs 11 people and
    is a care home for elderly patients who have learning disabilities. The
    previous owner intended to close down the business and the  second  and
    third Appellants decided to take it over in  2009  and  have  gradually
    built it up.

Best Interests

25.  The first Appellant has been living in the UK for  11  years  from  the
    age of four. She has no recollection of Mauritius and has been educated
    in the UK system for the past 11  years.  I  find  that  she  is  at  a
    critical stage of her education and she has  formed  a  strong  private
    life outside the family home.  It is clear from  the  'memories  album'
    and the letters from her friends that she is integrated into  life  and
    culture in the UK and has developed strong  bonds  and  friendships.  I
    have considered the report of Dr Blincow. The  Appellant  has  suffered
    from mental health  problems  because  of  her  proposed  removal.  Her
    removal  to  Mauritius  would  have  a  significant  effect   on   her.
    Accordingly, considering all the factors in EV (Philippines), it  would
    be in the first Appellant's best interests to remain in the UK.

Reasonableness

26.  At the date of application, the Appellant had been  living  in  the  UK
    for more than seven years. Following MA (Pakistan) this is  a  starting
    point and seven years' residence must  be  given  considerable  weight.
    Leave to remain should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to
    the contrary.

27.  In assessing reasonableness, I need to look not only at  the  situation
    of the first Appellant, but also balance  it  against  the  immigration
    history of the second and third Appellants. They have remained  in  the
    UK unlawfully since 2009, but have  made  several  attempts  to  obtain
    leave. They  have  set  up  their  own  business  and  are  financially
    independent. I find on the particular facts of this case that there are
    no powerful reasons to justify the refusal of leave,  given  the  first
    Appellant's length of residence and her significant private life in the
    UK.

28.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  first  Appellant,  MERL,   satisfies
    paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules because she has lived in
    the UK for at least seven years, is under the age of 18 and it  is  not
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK. She has  no  recollection  of
    life in Mauritius and no renewable connections.  She  has  formed  very
    strong bonds with friends outside the family  unit  and  she  is  at  a
    critical stage of her education. Her parents'  immigration  history  is
    insufficient, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  to  amount  to
    powerful reasons for refusing leave. The appeal of the first  Appellant
    is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Proportionality

29.  The immigration history of the  second  and  third  Appellants  is  not
    exemplary, but it is not poor. They speak English and  are  financially
    independent. They are not a  burden  on  the  taxpayer  and  are  fully
    integrated into British society.  They  run  a  business  employing  11
    people. Other than the maintenance of  immigration  control,  there  is
    limited public interest in their removal because their presence is  not
    detrimental to the economic wellbeing of the country.  The  factors  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act cannot be  held  against  the  second  and
    third Appellants and  are  a  neutral  factor  in  the  proportionality
    assessment following Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803.

30.  I find that the weight to be attached to the public  interest  in  this
    case is somewhat limited because, whilst the Appellants  have  remained
    in the UK beyond the expiry of their leave, they have  done  everything
    possible to regularise their status. At the time of  their  application
    in December 2013, the first Appellant had been resident in the  UK  for
    seven years.

31.  Applying Section 117B(6),  the  public  interest  does  not  require  a
    person's removal  where  that  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.   Accordingly,  the
    second and third Appellants  succeed  under  Article  8  because  their
    removal would be disproportionate in the circumstances.   I  allow  the
    appeals of the second and third Appellants under Article 8.


Notice of Decision

The first Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeals of the second and third Appellants are allowed on  human  rights
grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
