
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/15048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated            |
|On 29 September 2016             |                                          |
|                                 |On 5 October 2016                         |
|                                 |                                          |
|                                 |                                          |
|                                 |                                          |


Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                AMANDEEP KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Dr A Morgan (working under the supervision of
Londinium)
For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is a Home Office  appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  Sangha
      sitting at Birmingham on 21 January 2016.  This appellant was born  in
      India in 1992, and in 2011 she was given  student  leave  until  2013,
      when she applied in time for further leave which was granted in  2017.



2.   In 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain as  the  wife
    of a native British citizen, her marriage to a citizen of India  having
    been dissolved.  On 30 March 2015 that application  was  refused.   The
    Home Office took the view that the appellant could  perfectly well move
    back to India with her husband, for reasons that they  gave;  but,  and
    this is the point on this appeal, in 2013 the appellant had  taken  the
    English language  test  through  ETS,  a  result  which  could  not  be
    authenticated by ETS.  That test result had  been  put  forward  on  an
    application  for  administrative  review,  apparently  of  an   initial
    unfavourable student decision in 2013.  So, the Home Office  said,  the
    appellant was guilty of deception and  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Removal  directions  were  also
    given.

3.   The judge described the ETS point as the main reason for  the  refusal,
    and that was the only one on which this decision is challenged  in  the
    Home  Office  appeal:  he  found  in  the  appellant's   favour   after
    considering the usual generic evidence in ETS cases in the light of the
    Tribunal's decision in Gazi  (ETS - judicial review) (IJR) [2015]  UKUT
    327 (IAC)

4.   The grounds of appeal challenge that  finding  a  paragraph  7  on  the
    basis that Gazi    decided that the generic evidence "was sufficient to
    warrant the assessment that the appellant's English language  test  had
    been procured by deception and thus provided an adequate foundation for
    the removal decision".  Gazi  was  a  judicial  review  decision  by  a
    Presidential panel.  What  that  passage  means  is  that  the  generic
    evidence provides a sufficient basis, in a judicial review case, for  a
    lawful decision; but not that it disentitles the judge  from  allowing,
    on the merits, a statutory appeal in which the generic evidence is  put
    forward, as was later done, also by a  Presidential  panel  in  SM  and
    Qadir  (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229

5.   Looking at what the judge did in this case, he heard evidence from  the
    appellant, which he recorded at paragraph 14, asserting  that  she  had
    sat the English language test herself on 19 February 2013  and  got  no
    help from anyone.  In fact the certificate  shows  that  the  test  was
    taken on 28 February; but that was not the point raised on this appeal.

6.   Going to the judge's reasons for his decision, while it is possible  to
    read what he said at paragraphs 33  and  34  as  treating  the  generic
    evidence as not raising a sufficient basis for the decision reached  by
    the Home Office, it is quite clear that he  went  on  to  consider  the
    question which would have only been relevant if it had done so,  as  to
    whether this appellant had in fact genuinely taken  the  test  herself.
    He noted that there was no specific evidence that she in particular had
    not done so, and took account  of  her  history  and  studies  in  this
    country of two years even by that time, and the fact that she had given
    evidence before him in English.

7.   Whether or not the  judge's  approach  to  the  generic  evidence  left
    something to be desired in the light of Gazi, it seems to  me  that  he
    has gone on to consider the evidence put  forward  in  this  individual
    case and reached a decision, perhaps not as detailed as it  might  have
    been, but not  challenged  on  that  point,  that  this  appellant  had
    genuinely taken the test she said she did.

Respondent's appeal
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)


