
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/15712/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 June 2015                               |On 2 July 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     TO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Waithe, Counsel instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended) I make an anonymity  order.   Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or  her
    children.  For the avoidance of doubt, this order also applies  to  the
    appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply with this order  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  and  her  date  of  birth  is  9
    September 1978.  She made an application for further leave to remain in
    the UK and this application was refused by the Secretary of State in  a
    decision of  17  March  2014.   The  appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision and her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Hunter.  In a decision of 15 April 2015 I set  aside  the  decision  of
    Judge Hunter having found an error of law in  the  determination.   The
    error of law decision reads as follows:-

         "14. The  judge's  findings  are  inadequate  in  relation  to  the
             relatives that the appellant has  in  Nigeria.   There  is  no
             clear finding about the appellant's parents and this was a key
             area of conflict.  In addition the  judge  having  found  that
             there was a person in Nigeria whom the appellant considered  a
             sister does not attach due weight  to  this  when  considering
             best interests and proportionality.

         15.  The judge's decision in relation to the  eldest  child's  best
             interests is not grounded in the  evidence.   The  appellant's
             witness statement on the issue  is  lacking  in  detail.   She
             refers to her eldest child at [7] and  [8]  and  asserts  that
             there is 'absolutely no hope for my children in Nigeria.  I do
             not  have  any  ties  to  Nigeria'.  There  was  documentation
             submitted in relation to M's education which showed  that  she
             was doing well at school and that she participated in  certain
             activities, but it was not evidence which established that her
             best interests were to remain here.  M  had  been  in  the  UK
             continuously for nearly seven years at the date of the hearing
             before the First-tier Tribunal; however it is a fact that this
             was the first seven years of her life and  both  children  are
             young.  In relation to the likely circumstances of the  family
             on return to Nigeria, the judge did not consider this  in  the
             context of his findings (the judge found  that  the  appellant
             had worked in the UK and that she attended catering college in
             Nigeria,  there  was  at  least  one  surviving  relative   in
             Nigeria).   For  the   above   reasons   the   proportionality
             assessment was flawed and the decision  to  allow  the  appeal
             under Article 8 is set aside."

2.   The matter was adjourned for reasons explained in paragraph  16  of  my
    decision of 15 April 2015 and I made directions.

The Evidence and the Hearing

3.   At the hearing before me the appellant gave evidence.   She  relied  on
    the  bundle  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  further
    documents were submitted at the hearing. This evidence was  not  served
    in compliance with the directions of the Upper Tribunal. Ms Holmes  did
    not object to the admissibility of the documents.

4.   The documents submitted at the hearing are a letter  from  Minet  Green
    Health Practice relating to the appellant.  It is a document  dated  28
    April 2015 and confirms that the appellant  was  prescribed  medication
    for depression.  There are two death certificates, one relating to  the
    appellant's mother and the other to her father and a  letter  from  the
    appellant's eldest daughter's teacher and head  teacher.   There  is  a
    letter from Rosemary Mallett of 20 April 2015 who is the parish  priest
    of St. John Angell Town which indicates  that  the  appellant  and  her
    family are members of the church there

5.   At the hearing before me Ms Holmes submitted  the  case  of  Zoumbas  v
    SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74.   Mr  Waithe  submitted;  Jakupovic  v  Austria
    (Application No.36757/97, Boultif v Switzerland [2001]  33EHRR  50  and
    Yildiz v Austria [2003] 36EHRR 32.

The Appellant's Evidence

6.   The appellant's evidence is set out  in  Judge  Hunter's  determination
    between paragraphs 36 and 56.  There is no  reason  to  go  behind  the
    record of evidence which was not challenged  by  the  respondent.   The
    appellant had made a witness statement dated 23 October  2014  and  she
    gave further oral evidence before me.  Her evidence can be summarised.

7.   The appellant came to the UK in 2002.  She was brought to the UK  as  a
    domestic worker and  later  forced  into  prostitution.   She  has  two
    children who were both born in the UK.  Her  eldest  daughter,  MA  was
    born on 17 January 2008 and her son, TS was born on 12  February  2014.
    She has no contact with the children's fathers.  MA is attending school
    where she is well-settled and  making  good  progress.   Both  children
    speak English and do not speak their mother's first language.

8.   The appellant does not have any ties to Nigeria.   She  has  no  family
    there who would be able to take care of her.  Her parents are deceased.
     She has a non-biological sister who  was  raised  by  the  appellant's
    parents within the family unit, but she does not have contact with  her
    and does not know where she is. She would be able to  struggle  on  her
    own in Nigeria, but not with her children.  She would have  no  one  to
    take care of her.  Her children have never visited Nigeria and they  do
    not speak the language.  They speak English only.

9.   The appellant lived with her parents in Nigeria before  coming  to  the
    UK. Her parents are deceased. She has not been in contact with her non-
    biological sister since 2002.

10.  The appellant attended a catering school in Nigeria  for  three  years.
    She worked in the UK as a parking attendant for two to three years  but
    had to give this up on account of having no legal status here.

11.  She has obtained her parents' death certificates.  They  arrived  three
    days after the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   Before  coming
    to the UK the appellant was living with her parents.  She knew  someone
    in the UK who was travelling to Nigeria and they made contact with  her
    parents' pastor who was able to obtain the death certificates.

12.  The appellant had a friend on Facebook in Nigeria but she is no  longer
    in contact with her because she wanted  the  appellant  to  financially
    help her and the appellant was unable to do so.

13.  The appellant in the UK is supported by the  local  authority  and  the
    charity,  Kids  Company.   She  is  in  temporary  accommodation.   Her
    daughter's school helps feed the family.  She was previously  supported
    by friends and her father's godson; however they are no longer able  to
    support her.

Findings and Reasons

14.  My starting point are the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    have not been challenged.  The judge having heard oral  evidence  found
    that the appellant entered the UK illegally in 2002 or 2003.  The judge
    stated  that  he  had  "difficulties  with  the  credibility   of   the
    appellant's evidence" because of inconsistencies in  her  evidence  and
    the  correspondence  from  solicitors.   The  judge  found   that   the
    appellant, despite her evidence, had been working here  in  the  UK  in
    order to pay a significant percentage of her bills  rather  than  being
    dependent on her godson and friends as she asserted in  evidence.   The
    judge went on to find that various contradictions  in  the  appellant's
    evidence damage her credibility and he did not find that she  had  been
    trafficked into the UK and forced into prostitution.

15.  The appellant has two criminal convictions for theft, one in  2005  and
    one in 2010 and these were not disclosed in her application form.   The
    appellant's explanation was that having received advice from the friend
    she considered that having paid fines the matters were at  an  end  and
    she did not need to disclose them.  The judge accepted that  there  may
    have been some confusion, but he found it difficult to accept that  she
    would not  have  sought  advice  on  the  disclosure  of  the  previous
    convictions.  The judge accepted that the non-disclosure may have  been
    as a result of a misunderstanding on the appellant's part.  There is no
    reason for me to go behind this.

16.  The judge found that the appellant does have someone  in  Nigeria  whom
    she regards as a sister and that she has friends on Facebook.

17.  Considering the appellant's overall credibility I  find  that  she  has
    not established, on the balance of probabilities,  that  she  does  not
    have friends  or  family  in  Nigeria.   She  has  produced  two  death
    certificates relating to her parents; however, there was no  reasonable
    explanation given why the documentation was not produced at the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I note from the determination that the
    appellant's evidence at that hearing was that  she  had  not  requested
    their death certificate and her lawyers had not asked for them.  At the
    hearing before me she stated  that  the  death  certificates  had  been
    received three days after the hearing.  The appellant's evidence  about
    how she came into possession of the certificates  was  ambiguous.   She
    stated that someone had travelled to Nigeria and made contact with  her
    parents' pastor. This in my view would suggest that she is  in  contact
    with friends or indeed family members  who  live  in  Nigeria  who  has
    assisted her to obtain the certificates.

18.  Even if the appellant's parents are deceased, it is my  view  that  she
    has friends or family there who are able to at  least  offer  her  some
    support.  I did not  accept  her  evidence  in  relation  to  her  non-
    biological sister.  Her evidence before me was that she has not been in
    contact with her since 2002.  This was  not  advanced  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Before me her evidence  was  that  here
    had been a "fall out" between her family and the non-biological sister,
    but again this had not  previously  been  advanced.   In  my  view  the
    appellant sought to embellish her evidence.

19.  According to the respondent the  appellant  applied  for  an  emergency
    travel certificate on 17 June 2010 in order to travel to  Nigeria.  She
    completed a form indicating that she has a mother  and  her  sister  in
    Nigeria.  However, her evidence to me was that her sister was her  non-
    biological sister and she has not been in contact with her since  2002.
    In addition the death certificate that  she  provided  at  the  hearing
    before me indicates that her mother  died  on  15  December  2008.  The
    appellant's evidence about this is that she did not apply for a  travel
    certificate and indeed this was accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge found that it was unlikely that she would knowingly apply for
    a  travel  document  in  2010  given  her  immigration  position.   The
    appellant's evidence is  although  she  did  not  apply  for  a  travel
    document she did complete a form as maintained by the  respondent,  but
    that this was because she had been told to  do  so  by  an  Immigration
    Officer.  Having considered the evidence in the round, I do not  accept
    her explanation and find that she was in contact with  her  sister  and
    that her mother was living in Nigeria.  This  significantly  undermines
    the appellant's credibility. Considering the evidence in  the  round  I
    find the death certificates produced by the appellant  unreliable  (see
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318).

20.  The appellant is not able to meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and
    it is not argued by Mr Waithe that she is able to. Mr  Waithe  did  not
    submit that the appellant relied on article 8 within the rules and  his
    submissions related to article 8 outside of the rules. In any event,  I
    am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  ties  to  Nigeria.   (Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)).  At the  time
    of the hearing before me the appellant's  eldest  daughter  is  aged  7
    years and 5 months and I will consider reasonableness  in  the  context
    of section 117 (B) (6). There is no need for a  repeat  assessment  for
    the purpose of 276ADE (iv).

21.  I must consider both of the children's  best  interests  as  a  primary
    although not the primary consideration: ZH (Tanzania)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] 2 AC 166.

22.  The appellant's evidence in relation to her MA is  that  she  is  well-
    settled at school and  has  strong  ties  to  the  community.   In  the
    appellant's  witness  statement  she  also  talks  of  extended  family
    members.  In the appellant's bundle there are letters from friends here
    in the UK in support of the appeal.  These letters are brief  and  they
    do not shed light on either of the children's best interests.  None  of
    the authors attended the hearing either before me or before the  First-
    tier Tribunal to give evidence.

23.  There are documents from St. John's Angell  Town  C  E  Primary  School
    relating to MA for the academic year 2012 and 2013 and  these  indicate
    that she is making progress at school.  The  up-to-date  evidence  from
    the school is a letter of 27 April 2015 from MA's class teacher,  Mandy
    Walker and which is also signed by the Head teacher Martin  Clarke.  Ms
    Walker describes MA as a bright, helpful friendly child  who  has  done
    well at school and has many friends.  The letter goes on  to  say  that
    the family are living in poverty and MA comes to school hungry and that
    she was distressed at Christmas time and on her  birthday  because  she
    knew that she  would  not  have  the  same  experiences  as  the  other
    children.  Ms Walker describes her as wearing old, ill-fitting  clothes
    to school.  The school has  done  their  best  to  support  the  family
    providing free breakfast and lunchtime leftovers.  The school has  also
    made cash gifts to the appellant.  MA has always been happy  and  well-
    behaved but there have been changes in her behaviour over the past  few
    months.  She  has  become  increasingly  emotional  and  has  attention
    seeking behaviours.  She often talks about how worried she is about her
    mother and their situation.  MA as extremely worried about  her  mother
    and that living in poverty and the risk  of  homelessness  due  to  her
    mother's lack of ability to provide because she is not able to  legally
    work here is having a massive detrimental effect on MA.

24.  In Ms Walker's opinion the impact of a move to Nigeria  would  be  very
    damaging for MA who does not  speak  the  language  and  who  has  many
    friends in school and a bright educational future.  She is a  sensitive
    child and Ms Walker worries that moving away from the only country  she
    has any experience and knowledge of would be extremely harmful to  her.



25.  MA is aged 7 and 5 months and she was born here and has lived here  all
    her life.  This is significant in terms of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    primary legislation.  It is a fact that she is doing well at school and
    there are problems in  her  behaviour  as  a  result  of  the  family's
    situation.  The family lives in relative poverty here and is  dependent
    on handouts and the state.  The appellant's case  is  that  the  family
    would have no support in Nigeria but I  do  not  accept  this  for  the
    reasons that I have given. The appellant's evidence  is  not  credible.
    There is at least some support there. It is reasonably likely that  the
    appellant has friends and or family there.  In addition  the  appellant
    attended college in Nigeria and gained qualification there. There is no
    evidence to support a finding that she would be  able  to  support  her
    family there.

26.  The appellant has not established that  she  is  able  to  support  her
    family here in the UK even if she were allowed to work. She is able  to
    survive here as a result of the help from the government  and  charity.
    She does not have family here despite her  initial  representations  to
    the respondent claiming that she does.

27.  The appellant's case was not presented on the basis that  her  children
    could not complete their education in Nigeria and  in  any  event  this
    would not be supported by the evidence before  me.   The  children  are
    relatively young and there is no reason why they  could  not  adapt  to
    life there and the language. MA is not  at  a  critical  stage  of  her
    education.

28.  There is very little evidence before me that MA  has  significant  ties
    outside the family home  and  taking  into  account  her  age  this  is
    unlikely. They do not have family here and  there  is  no  evidence  of
    significant friendships.  The life that the family is leading  here  is
    one of relative poverty, dependency and uncertainty. The  appellant  is
    taking medication for depression and there is mention of the threat  of
    homelessness in the  letter  from  Dr  James  Easterway.  There  is  no
    evidence that her mental health will deteriorate should she  return  to
    Nigeria.

29.  I have taken into account Ms Walker's letter. I have no doubt  that  it
    has been written with the best intentions, but I am  unable  to  accept
    the assertion made by her that the impact of a move to Nigeria would be
    very damaging to MA.  I can only conclude that this assertion has  been
    made on the basis that the appellant does not have any family,  friends
    or support in Nigeria and this is evidence that do not accept. I do not
    accept that allowing the appellant and her family to remain here  would
    improve their circumstances here or that in the  event  of  removal  to
    Nigeria the family circumstances would be any worse.

30.   Having  considered  Azimi-Moayed  and  others   (decisions   affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  00197(IAC)  and  Zoumbas  [2013]
    UKSC 74, on the evidence before me I conclude that, on balance,  it  is
    in the children's best interests to return to Nigeria with their mother
    where I believe there is at least some family  support.   There  is  no
    family here. The children are young. The eldest child  although  having
    spent a significant period here, is still young and her  life  is  very
    much centred on her home and family. She is not at a crucial  stage  of
    her education. The mere presence of the children in the UK,  and  their
    academic success, is not a "trump card" which their parents can  deploy
    to demand immigration status for the whole family; Butt  v  Norway  App
    47017/09 4 December 2012, and EV (Philippines) and others  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

31.  The family has no right to be here. In my judgment the appellant's
    children are at an age where they could adapt to life in Nigeria
    particularly and that they have been raised by their Nigerian mother
    and the culture will be familiar to them.  They would be able to adapt
    to life in Nigeria and overcome linguistic difficulties.

32.  It is obvious that having regard to  Regina  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27, the determinative issue is whether or not the  decision
    is proportionate to the legitimate  aim  which  in  this  case  is  the
    economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  through   the   maintenance   of
    immigration control.  I must consider Article 8 through  the  prism  of
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the
    2002 Act").

33.  The maintenance of effective control is in the public interest.  It  is
    in the public interest that a  person  who  seeks  to  remain  here  is
    financially independent.  The appellant is not financially  independent
    and is a burden on taxpayers and dependent on charity.  In relation  to
    family life the family would be returning together to Nigeria  and  her
    case under Article 8 outside the Rules rests on  private  life.  Little
    weight should be given to private life which has been established by  a
    person when they have been  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   There  are  many
    factors in this case which weigh  against  the  appellant  and  weighty
    factors that weigh  in  favour  of  the  respondent.   The  appellant's
    immigration history is appalling.  Since she has been here she has been
    convicted of two criminal offences.  She  has  been  found  lacking  in
    credibility by the First-tier Tribunal and now the Upper  Tribunal.   I
    conclude that the decision to remove the appellant is proportionate and
    it is reasonable to expect MA to leave the UK with her family.

34.  The appellant's application in this case was made on 14  February  2012
    which  is  before  the  amendment  to  the  Immigration   Rules.    The
    application was made outside the Immigration  Rules  and  there  is  no
    suggestion that  the  appellant  would  have  been  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules prior to 8  July  2012.   In  any
    event, the matter was not pursued by Mr Waithe.  I have not referred to
    the case law submitted to me by Mr Waithe. He was unable to explain  to
    me the relevance of the decisions to the appellant's case.

35.  I have made an order for anonymity  to  protect  the  identity  of  the
    appellant's children.

Notice of Decision

36.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

37.  The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 29 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

