
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/15052/2014
                                                               IA/15045/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20th March 2015                   |On 15th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Sakeenah Beebee Faldeenah Dauhoo
                            Abdool Kader Khudarun
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are nationals of Mauritius.  They  are  respectively  a
    wife and husband born 9th February 1978 and 20th August  1975.  On  the
    7th November 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  M.  Davies)  allowed
    their linked appeals against decisions to refuse to  vary  their  leave
    and to remove them from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  Secretary  of  State
    now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.

Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Respondents had originally come to the United Kingdom  as  students
    and latterly as Points Based System Migrants. On the 6th September 2013
    they made applications to be granted indefinite leave to remain on  the
    grounds that they had each accrued 10 years continuous lawful residence
    in the UK.

 3. The applications were rejected by way of letters  dated  27th  February
    2014.  The Secretary of State accepted that the couple had come to  the
    UK in 2003 but found there to have  been  a  break  in  the  continuous
    lawful residence claimed. The period identified was from  31st  January
    2010 to 17th September 2010. The applications did  not  therefore  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  Consideration was given  to  Article  8
    under and outwith the Rules, and the decision to refuse  further  leave
    found to be proportionate and lawful.

 4. Appeals  were  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on the 20th November 2014 Judge Davies carefully  sets  out
    the chronology of the Respondents' periods of leave. She  accepts  that
    on the 13th January  2010  in-time  applications  to  vary  leave  were
    lodged. On the 24th February 2010 the Secretary of State  informed  the
    Respondents that those forms had not been completed properly  and  were
    invalid. The Secretary of State invited the Respondents to  make  valid
    applications within a 28 day period, which they did, on the 10th  March
    2010.  The  difficulty  arose  that  when   those   applications   were
    substantively rejected on the 28th April  2010,  the  Respondents  were
    given no right of appeal. That was because their last leave had expired
    on the 31st January 2010, so the valid applications lodged on the  10th
    March 2010 were made out of time.  Judge Davies accepted that  the  in-
    time applications made in January had not  been  valid,  and  that  the
    Secretary of State had been right to reject them.  It was this chain of
    events which had led to  the  break  in  lawful  residence,  ending  in
    September of that year when further leave was granted.  This chronology
    led to the first finding made by the First-tier  Tribunal:  given  that
    factual background the Secretary of State  should  have  exercised  her
    discretion as to whether to disregard the  break  in  lawful  residence
    between the 31st January and 17th September 2010. The  refusal  letters
    gave no indication that discretion  had  been  exercised  and  to  that
    extent the decision was 'not in accordance with the  law'.  The  appeal
    was allowed on that basis and the decision 'remitted' to the  Secretary
    of State in order  that  she  exercise  her  discretion.  There  is  no
    challenge to that decision:   paragraph  3  of  the  Grounds  expressly
    accept that it is correct.

 5. This appeal arises from what the First-tier Tribunal did next. That was
    to take account of the evidence before it, including the live testimony
    of nine witnesses, and allow the  appeal  substantively  on  Article  8
    grounds. The Secretary of State submits that having allowed the  appeal
    as 'not in accordance with the law' there was "no need to  travel  into
    Article 8" since unlawfulness had already been established: Mirza & Ors
    (oao) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 159.  The challenge to  this  Tribunal  is
    there was, in effect, no appeal left before the First-tier Tribunal  to
    be allowed under Article 8.

 6. For the Respondents Mr Hawkin submits that the Judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 by virtue of s84(1)(g) of the  2002
    Act.   He pointed out that Article 8 can  be  considered  in  variation
    appeals as well as removals (see for instance Patel [2013] UKSC 72) and
    that it made a good deal of sense  for  the  Judge  to  deal  with  the
    matter, not least because nine witnesses had all  come  to  court.   He
    notes that there is no challenge to the substantive  findings  made  by
    the Judge.  In those circumstances the Respondents  should  be  granted
    discretionary leave. Alternatively the Secretary of State can  exercise
    her discretion in their favour  and  grant  them  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

My Findings

 7. The point made in these grounds is a simple one. That is  that  if  the
    decision appealed is found to be unlawful and is set aside, there is no
    decision left to appeal on human rights grounds. That is precisely  the
    point made by Sedley LJ in Mirza. Ms Isherwood further points out  that
    even if that were not the case the Razgar Article 8  assessment  should
    have simply have halted at question 3: "is the decision  in  accordance
    with the law?". Having found it not to be,  there  was  no  basis  upon
    which the tribunal could have gone on to determine proportionality. The
    fudge at paragraph 53 of the decision does  not  adequately  deal  with
    that fundamental problem:  "to  the  extent  that  the  decision  under
    paragraph 276B was in accordance with the Rules (save for  the  failure
    to exercise discretion)...the decision would be in accordance with  the
    law".   Mr Hawkins relies on Pun and Ors  (Gurkhas  -policy-Article  8)
    Nepal [2011] UKUT 00377 (IAC) but I found nothing  therein  to  address
    these central grounds for the Secretary  of  State.  I  find  that  the
    grounds are made out. The decision of the Secretary of State  had  been
    set aside as unlawful and there was therefore no more to be done in the
    appeal.

 8. Although the decision in respect of Article  8  cannot  stand  for  the
    reasons identified in the grounds, it is correct to say that there  was
    no substantive challenge to the Tribunal's carefully reasoned findings.
    In  granting  permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    nonetheless found it to be arguable  that  the  reasoning  was  flawed,
    notably for failure to properly engage with s117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   To the extent that it is relevant, I
    consider  the  reasoning  in  the  determination   to   be   a   lawful
    proportionality balancing  exercise.  The  Judge  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing from a number of witnesses, none of whom were challenged by the
    HOPO on the day.   It is apparent from paragraphs  54  and  55  of  the
    determination that the Judge did have regard to  s117.   No  doubt  the
    Secretary of State will wish to take all  of  this  into  account  when
    considering whether to disregard the seven months  in  2010  when  this
    couple had no valid leave.



Decisions

 9. The determination contains an error of law  and  the  decision  is  set
    aside to the extent identified above. I re-make  the  decision  in  the
    appeal as follows:

         "The appeal is allowed as not in accordance with the law".

10. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              12th June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal JM Holmes on the 21st January
2015.

