
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16689/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2018                    |On 23 January 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [U A]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                   Mr. P. Turner of counsel, instructed
by Burnley Legal                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent, who was born on [ ] 1986, is a  national  of  Pakistan.
    He suffers from memory loss but believes that he  was  brought  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2005. He has poor self-care  skills  and  is  largely
    dependent upon a friend from his local mosque, [YA], who he met in 2007
    and who provides him with accommodation and support. Other  members  of
    the mosque also contribute money towards his support.

2.   An application was made on his behalf for leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on 5 August 2014. His application was refused  on  29
    October 2014. The Respondent's solicitors wrote to the Appellant on  25
    November  2014,  providing  further  details  about  the   Respondent's
    circumstances. The Appellant did reconsider her decision but then  made
    a further decision refusing him leave to remain on 14 April  2015.  The
    Respondent appealed against this decision on  29  April  2015  and  his
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge James  in  a  decision,
    promulgated on 27 February 2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed on 12 October  2017  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker granted her permission to appeal on 27 October 2017 on a  limited
    basis.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  accepted  that
    the Respondent was not fit to  give  evidence.  [YA]  had  submitted  a
    witness statement and also attended the appeal hearing and his evidence
    was not challenged by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.  In  his
    witness statement he  confirmed  that  the  Respondent  found  it  very
    difficult to recall anything such as names, dates or places  and  could
    not read or write.

6.   The Respondent has had no leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    has no identity documents and has, therefore, not been able  to  access
    NHS treatment. But Dr. Ascione from  the  Private  Therapy  Clinic  had
    examined the Respondent and in a report,  dated  3  November  2014,  he
    concluded that the  Respondent  presented  with  severe  confusion  and
    memory difficulties and was suffering from a major depressive  disorder
    which was recurrent and severe with psychotic symptoms. He  also  found
    that he was suffering from moderate anxiety and memory loss and that he
    did not  have  the  mental  capacity  to  recall  certain  events.  The
    Respondent was also noted to be unkempt with a lack of  basis  grooming
    and hygiene. His responses to questions were said to be  circumstantial
    and tangential and that he was not orientated to person and  situation.
    This was in circumstances where the Respondent had the support of  [YA]
    and other members of his local mosque.

7.   Dr. Bedi, a consultant psychiatrist, also provided a report,  dated  16
    January 2017, in which he concluded that  there  was  evidence  of  the
    Respondent  having  cognitive  impairment   including   disorientation,
    reduced attention span, memory impairment as well  as  limited  reading
    and writing abilities. He  added  that  the  Respondent's  history  and
    presentation was suggestive of an underlying learning  disability  with
    possible psychotic episodes under stress. In addition,  he  found  that
    there was evidence of longstanding impairment of functioning  and  that
    it was likely that the Respondent was going to need ongoing help in the
    future, He also found that in the absence of  appropriate  support  the
    Respondent's mental state and  functioning  could  further  deteriorate
    resulting in an increased risk to his health and self-neglect.

8.   In her grounds of appeal, the Appellant submitted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had materially erred in finding that the Respondent  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, both First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker refused the Appellant permission to appeal  on  this  basis
    and, therefore, this decision stands.

9.   However, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker did grant permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge James had misdirected  himself
    in relation to GS (India) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and N v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2005] UJHL 31.

10.  It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision that  he  did
    not refer to this case  law  or  consider  whether  the  facts  in  the
    Respondent's case met the very high threshold required by  N  v  United
    Kingdom.

11.  Instead, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found in  paragraph  24  of  his
    decision, that, in the alternative, it was arguable that  removing  the
    Respondent to Pakistan would amount to a breach of  Article  3  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  following  the   decision   in
    Paposhvili v Belgium (Application No. 41738/10)

12.  In paragraph 182 of that decision the Grand  Chamber  of  the  European
    Court of Human Rights held that:


         "... it is essential that the Convention is interpreted and applied
         in a manner which renders its rights practical  and  effective  and
         not theoretical and illusory".


13.  In paragraph 183 it also found that:


         "... the other "very exceptional cases" within the meaning  of  the
         judgment in N v United Kingdom  which  may  raise  an  issue  under
         Article 3 should be understood to refer to situations involving the
         removal of seriously ill person in which substantial  grounds  have
         been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at  imminent
         risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence of
         appropriate treatment in the  receiving  country  or  the  lack  of
         access to such treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid  and
         irreversible decline in his or her state  of  health  resulting  in
         intense  suffering  or  to  a   significant   reduction   in   life
         expectancy".


14.  However, this is not the test which was applied by the House  of  Lords
    in N v Secretary of State for the Home Department and., although  I  am
    obliged to take into account decisions of the  Grand  Chamber,  I  must
    follow a precedent established by the House of Lords/Supreme Court  and
    the evidence does not establish that the Respondent's case was  of  the
    type of exceptional cases protected by N.

15.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that  the  Respondent's  situation
    could be equated with that of D v United Kingdom (1997)  24  EHRR  423.
    However, as the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  the  Upper
    Tribunal was bound by the decision in N v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department and the circumstances in that case were similar to that
    potentially facing the Respondent.

16.  In  paragraph 184 of Paposhvili the Grand Chamber went on to find  that
    "the  primary  responsibility  for  implementing  and   enforcing   the
    guaranteed rights and freedoms is laid on national authorities, who are
    thus required to examine the applicants' fears and to assess the  risks
    they  would  face  if  removed  to  the  receiving  country,  from  the
    standpoint of Article 3".

17.  Again, this part of the judgment imposes  a  test  which  went  further
    than that established in N v United Kingdom and should  not  have  been
    followed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

18.  However, any error made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James  in
    relation to Article 3 or 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    outside the Immigration Rules was not material, as he had not erred  in
    law when he allowed the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  For the avoidance of doubt, First-tier Tribunal Judge  James'  decision
    is upheld in relation to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, as permission had not been granted to  challenge  this  part  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge James' decision.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


