
IAC-BH-PMP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16004/2013
                                                               IA/16023/2013
                                                               IA/16030/2013
                                                               IA/16040/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2015                 |On 16th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

     PI  First Appellant
     MI  Second Appellant
     RI  Third Appellant
     OI  Fourth Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Campbell of Counsel, instructed by 1st Call
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the Appellant.
     However, for consistency I shall continue to refer to the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. At the error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 8th October 2014 I
    decided as follows also setting out the background to the appeal:

         "2.  On 30th  January  2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Woodcraft gave permission to the respondent to appeal
             against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  V  A
             Osborne in which she  allowed  the  appeals  on  human  rights
             grounds against the decisions of the respondent to  refuse  to
             vary leave to remain as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  for  the
             first appellant and to refuse leave to remain for  the  second
             appellant as her dependent  partner  and  for  the  third  and
             fourth appellants as her dependent children.

          3. In granting permission Designated Judge Woodcraft  noted  that
             the judge had allowed the appeals under Article 8 finding that
             the third  and  fourth  appellants'  academic  progress  would
             deteriorate upon return and  also  taking  into  consideration
             that the third appellant had lived in the United  Kingdom  for
             at least seven years thus qualifying  in  her  own  right  for
             leave  to  remain.   However,   in   paragraph   30   of   the
             determination, the judge found that the  children  were  young
             enough to adapt to a different environment and  there  was  no
             reason why they could not satisfactorily make  the  adjustment
             to leaving the United Kingdom despite  an  initial  period  of
             disruption and disappointment.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  had
             found in favour of the appellants by arguably placing too much
             emphasis on the benefits to the children of  completing  their
             education when there was insufficient attention to the  weight
             to be given to the legitimate aim being pursued.

          4.  The  grounds  of  application  by  the  respondent  had  also
             contended that the family could have no legitimate expectation
             that they would be able  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
             Immigration  Rules  and  that  they   would   need   to   show
             circumstances  that  were  exceptional  or  compelling  before
             consideration of leave  outside  those  Rules.   Further,  the
             interests of the children,  whilst  a  primary  consideration,
             were not the primary consideration.

          5. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety argued that paragraph  30
             of the determination showed that the judge had not  found  any
             compelling  circumstances  which  suggested  that  the  matter
             should have been considered outside the  Rules.   Further,  in
             paragraph 31, the judge also found that the  parties  had  not
             lost their  ties  to  Nigeria,  indeed,  this  conclusion  was
             repeated  in  paragraph  37.   However,  the  conclusions   in
             paragraph 35 were inconsistent with those  other  conclusions.
             The judge appeared to have allowed the appeal on the basis  of
             educational facilities for the appellants, yet in the Court of
             Appeal decision in EV [2014] EWCA 874 at paragraph 60, it  was
             concluded that the desirability of being  educated  at  public
             expense in the United Kingdom could not outweigh  the  benefit
             to children of remaining with their parents.

          6. Ms Campbell agreed with me that the approach to  human  rights
             issues recommended by the Tribunal in Gulshan (Article 8 - new
             Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)  had
             now been overruled by the Court of Appeal in MM &  Ors  [2014]
             EWCA  Civ  985  and  thus  the  identification  of  compelling
             circumstances to justify consideration outside the  rules  was
             not appropriate.  However, she contended, the judge had  found
             that the oldest child had been in the United Kingdom for seven
             years and therefore the provisions of section EX.1 could  have
             been applied to the child's  parents  or,  alternatively,  the
             private  life  provisions  in  paragraph  276ADE  would   have
             benefited that child.  Ms Campbell conceded that the judge had
             not considered the  specific  provisions  of  the  Immigration
             Rules although paragraph 26 of the  determination  shows  that
             she was aware of them.  Nevertheless,  she  thought  that  the
             judge's error was not material because focus had  been  placed
             on the seven year Rule for the child and the judge conducted a
             comprehensive balancing exercise taking that into account.

          7. After considering the matter for a  few  moments  I  announced
             that I was satisfied that the determination showed an error on
             a point of law such that it should be re-made.  My reasons for
             that conclusion follow.

          8. This appeal was heard on 6th December 2013 in  the  First-tier
             Tribunal and the determination sent out on 9th  January  2014.
             Thus, the judge cannot be blamed  for  failing  to  take  into
             consideration the guidance of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Gulshan
             when considering the appeal within the Immigration  Rules  and
             on human rights grounds outside the Rules.  In any event,  the
             guidance set out in Gulshan has been overturned by  the  Court
             of Appeal in MM so that it is  no  longer  necessary  for  the
             judge to conduct an intermediary test to  identify  compelling
             circumstances which would lead to a  good  arguable  case  for
             consideration of the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

          9.  Thus,  the  judge's  consideration  of  human  rights  issues
             apparently outside the Rules by applying the five  stage  test
             set out in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  and  by  making  the  best
             interests  of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  a  primary
             consideration does not appear to reveal a material error on  a
             point of law.  However, the determination does not  show  that
             the judge gave comprehensive  consideration  to  the  relevant
             parts of the Immigration Rules before conducting her  analysis
             of Article 8 issues  outside  them.  Additionally,  the  judge
             reached conclusions, particularly those in paragraphs  30  and
             31 of the determination, which are  in  contradiction  to  her
             overall conclusion that all appeals could be allowed on  human
             rights grounds principally because of the effect a  change  of
             culture and education  would  have  on  the  child  appellants
             without conducting a deeper proportionality analysis.

         10. Whilst paragraph 26 of the determination shows that the  judge
             was aware of the provisions of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
             Rules and the private life provisions  set  out  in  paragraph
             276ADE, the determination does not reveal that she  considered
             the application of section EX.1 of Appendix FM in  respect  of
             the interests of the first and second appellants as parents of
             a child who had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  over  seven
             years in addition to the similar private life  provisions  for
             that child set out in paragraph  276ADE.   Had  she  done  so,
             applying the appropriate provisos in the Rules  about  whether
             or not it would have been reasonable to expect  the  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom, then it might have been  unnecessary
             for her to conduct an analysis of human rights issues  outside
             the Rules.  Further, it  is  evident  that,  in  adopting  her
             approach, the judge concluded,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the
             children could return with their parents to  Nigeria  but,  on
             the other, that cultural  and  educational  differences  which
             would be experienced by both children if returned  would  lead
             to an infringement of their Article  8  rights.  Such  factors
             alone are not recognised by the Articles of the  Human  Rights
             Convention and should not have tipped the balance in favour of
             the appellants in the light of the judges other findings.  The
             determination therefore shows errors on  points  of  law  such
             that it should be re-made."

 3. Following the making of the above decision I also gave  directions  for
    the resumed hearing to take place before  me  on  the  basis  that  the
    matter could be re-heard by way of submissions only taking into account
    evidence already submitted.

Re-Making the Decision

 4. The matter proceeded before me as indicated in the preceding paragraph.

 5. Ms Campbell pointed out that, in addition to the two children  who  are
    the third and fourth appellants in this appeal, the  first  and  second
    appellants also have a third child  who  is  not  the  subject  of  the
    present proceedings.  Ms Campbell also reminded me that the  third  and
    fourth appellants are Nigerian citizens but had both been in the United
    Kingdom for over seven years.  The third appellant came  in  2005  when
    aged 3 and is now 12 years of age.  The fourth appellant  was  born  in
    the United Kingdom in 2006 and  is  now  8  years  of  age.   She  also
    emphasised that the first appellant, who is the mother of the children,
    had continuous leave to be in the United Kingdom from 2004 to the  date
    of the application for further leave to remain on  10th  January  2013,
    the refusal of which forms the subject of this appeal.

 6. I was reminded of the background situation for the appellants which  is
    set out in the first appellant's statement of 29th November  2013.   In
    this the first appellant explains that, when  she  married  the  second
    appellant in 2000, he was living in  Italy  where  he  had  been  since
    January 1994.  She joined him there in January 2001.  They both  gained
    residency permits in Italy (although it is not argued that either is an
    Italian citizen).  The third appellant, RI, was born  on  18th  October
    2002 and she, too, gained a  residency  permit  in  Italy.   The  first
    appellant came to UK in October 2004 as  a  student.  She  renewed  her
    leave up to 15th January 2013.  She has been back to Nigeria twice  for
    short stays since May 2001 and has also returned to Italy for holidays.
     She claims she obtained a first degree  in  Nigeria  and  subsequently
    obtained an LLM from Nottingham Trent University.  Her last two  visas,
    respectively, were as Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant and Tier 1  (General)
    highly  skilled  migrant.   She  claims  that  the  second  and   third
    appellants, who joined her in UK in July 2005, have been her dependants
    since that date and the fourth appellant, who was born in  UK  on  22nd
    August 2006, has only left the UK on two occasions, once to  Italy  and
    on another occasion to Nigeria for three weeks in 2009.

 7. The first appellant claims that, when visiting  Nigeria,  both  of  her
    children were "very disturbed" because of  the  atmosphere  there  with
    armed police.  They were also bitten by mosquitoes  and  other  insects
    which resulted in them receiving treatment from  their  GP  on  return.
    Both her children regard UK as their home.  As to RI,  she  understands
    her situation but is stressed by it.  Both  children  achieve  well  at
    school and have many friends.  The family also attends church regularly
    and is integrated into its community.  Both children have now  been  in
    UK for over seven years.

 8. Ms Campbell argued that, in the circumstances  claimed,  both  children
    should be granted status as a result of their private  life  under  the
    provisions of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  That  is
    because they had each lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  at
    least seven years.  She commented that, in the event that the exception
    in section EX were to apply to the first and second appellants, then it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  As  to
    the present situation, she also pointed out that neither the third  nor
    fourth appellants could speak the  local  languages  of  Nigeria.   The
    second appellant has  not  worked  or  lived  in  Nigeria  since  1994.
    Although he has a degree in engineering from that country he was  doing
    unskilled work in Italy but does not work in UK at present.

 9. Mr McVeety contended that, although the two child appellants  meet  the
    residency requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv), it could not be said to
    be unreasonable to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom.   He  also
    emphasised that the public interest considerations set out  in  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)
    imposed the same test in sub-Section (6)(b).  As to the best  interests
    of the children he made reference to the Supreme Court case of  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC  74  and  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  He argued that the  Nigerian  child
    appellants could not claim to remain just because of  their  continuing
    education.   The  children's  interests  were  not   the   only   prime
    consideration.  In Zoumbas the Supreme Court  had  concluded  that  the
    fact that children were not British citizens and thus had no  right  to
    future education and healthcare in the United Kingdom, their  interests
    in remaining in the United Kingdom did not outweigh  considerations  of
    the public interest.  In EV the Court of Appeal had also made it  clear
    that it was irrelevant to consider whether an educational system abroad
    was worse than that in the United Kingdom.  Lord  Justice  Lewison,  in
    particular, was unable to find that the desirability of being  educated
    at public expense in the UK could outweigh the benefit to  children  of
    remaining with their parents.

10. Ms Campbell concluded her submissions by referring me to the tests  set
    out in paragraph 35 of EV.  She argued that, in all  the  circumstances
    and making the children's best interests a primary consideration, their
    private lives would be infringed by  the  respondent's  decision.   She
    also reminded  me  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC) which concluded, amongst other things,  that  children  who  have
    seven years' residence in UK from the age of 4 are likely  to  be  more
    significantly affected by removal than in  the  first  seven  years  of
    life.  Ms Campbell pointed out that both children  regarded  themselves
    as  British  and  had  no  significant  experiences  of  Nigeria.   She
    therefore argued that the respondent's decision was disproportionate.

Conclusions

11. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the
    standard  of  proof  is  a  balance  of  probabilities.   I  take  into
    consideration the circumstances appertaining at the time of the hearing
    before me.

12. Where human rights  issues  arise,  as  in  this  case,  I  have  first
    considered  whether  or  not  the  Immigration  Rules  can  avail   the
    appellants and then, if  not  and  the  circumstances  permit,  I  have
    considered human rights  issues  outside  the  Rules  making  the  best
    interests of any child appellants a primary consideration and following
    the five stage approach recommended in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

13. There has been reference to the potential application of section EX  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules for the benefit of the  first  and
    second appellants on the basis that they are  partners  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, as the refusal for the first appellant of 23rd April
    2013 makes clear, the exceptions set out in paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM cannot apply where the exemption requirements set out in paragraph E-
    LTRP.1.2 of Appendix FM apply to the  partnership.  Neither  first  nor
    second appellants are British  citizens  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom  or  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian  protection.
    Section EX.1 is not a stand alone section so where the appellant is not
    eligible under the substantive rule, section EX.1 cannot apply.

14. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are those set  out  in
    paragraph  276ADE  particularly  sub-paragraph  (iv)  which  states  as
    follows in relation to minor applicants:

         "(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
             the UK for at least seven years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK."

15. The above provision caters, potentially, for the interests of the third
    and fourth appellants. It is not claimed  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants can benefit from the other provisions  in  paragraph  276ADE
    bearing in mind that neither has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for
    twenty years.  However, the first and second appellants may be able  to
    benefit from the statutory provision relating to  the  public  interest
    set out in Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (as amended) which states that the public  interest  does  not
    require a person's removal where there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.   The  test
    in respect of all appellants is, therefore, essentially the same.

16. As to whether or not it would be reasonable to  expect  the  third  and
    fourth appellants to leave the United Kingdom I take into consideration
    the relevant  factors  which  have  been  identified  in  evidence  and
    submissions as follows.

17. Both children have been in the United Kingdom  for  over  seven  years.
    The third appellant came here in July 2005 with her father  from  Italy
    to join the first appellant and so has been here for over  nine  years.
    The fourth appellant was born here on 22nd August 2006 so has been here
    for over eight years.  There is also another child of the  family  born
    here on 16th June 2011 although not an appellant in these  proceedings.
    Both third and fourth appellants are in education in the UK.

18. I take into consideration the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Azimi-
    Moayed which, although concluding that the best interests  of  children
    are to be with both parents, defines that the seven years from the  age
    of 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than the  first  seven
    years of life.  Very young children are focused on their parents rather
    than their peers and are adaptable.  I therefore accept that  any  move
    to  Nigeria  for,  in  particular,  the  third   appellant   would   be
    significant.  However, that does not automatically mean that  the  best
    interests of that appellant require  that  she  should  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as the respondent's decision in relation to her and  her
    family is disproportionate.

19. Considerable emphasis has been placed on the benefits of  education  in
    the United Kingdom for both child  appellants  although,  as  was  made
    clear in EV (Philippines), the desirability of being educated at public
    expense in the United  Kingdom  should  not  outweigh  the  benefit  to
    children of remaining with their parents.  Whilst  both  children  have
    been to Nigeria with their parents and expressed some dislike for  life
    there that does not mean that it would be unreasonable to  expect  them
    to go there.  They are Nigerian citizens.  Both  parents  are  educated
    and could I conclude, obtain  reasonable  employment  in  that  country
    without significant difficulty.  In particular, both are graduates  and
    have worked in the country in the past.  It is not suggested that  they
    have no contacts in the country and indeed that must  be  the  case  as
    return visits have taken place.  Neither child suffers from any illness
    which would inhibit return.  Although both  children  have  established
    friendships in the United Kingdom I  conclude  that  relationships  can
    also be established by them in Nigeria.  Whilst it is argued  that  the
    children do not speak any local languages, the fact is  that  the  main
    language spoken in Nigeria is English.   I  also  bear  in  mind  that,
    although the first appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  2004
    and in Italy from 2001, it is quite evident that they have not given up
    their ties to Nigeria.  Neither had good reason  to  expect  that  they
    could remain in the United Kingdom indefinitely.

20. Therefore, having regard to  the  factors  I  have  identified  in  the
    preceding paragraphs, it is my conclusion that  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants cannot benefit from the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE  in
    respect of their private lives in UK because it is reasonable to expect
    them to remain with their parents as a family unit  and  to  return  to
    Nigeria with them.

21. As I am not satisfied that the Rules cannot avail any of the appellants
    I have to consider the proportionality  of  the  respondent's  decision
    against the statutory provisions set out in Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act alongside which I have considered  their  claims  making  the  best
    interests of the children a primary consideration and applying the five
    stage Razgar approach.  In doing so I can apply  the  factors  which  I
    have  already  identified  in  relation  to  my  consideration  of  the
    application of the Immigration Rules.

22. It is clearly in the best interests of the children  that  they  remain
    with their parents.  I have already identified factors which assist  me
    to conclude that it would be reasonable to expect the children to go to
    Nigeria, of which country they are citizens, with their parents.   This
    may disrupt the education particularly of the third appellant but  both
    children  can  be  educated  in  English  in  Nigeria   and   establish
    friendships there.  This will cause  some  difficulty  but  it  is  not
    unreasonable to expect them to  return  with  their  parents  who  have
    always known that their status in this country was tenuous.   The  test
    set out in Section 117B(6) is, in essence, the  same  as  that  already
    examined under the Rules save that it  can,  potentially,  benefit  the
    first and second appellants whose removal  is  not  required  where  it
    would not be reasonable to expect their children to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  But I am not satisfied that the section can assist the  first
    and second appellants for the reasons I have already given.

23. Applying the Razgar five stage tests I accept that the proposed removal
    of the appellants to Nigeria will interfere with their right to private
    and family life and the interference will  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8.   On  the
    basis that such interference is in accordance with the  law  I  decide,
    however, that the respondent's decision is not disproportionate in  the
    interests of immigration control.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error on a point of  law
such that it should be re-made.  I re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the
appeal.

Anonymity

As this appeal involves the interests  of  children  I  make  the  following
direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 6th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal there can be no fees award.



Signed        Date 6th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
