
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 29th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                         MR ABIOLA WASIU OLOWU OLOWU
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ariyo (Apex Solicitors)
For the Respondents:   Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  by  Judge
    Carroll of the First-tier Tribunal on 22nd May 2015.  In  his  Decision
    Judge Carroll dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to refuse to issue him with a residence card under the
    EEA regulations as the spouse of an  EEA  national  who  is  exercising
    Treaty rights in United Kingdom.

 2. The Secretary of State's reasons for the refusal were twofold:  firstly
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  EEA  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person because the  evidence  provided  in  relation  to  her
    employment  was  unreliable  and  secondly  the  Secretary  of  State's
    believed that the marriage was one of convenience.

 3. In his Decision and Reasons  Judge  Carroll  found  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State's arguments.

 4. The grounds on which permission to  appeal  was  sought  challenge  the
    Judge's findings on the basis of the evidence before  him  and  suggest
    that the judge failed to make findings of fact on matters that went  to
    the core of the claim. However, permission to appeal was  granted  only
    on the basis that there was an arguable error of law at paragraph 19 of
    the Decision by the Judge where he indicated that the burden  of  proof
    rests with the Appellant.  This was arguably wrong in law  in  relation
    to the question of a marriage of convenience in line with the  case  of
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse-marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC).

 5. In Papajorgji the President of the Upper Tribunal held  that  "Although
    neither the Directive nor the Regulations define it,  as  a  matter  of
    ordinary parlance and the past experience  of  the  U.K.'s  immigration
    rules and case law, a marriage of convenience  in  this  context  is  a
    marriage contracted  for  the  sole  or  decisive  purpose  of  gaining
    admission to the host state.  A  durable  marriage  with  children  and
    cohabitation  is  quite   inconsistent   with   such   a   definition."
    Additionally the European Commission  has  produced  a  handbook  which
    defines a marriage of convenience as  a  marriage  contracted  for  the
    predominant  purpose  of  conferring  a  right  to  free  movement  and
    residence under EU law to a person who would otherwise not have such  a
    right and explains that as "sole  purpose"  is  an  autonomous  EU  law
    concept that is not to be interpreted literally as being the unique  or
    exclusive purpose. There is no  definition  of  "predominant"  but  the
    handbook indicates that the phrase is used  because  someone  may  have
    more than one abusive purpose (such as a tax  advantage".  The  key  is
    whether there is abuse.

 6. So far as the  burden  of  proof  is  concerned  in  IS  (marriages  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  00031  the  Tribunal  held  that  the
    burden of proving that a marriage is not a  "marriage  of  convenience"
    for the purposes of the EEA Regulations rests on the Appellant: but  he
    is not required to discharge it in the absence of  evidence  of  matter
    supporting a suspicion that the marriage is one  of  convenience  (i.e.
    there is an evidential burden on the  Respondent).  In  Papajorgji  the
    Tribunal held that (i)  there  is  no  burden  at  the  outset  of  the
    application on the Appellant to demonstrate that a marriage to  an  EEA
    national is not one of convenience and (ii) IS  establishes  only  that
    there is an evidential burden  on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage was entered into  for
    the predominant purpose of securing residence rights. The  Tribunal  in
    Papajorgji made it clear at paragraph 33 that they did not accept  that
    there was a burden as such on the Appellant  and at paragraph 39 stated
    "in summary, our understanding is that, where the issue was  raised  on
    appeal the question for the Judge will therefore be "in  the  light  of
    the totality of the information before me, including the assessment  of
    the claimant's answers and any information  provided,  am  I  satisfied
    that it  is  more  probable  than  not  that  this  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience?" At paragraph 27 of  Papajorgji  the  Tribunal  said  that
    there is no burden at the outset of an application  on  a  claimant  to
    demonstrate a marriage to an EEA national is  not  one  of  convenience
    unless the circumstances known to the  decision-maker  give  reasonable
    grounds for suspecting this was the case. At paragraph 28 the  Tribunal
    suggested that a  suspicion  cannot  arise  by  a  failure  to  produce
    evidence not asked for. At paragraph 32 the Tribunal held that  a  visa
    should be issued promptly on application unless the decision maker  has
    reasonable grounds  to  suspect  a  marriage  of  convenience  and  the
    evidential onus of showing that there are such  reasonable  grounds  in
    the first place rest on the decision maker.

 7. Before me Mr Ariyo submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof which rested upon her. He argued that the
    statements of  the  couple  had  given  clear  explanations  about  the
    discrepancies in the marriage interview that the Judge  had  failed  to
    look at. On the basis of the interview, he submitted, the Judge  should
    not have found against the Appellant because,  although  there  were  a
    number of errors, he did not give credit for the  number  of  questions
    that they got right.  He  submitted  that  there  were  no  justifiable
    reasonable  suspicions  to  indicate  that  this  was  a  marriage   of
    convenience. He submitted that the questionable divorce certificate was
    not enough to invalidate the marriage and explanations about the  flaws
    in that certificate were before the Judge in the Appellant's bundle. He
    argued that the divorce certificate was not submitted to the  Secretary
    of State with  the  application  because  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    refusing an earlier application had not accepted that first marriage to
    be a valid one. In relation  to  the  question  of  the  EEA  sponsor's
    employment he said that at paragraph 12 of the Decision the Judge  fell
    into error in saying there was no letter from the employer  when  there
    was one in the bundle.

 8. I will deal firstly with the question of the marriage itself because if
    the marriage is either invalid or a marriage  of  convenience  then  it
    matters not whether the EEA Sponsor is a qualifying person because  the
    appellant cannot then succeed.

 9. The immigration history  of  the  Appellant  in  this  case  is  highly
    relevant to that evaluation and is set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 of  the
    Judge's decision. The Appellant, a Nigerian national, came to the UK in
    September 2004 as a student and his visa was renewed successfully until
    2010 when he was granted leave to remain as a post-study  work  migrant
    until March 2012. In March 2012 he made application for leave to remain
    on the basis of his marriage to an EEA national, a Miss Kimberly  Bito.
    That application was refused on April 2012. On  30th  August  2012  the
    Appellant submitted another application for leave to remain  this  time
    on the base of his private life. That application was refused  on  17th
    October 2013. On 31st October 2013  the  Appellant  again  applied  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of an EEA national and it was the refusal
    of that application that was the subject of the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

10. The Appellant's wife on this occasion was  a  different  EEA  national,
    Fanta Keita-Doumbia, a French national.

11. Following the application the couple were interviewed by the  Secretary
    of State in March 2014.

12. At paragraph 18 of the Decision the Judge refers to those interviews as
    being very lengthy and the bundle contained the full interview  record.
    That record he said revealed inconsistencies and discrepancies  of  the
    most fundamental nature between the Appellant and his  EEA  sponsor  as
    set out by the Secretary of  State  in  her  Letter  of  Refusal.   The
    discrepancies included basic information relating to  the  finances  of
    the Appellant and his  EEA  sponsor  and  showed  a  complete  lack  of
    knowledge also on the part of  the  EEA  sponsor  of  personal  details
    relating to her claimed husband, including the reason he did  not  wear
    his wedding ring.

13. On the basis of the Papjorgji as set out above, the Secretary of  State
    must have reasonable grounds to suspect  the  marriage  to  be  one  of
    convenience. Mr Ariyo submitted that there  was  insufficient  in  this
    case to justify the Secretary of State's  suggestion  that  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience. I disagree. In the first place, the  Secretary
    of State sets  out  over  two  pages  of  the  Letter  of  Refusal  the
    considerable number of significant discrepancies in the interview.  The
    Secretary of State also noted the validity of the marriage  itself  was
    in question as the Appellant had previously claimed to  be  married  to
    another EEA national but had provided no evidence that he was  divorced
    from her and therefore free to  marry.  Additionally,  the  Appellant's
    immigration history including two separate applications as a spouse  to
    different women and an application  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    private life indicating a determination by him to remain in the UK.

14. Once the Secretary of State has  raised  on  the  basis  of  reasonable
    grounds the suggestion that it is a marriage of convenience  then  that
    is a matter to be addressed by the Appellant in evidence. Although  the
    Judge did not specifically refer to Papajorgji, it is  quite  clear  in
    this case on the basis of what the Judge did  say  about  the  marriage
    that he accepted there were reasonable grounds  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider that this was indeed a marriage of  convenience  such
    that  the  Appellant  should  have  put  forward  evidence  that   that
    assumption was incorrect. It is clear from the Decision that the Judge,
    as  he  was  entitled  to,  attached   considerable   weight   to   the
    discrepancies in the interview. The witness statements relied  upon  by
    the Appellant's  representative  did  not  satisfactorily  explain  the
    discrepancies.  The statements were before the Judge and indeed  it  is
    clear from the markings on them that the  Judge  had  read  them.  They
    offer various explanations including interpreter difficulties  for  his
    wife and the passage of time and memories fading  in  relation  to  the
    wrong answers. However,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    discrepancies amounted to very significant difficulties in the evidence
    and he was also entitled to attach considerable weight to the fact that
    he had no oral evidence from either the Appellant or his Sponsor.

15. In the Decision the Judge sets out at paragraph 9  that  the  Appellant
    had indicated in his Notice of Appeal that he wished to  have  an  oral
    hearing. That was initially set down  for  24  November  2014  but  was
    adjourned for the Appellant to be provided with a copy of the interview
    report. That was a proper application and a proper reason  to  adjourn.
    The hearing was then fixed for 20 April 2015. On the last  working  day
    prior to the hearing date the  Tribunal  received  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's  solicitors,  the  same  who  continue  to  represent  him,
    including additional documents and saying that the  Appellant  had  now
    "elected that his appeal should be decided on the papers".

16. Mr Ariyo sought to explain that this was because the Appellant's father
    had been taken ill. That may well have been the case. However, it  does
    not explain why the Appellant should elect to  have  his  appeal  dealt
    with on the papers. There is no reason why an  adjournment  application
    could not have been made on the basis that it is clearly crucial  in  a
    case where the subsistence of the marriages is  in  question  that  the
    Judge should hear from both parties to  that  marriage.  There  was  no
    reason why the solicitor  and  the  Appellant's  wife  could  not  have
    attended the hearing but they chose  not  to  do  so.  It  is  entirely
    unsurprising in a case such as this, with immigration history  such  as
    this that the Judge was entirely satisfied that this was a marriage  of
    convenience.

17. So far to the validity of the marriage itself is  concerned  the  Judge
    was also entitled to find difficulties with that. It was  submitted  to
    me that the reason why the Appellant  had  not  submitted  his  divorce
    certificate to the Secretary of State  was  because  the  Secretary  of
    State had not considered his first marriage to be valid. The  Appellant
    however had asserted that it was a valid marriage and therefore it  was
    up to him to show that marriage had been terminated. He cannot have  it
    both ways. A purported divorce certificate was produced for the purpose
    of the appeal but the Judge pointed out various difficulties  with  the
    certificate and found, as he was entitled to do, that he  could  attach
    no weight to it.

18. The Judge would have  been  entitled  to  dismiss  this  appeal  either
    because there was no valid marriage or that any marriage was a marriage
    of convenience.

19. Given those inescapable conclusions on the evidence whether or not  the
    EEA sponsor was in truth a qualifying person becomes irrelevant.

20. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
