
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/16038/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 28 June 2016              |On Friday 23 September 2016          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                       MISS VINOTHIKA THAVABALASANDRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by KTS Legal
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Monson promulgated on 16 December 2013  ("the  Decision").  By
       the Decision the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
       Respondent's decision dated 25 April 2013 refusing her further leave
       to remain on the basis of  her  private  life  and/or  compassionate
       grounds and directing her removal to Sri Lanka.

    2. Permission to appeal was  refused  first  by  Designated  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge French on 5 March 2014 and  then  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Chalkley on 9 April 2014.    On  2  May  2014,  the  Appellant
       lodged an  application  for  judicial  review  of  Judge  Chalkley's
       decision which culminated in the grant of permission to apply by Mrs
       Justice Nicola Davies on 18 August 2014.  The  interested  party  in
       those proceedings (the Respondent in the instant case)  appears  not
       to have requested a hearing and therefore, under CPR54.7A, the  case
       was automatically remitted to this Tribunal whereupon permission  to
       appeal was granted on  15  October  2014.   Following  a  series  of
       interim directions orders, one of which I need to deal  with  below,
       the appeal finally came before us to determine whether there  is  an
       error of law in the  Decision  and  if  so  to  either  re-make  the
       decision or remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

    3. Two of the three grounds  raised  by  the  Appellant  refer  to  the
       Judge's findings at [29] of the Decision that the Appellant's family
       live in India and have a form of status there which would enable her
       to go to live in that country  rather  than  Sri  Lanka  if  she  so
       chooses.  Following a short adjournment at the start of the hearing,
       Mr Paramjoorthy indicated that Mr Walker  was  prepared  to  concede
       that this paragraph contained an error of law on the basis that  the
       Judge had misunderstood the evidence.  We pointed out  however  that
       we were not persuaded that, even if this paragraph  did  contain  an
       error of law, this would lead to the setting aside of  the  Decision
       because the error appeared to us to  be  immaterial.   We  indicated
       that this was our preliminary view but we encouraged Mr Paramjoorthy
       to make submissions to persuade us to the contrary.

    4. That exchange led on to a further preliminary matter which  was  the
       subject of  our  decision  dated  29  June  2016.   Mr  Paramjoorthy
       directed our attention to an order of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
       made on 17 November 2014, made shortly after the grant of permission
       to   appeal.    Judge   Martin   directed   that   the   Appellant's
       representatives  provide,   within   fourteen   days,   a   schedule
       identifying the evidence which they say  is  inaccurately  recorded.
       Judge Monson was then to be invited to comment on that schedule  and
       to  provide  a  legible  record  of  proceedings.  Mr   Paramjoorthy
       submitted that the statement of the Appellant dated 28 November 2014
       which I directed be re-served in my decision dated 16 February  2016
       deals with that issue.  That statement was not re-served as directed
       but we were able to find a copy of it on file prior to the  hearing.
       Unfortunately,  my  attention  was  not  drawn  to  Judge   Martin's
       directions on the occasion  of  the  hearing  in  February  2016  as
       otherwise it might have been possible for me to make  investigations
       as to the compliance with the remainder of those directions.

    5. As it was, having checked the file during the hearing, we were  able
       to find a letter from  Principal  Resident  Judge  Latter  to  Judge
       Monson dated 29  December  2014  asking  for  his  comments  on  the
       statement and drawing his attention to the terms of  Judge  Martin's
       order.  We were though unable to find a response during the hearing.
        The hearing therefore proceeded with both parties'  representatives
       making short submissions as recorded below in  relation  to  whether
       there is an  error  of  law  in  the  Decision  following  which  we
       indicated that we reserved  our  decision  and  would  issue  it  in
       writing.  However, following the conclusion of the hearing, we found
       the response of  Judge  Monson  together  with  a  typed  record  of
       proceedings which is in effect the Decision  but  incorporates  also
       his typed notes of the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  at  the
       hearing in relation to return to India.


    6. Although we took the view, as indicated to Mr  Paramjoorthy  at  the
       hearing, that what is important is what the Judge  recorded  in  the
       Decision as to the evidence and not what he understood the  evidence
       to be at the time, we considered  it  to  be  in  the  interests  of
       fairness to both parties that the material be provided and  they  be
       given the opportunity to make submissions  about  it.  We  therefore
       provided that opportunity by way  of  directions  contained  in  our
       decision dated 29 June 2016.   There  was  unfortunately  a  further
       delay as the response of  Judge  Monson  was  not  attached  to  our
       decision as originally promulgated.   It was  however  sent  to  the
       parties on 26 July 2016 and I indicated that I extended time  for  a
       response to Judge Monson's  comments  to  fourteen  days  after  the
       sending of that response.  Time accordingly  expired  on  10  August
       2016 but no submissions were received.  Accordingly, we have reached
       this decision taking into account the material before  us  including
       Judge Monson's comments and the submissions made at the  hearing  on
       28 June 2016.


    7. A further preliminary matter requires mention.   On  12  July  2016,
       the Appellant's solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  purporting  to
       submit a statement of additional grounds made  pursuant  to  section
       120  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  drawing
       attention to the fact that the Appellant says that during the appeal
       process she completed ten years' lawful residence and  qualified  in
       August 2015 for leave to remain on that basis.  We note  that  there
       was no application before us on  28  June  2016  to  adduce  further
       evidence.  Due to the passage of time,  this  could  not  have  been
       considered by Judge Monson and it cannot impact on the  legality  of
       his decision.  Accordingly, we directed the Tribunal to  respond  to
       that effect and to indicate that the Tribunal would only  take  this
       into account in the event that an error of law was  found  in  Judge
       Monson's Decision.


    8. We now turn to the factual background to  this  case  which  can  be
       shortly stated.  The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  She came
       to the UK in August 2005 as a  student  and  was  granted  leave  to
       remain which was extended until 30 March 2013.  Following revocation
       of her sponsor's licence, that leave was curtailed to expire  on  10
       August 2012 to find an alternative sponsor.   Instead,  she  applied
       for leave as a Tier 1 (entrepreneur) migrant but then, on 16 January
       2013, asked for that application to be withdrawn while  it  remained
       pending for decision.  She then applied  on  25  February  2013  for
       leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR.  We pause to observe  that  it
       would appear on the basis of this chronology  that  her  section  3C
       leave may have ended when she withdrew her  application  in  January
       2013.  That might affect her entitlement to leave on  the  basis  of
       ten years' lawful residence.  On the other hand, by her letter dated
       25 April 2013 which is under appeal in  this  case,  the  Respondent
       appears to have treated the application made in February 2013 as in-
       time and issued a  notice  refusing  to  vary  leave  and  directing
       removal.  This is not a matter which we need  to  consider  at  this
       stage.


    9. The basis for the Appellant's application is  the  duration  of  her
       stay in the UK, her private life here and the lack of  ties  to  her
       home country, Sri Lanka.   She  has  worked  as  a  tutor  providing
       additional home education and assistance for schoolchildren  in  the
       UK and has thereby been an asset to the community.   She  also  owns
       her own property.  She has never had recourse to public funds.   Her
       family consisting of her parents and sister now live in India.   Her
       parents moved from Sri Lanka to India in 2006.  This is a  point  to
       which we will return  since  it  forms  the  basis  of  the  grounds
       concerning Judge Monson's appreciation of the evidence.


   10. There is one particular  factor  of  note  in  this  case  which  is
       relevant to the Appellant's case concerning obstacles which she  may
       face on return to Sri Lanka.   She  claims  that  she  has  suffered
       discrimination in Sri Lanka due to burns suffered to  her  face  and
       upper body as a result of a childhood accident.  She worked at  HSBC
       in Sri Lanka before coming to the UK and, it appears,  was  promoted
       to  assistant  manager.   However,  she  says  that   due   to   the
       discrimination suffered from Sinhalese employees there, she  had  to
       resign.  She says that she then lost her confidence and did not feel
       able to continue her studies in Sri Lanka. She came to the  UK  with
       her mother between 1996 and 1997 for reconstructive surgery but that
       was unsuccessful and the scarring remains.


   11. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application by  letter  dated
       25 April 2013.  She considered the case under paragraph  276ADE  but
       concluded that the Appellant could not succeed on that basis as  she
       had not spent twenty years in the UK.  She was by then aged  twenty-
       nine years and, having spent the first twenty-one years in Sri Lanka
       before coming to the UK, it was not accepted that she had lost  ties
       to that country.   The  Respondent  also  gave  directions  for  her
       removal to Sri Lanka. Judge Monson dismissed the  appeal  under  the
       Rules and on human rights grounds outside the Rules.


    The grounds, submissions and evidence


   12. As we observe at [3] above, two of the three grounds before us focus
       on Judge Monson's findings that the Appellant could return to  India
       if she so wished.  This was also  the  primary  focus  of  the  oral
       submissions.  We therefore set  out  the  factual  basis  for  these
       submissions.
   13. Judge Monson made the following findings at  [29]  to  [30]  of  the
       Decision:-


            "[29]      The appellant's case proceeds on  the  premise  that
           she would have to go to Sri  Lanka.   However,  the  documentary
           evidence in the appellant's bundle indicates  that  her  parents
           and younger sister have settled status in India, either  because
           her father has been recognised as a political refugee or because
           the family have sufficient resources to be accepted as  economic
           migrants.  The appellant's younger sister is currently  studying
           to be a dentist, and the appellant's parents have the  requisite
           status in India to be able to sponsor the appellant to  come  to
           India as  a  visitor.   The  appellant  confirmed  in  her  oral
           evidence that it was not as a result  of  any  legal  impediment
           that she had not gone through with the plan to visit her  father
           in Chennai.  It was purely because of the bureaucratic delay  in
           obtaining a visit visa.


            [30] It is not of course enough that the  appellant  should  be
           able to visit her family in India.  She would need to be able to
           go there for the purposes of settlement  as  an  alternative  to
           going back to Sri Lanka.  Although her strong  preference  would
           be to remain in the United  Kingdom,  I  find  that  it  is  not
           established on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant
           would have to go to Sri Lanka, rather than to India, if required
           to leave the UK.  As the appellant has  strong  family  ties  to
           India, this disposes of her claim under paragraph 276ADE(vi)"


   14. The evidence on which those findings are based is rehearsed at  what
       is now [18] of the Decision as follows:-


            "[18]      In answer to questions  for  clarification  purposes
           from me, the appellant said that she had withdrawn  her  Tier  1
           Entrepreneur Migrant application as  she  realised  it  was  not
           going  to  work.   She  was  having   disagreements   with   her
           entrepreneurial team partner.  She  could  join  her  family  in
           India, but she had qualified here and she  did  not  know  about
           Indian culture."


   15. At [19] of the Decision, Judge Monson also records the testimony  of
       the Appellant's witness Ms George, as follows:-


           "Unfortunately  in  2006  the  appellant's  family   encountered
           problems in Sri Lanka, and eventually her  parents  and  younger
           sister had to leave Sri Lanka for India."


   16. As we note at [5] above, Judge Monson was asked for  his  record  of
       the proceedings concerning the oral evidence on this topic  and  for
       his comments on the Appellant's grounds that  he  had  misunderstood
       the evidence.  In relation  to  the  record  of  proceedings,  Judge
       Monson produced his draft of the Decision which incorporates at [15]
       the passage we have set out at [13] above but continues as follows:-


           "... It was not as a result of any legal impediment that she had
           not gone through with the plan to visit her father  in  Chennai.
           It was purely because of the bureaucratic delay in  obtaining  a
           visit visa.


            Verbatim Extract from manuscript notes of hearing, page 3


            16.  I could join my family in India
            (But) I am qualified here
            I don't know about Indian culture
            Every year I visit my parents in India
            Qualifications - Degree in Business Management
            Indian visas - I don't think it is that easy
            Sri Lankan can only here"


       He also points to  the  sentence  contained  in  his  draft  of  the
       Decision at what is now [19] and which  we  have  set  out  at  [15]
       above.


   17. In his comments, Judge Monson notes that he has provided a  verbatim
       transcript of the answers given by the Appellant in relation to  the
       ability to travel to India  and  to  join  her  parents  there.   In
       relation to the passage at [29] of the Decision which we have  cited
       at [13] above, the Judge points out that this does not turn on  what
       was said in oral evidence.  The Appellant's solicitors  assert  that
       this passage is based on a misunderstanding of the documents in  the
       Appellant's bundle.  As this does not turn on what was said  at  the
       hearing, Judge  Monson  rightly  takes  the  view  that  it  is  not
       appropriate for him to comment further.


   18. We asked Mr Paramjorthy at the hearing to direct  our  attention  to
       the documents which he  says  have  a  bearing  on  the  Appellant's
       application for permission to appeal.  We confirm that we have taken
       into account all the documents to which he referred us.  However, we
       have only cited those passages from the documents which we  consider
       have relevance to the issues.


   19. The first document of relevance is the letter from  the  Appellant's
       father [AB/106].  In relation to his  position  in  India  which  is
       central to this main issue, he says as follows:-


           "Unfortunately, in 2006, I had to leave Sri Lanka along with  my
           wife [NAME GIVEN] and youngest daughter [NAME GIVEN]  for  India
           due to political pressures in Sri Lanka.  I cannot return to Sri
           Lanka, nor can my wife  or  daughter.   I  have  taken  all  the
           necessary steps to live in India under  the  asylum  rules  from
           2006.  Since 2006 I  have  not  gone  back  to  Sri  Lanka.   My
           daughter [NAME GIVEN] is currently studying Dentistry (3rd year)
           at SRM University in Chennai"


       He goes on to speak of the lack of ties for  the  Appellant  in  Sri
       Lanka and her successes in the UK.  He does not address the question
       whether the Appellant would be able to go to India to live.

   20. We turn next to the Appellant's own statement [AB/149 onwards].  She
       mentions that her parents and sister fled to  India  in  2006.   She
       also has a brother who she says claimed asylum  in  the  UK,  having
       come here in 2004 but whose whereabouts are unknown since 2010.   In
       relation to her parents in India, she continues at [5] as follows:-


            "[5] On the 9th August 2012, I made an  application  under  the
           Tier 1 Entrepreneur which was acknowledged on  the  13th  August
           2012 (copy enclosed).  On the 16th January 2013, I requested the
           Home Office to withdraw  my  application  because  I  wanted  to
           travel urgently to Chennai, India since my father was not  well.
           However, I changed my mind  regarding  the  travel  due  to  the
           difficulty in obtaining the Indian visit visa in time.


            [6]  My parents had been displaced from Sri Lanka due  to  fear
           of persecution and are living in India since 2006."


       She continues at [13] as follows:-


           "I do not have any family to return  to  in  Sri  Lanka  ...  My
           parents and sister  are  residing  in  India  due  to  political
           pressures and persecution in Sri Lanka.  Therefore,  I  have  no
           ties in Sri Lanka whom I can return to."


   21. The Appellant's grounds assert that the Judge has misunderstood  the
       Appellant's evidence in relation to her family's status in India and
       that this error of fact amounts to an error of law.  The grounds are
       pleaded as follows:-


           "The  IJ's  assessment  of  the  facts  pursuant  to   paragraph
           276ADE(vi) of the immigration  rules  at  paragraph  29  of  the
           determination  is  with  respect  fatally  flawed.   First,  the
           Appellant's  family  is  neither  [sic]  are  neither   economic
           migrants nor are they political refugees.  India is not and  has
           not ever been signatory to the Geneva Convention.   The  learned
           IJ should have asked the A to discharge the burden of  proof  as
           to the actual status of her parents in India and it was  clearly
           central to his assessment of paragraph 276  of  the  immigration
           rules.  The Appellant's family are neither economic migrants but
           are temporary  refugees  in  that  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  who  had
           previously fled the civil war in  Sri  Lanka  are  permitted  to
           reside in the state of Tamil Nadu by registering their  presence
           with the Police and they have to renew that  registration  every
           six months.  The IJ  has  procedurally  erred  in  law  (and  it
           submitted that this is material) by failing to out the status of
           the Appellant's family to her [sic].


           It submitted with the utmost respect to the learned IJ, that the
           Appellant cannot travel to India from the UK.  The Appellant has
           no valid leave to remain here in the UK  and  is  a  Sri  Lankan
           national.  Is the learned IJ suggesting that the  Appellant  can
           actually make an application for entry clearance on the basis of
           settlement at the  Indian  High  Commission  in  London,  whilst
           having no valid leave?  The answer to that rhetorical submission
           must with respect  "no"  [sic].   The  Appellant  would  firstly
           require valid leave and any  application  for  settlement  would
           have to be made  at  the  Indian  Embassy  in  Colombo,  as  the
           Appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen.  Therefore with the  greatest
           of respect to IJ Monson, his assessment of paragraph 276 of  the
           rules, on the premise that the Appellant would not have to go to
           Sri Lanka is completely wrong and that  amounts  to  a  material
           error of law.   The  IJ's  finding  at  paragraph  30  that  the
           Appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE(vi) is disposed of,  as
           she can travel directly to India is a material error of law."


   22. Much of the oral hearing before us on 28  June  was  taken  up  with
       discussion of the materiality of any error of law  which  the  Judge
       may have made in this regard.  That is because the  Judge  continued
       after the finding at [30] of the Decision (cited at [13]  above)  as
       follows:-


           "[31] But I also consider the application of this Rules  on  the
           alternative premise that the appellant would have to go back  to
           Sri Lanka...


       [having then cited from Ogundimu and discussed what is meant by  "no
       ties", the Judge continued at [33]]


            "[33]      On the available  evidence,  the  appellant  has  no
           effective family ties in Sri Lanka as her close  family  members
           have relocated to Chennai in India.  But she was educated in Sri
           Lanka, and she has also worked in Sri Lanka.   She  speaks  both
           Tamil and Sinhalese, and she spent  the  vast  majority  of  her
           formative years in Sri Lanka.  She came to the United Kingdom at
           the age of 21 or 22 for a temporary purpose, and the  number  of
           years which she has  accumulated  here  in  the  capacity  of  a
           student are not such as to render her a person who does not have
           sufficient knowledge of or connections to her country of  origin
           so as to be able to  form  an  adequate  private  life  in  that
           country.  It cannot be said that the appellant is a stranger  to
           Sri Lanka, the people or the way of life there.


            [34] I turn  to  consider  whether  the  consequences  for  the
           appellant in re-establishing a private life in Sri Lanka at  her
           age, after some seven years' residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
           would be unjustifiably harsh having regard to her Tamil minority
           status, the relocation of her close family  to  India,  and  her
           facial scarring.  Whilst the appellant's  account  of  her  past
           experiences in Sri Lanka has some credibility, I  consider  that
           there is some  exaggeration.   Despite  her  disadvantages,  the
           appellant obtained employment with HSBC, and indeed  obtained  a
           promotion while working for HSBC  On her own case, the appellant
           has been warmly embraced by the Sri Lanka community in  the  UK,
           and it is unlikely that Ms George's sympathetic response to  the
           appellant whilst growing up was unique.    It  is  not  credible
           that the treatment which the appellant has received here is  the
           opposite  of  the  treatment   the   appellant   received   from
           schoolmates,  teachers  and  work  colleagues  in   Sri   Lanka,
           particularly  where  they  shared  the  common  bond  of   Tamil
           ethnicity.


            [35] In any event, as indicated by Ms  George's  evidence,  the
           appellant has grown in confidence and has become independent and
           self-sufficient.   She  has  the  skills,  maturity  and  mental
           resilience to re-establish  an  adequate  private  life  in  Sri
           Lanka.   If  necessary,  she  can  draw  on  the  practical  and
           emotional support of friends and relatives of those  members  of
           the Sri Lankan diaspora with whom she has forged close  contacts
           and friendships here.  It is inherently improbable that  all  of
           these friends have no contacts  in  Colombo  to  whom  they  can
           introduce the appellant.


            [36] So I find that the appellant can discharge the  burden  of
           proving that she qualifies for leave to remain  under  paragraph
           276ADE(vi) of the Rules...."


   23. We have set that passage out in full as it seems to us (as  we  have
       already indicated)  that,  even  if  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
       understanding of the evidence in relation to return  to  India,  the
       Appellant would need to make out her other ground that there  is  an
       error of law in relation  to  the  Judge's  assessment  whether  the
       Appellant has "no  ties"  to  Sri  Lanka;  otherwise  any  error  in
       relation to return to India would not be material.   The  Judge  has
       found in the alternative that the Appellant can return to Sri Lanka.
        Indeed, the Respondent's decision under  appeal  expressly  directs
       the Appellant's removal to that country.


   24. The Appellant's ground in this regard is at [6] of  the  grounds  as
       follows:-


           "The IJ's assessment as to whether the Appellant has no ties  to
           Sri Lanka  (para  33  of  the  determination)  also  contains  a
           material error of law.  The Appellant has no family ties in  Sri
           Lanka and the fact that is conversant in Sinhala and Tamil  when
           having regard to the rationale on Ogundimu, with  respect,  does
           not mean that the Appellant has  sufficient  ties  to  her  home
           country.  Her language proficiency  cannot  rationally  outweigh
           the fact that she has no immediate family in Sri Lanka  and  the
           IJ at paragraph 34 accepts (sic) "the Appellant's account of her
           past experiences in Sri Lanka has some credibility"  (albeit  he
           considered that there was  some  exaggeration).   The  Appellant
           will be returning to post-conflict Sri Lanka with serious facial
           scarring and the UK has failed to  adequately  engage  with  the
           fact that the Appellant will be returning to  a  country,  where
           she has sustained such substantial scarring, in the  absence  of
           any physical and emotional support from her family.   It  should
           not be forgotten that it was the Appellant's evidence  that  she
           came to the UK in 1996 to have treatment for  her  injuries  and
           that was with the support of her mother.  The Appellant's mother
           is in Sri Lanka [sic} and is a temporary refugee in India.   The
           IJ's failure to absolutely engage with these facts is a material
           error in law."


      Discussion and conclusions

   25. In light of the view we express at [23] above, we start  first  with
       the Appellant's  ground  concerning  the  Judge's  consideration  of
       whether the Appellant could be expected to return to Sri Lanka.   In
       light of the antiquity of this appeal, the test at the time was  one
       of whether the Appellant has "no ties" to Sri Lanka.   We  start  by
       noting that we do not understand it to be the Appellant's case  that
       the scarring which she has is a result of  the  hostilities  in  Sri
       Lanka.  It was caused by an accident during her childhood.  This  is
       not a case therefore where there is said to be  a  risk  arising  on
       return due to scarring.


   26. We  note  also  that  the  Judge  has  taken  into  account  of  the
       difficulties which the Appellant may face due to her scarring but as
       observed in the passage at [35] of the  Decision,  the  Judge  finds
       that the Appellant is likely to have grown in confidence as she  has
       become independent and self-sufficient during her time  in  the  UK.
       The Judge concludes that she  will  be  able  to  use  the  "skills,
       maturity and mental  resilience"  to  re-establish  herself  in  Sri
       Lanka.  The  Judge  does  not  say  that  her  language  proficiency
       outweighs the lack of her family in Sri Lanka.  What he does at [33]
       to [35] of the Decision is consider all of the factors  weighing  in
       the balance on this issue before reaching  the  conclusion  that  it
       cannot be said that the Appellant has "no  ties"  so  as  to  render
       return "unjustifiably  harsh".   The  Appellant's  challenge  is  in
       essence a rationality challenge.  The Judge's conclusions  based  on
       his assessment cannot be said to be irrational.  There is  no  error
       of law disclosed by the Judge's consideration of this issue.


   27. Having disposed of that ground, we conclude that, even if the  Judge
       had made any error of law in relation to return to  India,  this  is
       not  material  because  there  is  no  error  in  relation  to   his
       conclusions concerning return to Sri Lanka.


   28. In case we are wrong  about  that,  though,  we  also  consider  the
       substance of the grounds based on  return  to  India.   We  have  no
       difficulty in  accepting  that  an  error  of  fact  is  capable  of
       amounting to an error of law.  That is subject to some restrictions,
       however.  At [66] in the Court of Appeal's judgment in E v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49,  those  were
       stated as follows:-
           "In our view, the time has now come to accept that a mistake of
           fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate head of challenge
           in an appeal on a point of law, at least in those statutory
           contexts where the parties share an interest in co-operating to
           achieve the correct result. Asylum law is undoubtedly such an
           area. Without seeking to lay down a precise code, the ordinary
           requirements for a finding of unfairness are apparent from the
           above analysis of CICB. First, there must have been a mistake as
           to an existing fact, including a mistake as to the availability
           of evidence on a particular matter. Secondly, the fact or
           evidence must have been "established", in the sense that it was
           uncontentious and objectively verifiable. Thirdly, the appellant
           (or his advisers) must not been have been responsible for the
           mistake. Fourthly, the mistake must have played a material (not
           necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."
   29. Applying  that  approach  to  this  case,  the  findings  which  are
       criticised are that the Appellant's family are political refugees or
       have sufficient resources  to  be  accepted  as  economic  migrants.
       Although the grounds seeking permission to appeal  assert  that  the
       family's status is as temporary refugees who have to  register  with
       the Indian authorities every  six  months,  that  assertion  is  not
       supported by any evidence which the Appellant  seeks  to  adduce  to
       correct what she says is a mistake.  Although it  may  well  be  the
       case that India does not "recognise" refugees in accordance with the
       Refugee Convention because it is not a signatory to it, the evidence
       which the Judge had from the Appellant and her father was  that  the
       family fled Sri Lanka on account of persecution.   Furthermore,  the
       Appellant's father states that he lives in India under  the  "asylum
       rules".  He does not say what those are but he  does  not  say  that
       those require him to  re-register  every  six  months  or  that  the
       family's status is temporary.  Indeed, he makes clear  that  he  has
       lived in India with his family since 2006 and that the family cannot
       return to Sri Lanka.


   30. As such, we are not persuaded on the evidence before the  Judge  nor
       indeed on the evidence before us that there  has  actually  been  an
       error of fact, certainly in relation to whether the  family  are  in
       Sri Lanka as "political refugees" on  the  widest  meaning  of  that
       phrase.  The finding that the family are settled in India may or may
       not be an error of fact but as the evidence  currently  stands  that
       fact cannot be said to be "uncontentious".  We also note that  there
       is a requirement for the error of fact to be material to the Judge's
       reasoning.  For the reasons which we have already stated at [26], we
       are satisfied that, to the extent there is any error of fact, it  is
       not material to the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant  does  not
       satisfy paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules  as  those  stood  at  the
       relevant date.


   31. For those reasons, we find that there is no error of law in relation
       to the Appellant's grounds relating to return to India or  that  any
       error is not material.



DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of  law.  We  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 16 December 2013 with the consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal is dismissed.


Signed           [pic] Date      23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
