

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16188/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 20th December 2013                       |On : 31st December 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                        ileshkumar jagdishbhai patel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Zane Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Having initially arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as
    a student, the appellant made  an  in-time  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Migrant, and on 19th August 2010 the  Border  Agency
    sent a letter to his solicitors, Malik Law Chambers, with the news that
    their client's Biometric Residence Permit was on its way under separate
    cover.  This, it was explained, "is a residence permit which holds your
    client's  biographic  and  biometric  information   and   shows   their
    immigration status and entitlements", replacing  the  vignette  or  ink
    stamps which used to be placed in migrants' passports to show that they
    had leave to remain.  The letter also informed the representatives that
    their client  had  permission  to  undertake  an  Advanced  Diploma  in
    Business Management at William Shakespeare College.

2.   A leaflet was attached to the letter which, it was said, "explains  the
    conditions of your client's stay whilst in the  United  Kingdom."   The
    Residence Permit itself duly arrived, bearing the same date of issue as
    the letter (19th August 2010) and valid until 20th  August  2012.   The
    size of a credit card, the permit only has limited  space  for  written
    information to be imprinted  upon  it.   Under  the  heading  'Type  of
    Permit' we read "T4 GENERAL STUDENT LEAVE TO REMAIN", while  under  the
    heading 'Remarks' we read "WORK 20 HRS MAX  IN  TERM-TIME".   There  is
    plainly little room on the card for any  further  information,  and  it
    would be surprising if the card was intended to tell the holder all  he
    needed to know about his leave to remain as  a  student.   Indeed,  the
    information leaflet enclosed with the Border Agency's letter  to  Malik
    Law Chambers would have been unnecessary if the card said all there was
    to say.  But as we shall see below, it is now argued that the card  was
    the sole repository  of  any  conditions  which  could  effectively  be
    attached to Mr Patel's leave to remain.

3.   Before the expiry of this leave, the  appellant  applied  to  vary  it,
    indicating that he had been pursuing studies at Kingston College of  IT
    & Management from June 2010 to July 2012.  The application was refused,
    on the ground that Mr Patel had contravened paragraph  245ZY(c)(iv)  of
    the Immigration Rules, which stipulates "no study except (1)  study  at
    the institution  which  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    Checking Service records as the migrant's Sponsor."  This was  said  to
    trigger one of  the  General  Grounds  for  Refusal,  namely  paragraph
    322(3), "failure to comply with any conditions attached to the grant of
    leave to enter or remain."  Reference was made to  section  50  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  which  inserted  a  new
    s.3(1)(c)(ia) into  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  namely  "a  condition
    restricting his studies in the United Kingdom."

4.   The application was also refused on the ground that Mr  Patel  had  not
    fulfilled all the requirements for demonstrating that he  had  attained
    level B2 in English.  This ground of refusal was  overturned,  however,
    when the subsequent appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal, and  as
    this outcome has not been challenged, I need say no more about  it.   A
    simultaneous decision was taken to remove Mr Patel under section 47  of
    the 2006 Act, but as the decision was taken  before  the  amendment  to
    section 47 permitted such a course from 8th May  2013,  the  Presenting
    Officer withdrew it at the hearing at Hatton Cross on 7th October 2013.
     Judge Doran did, however, dismiss the  appeal  on  the  other  ground.
    Because the appellant had switched to a different college from the  one
    recorded by the CAS Checking Service  when  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in August 2010, he had failed, said the judge, to comply with  a
    condition of his leave "and therefore did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 245ZX(a) [which stipulates that the applicant must  not  fall
    for  refusal  under  the  General  Grounds]  and  322(iii)  [322(3)  is
    intended]."  Judge Doran also dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds, and although this featured in the grounds for seeking leave to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, leave was not granted on this issue,  and
    it has not been pursued further.

5.   The only ground on which Judge Robertson granted leave  to  appeal  was
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  arguably  treated  a  discretionary
    ground of refusal under Part 8 of the Rules, namely  paragraph  322(3),
    as if it were mandatory.  When the appeal came before me,  however,  Mr
    Malik ~ relying on Ferrer (limited appeal grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT
    304 (IAC) ~ sought to revive another ground on which leave had not been
    granted, namely that the  appellant  was  not  actually  subject  to  a
    condition interdicting him from studying with a sponsor other than  the
    one recorded by the CAS  Checking  Service.   I  was  content  to  hear
    argument on  this,  and  Mr  Malik  did  indeed  deploy  his  customary
    ingenuity in setting out a  case  which  was  stoutly  resisted  by  Mr
    Wilding.  At the close of submissions, however, it seemed  to  me  that
    Judge Robertson had got it right, and that the First-tier determination
    was open to criticism only on the point about the discretionary  nature
    of rule 322(3).

6.   The statutory basis for the disputed condition is s.3(1)(c)(ia) of  the
    1971 Act, which  talks  about  a  condition  "restricting"  a  person's
    studies in the United Kingdom.  That cannot just mean, as argued in the
    grounds of appeal, restricting the duration of a person's studies.  The
    plain and natural meaning of the word extends to the course of  studies
    which the person is pursuing,  and  the  institution  at  which  he  is
    pursuing them.

7.   Mr Malik sets greater store by the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
    Remain) Order 2000, which stipulates at Article 3  that,  if  an  entry
    clearance is to take effect as leave to enter,  it  "must  specify  the
    purpose for which the holder wishes to enter the  United  Kingdom"  and
    "must be endorsed with (a) the conditions to which it is subject."   By
    the same token, contends Mr Malik, the residence permit  issued  to  Mr
    Patel must have been endorsed on its face with any conditions to  which
    his leave to remain was subject.  The only condition appearing  on  the
    residence permit is a restriction on working more  than  20  hours  per
    week during term-time.  No condition was therefore imposed on Mr Patel,
    which would be breached by his switching to a different sponsor.

8.   This contention depends upon reading into the 2000 Order (or into  some
    other document, for the  order  itself  is  completely  silent  on  the
    subject) a requirement that leave to remain, in order to be  effective,
    must be endorsed with the conditions to  which  it  is  subject.   This
    argument by analogy is simply not tenable.  One cannot define leave  to
    remain by analogy with leave to enter.  The  two  are  different.   The
    2000 Order made a significant change to the nature of entry  clearance,
    expanding it from a travel document valid for six  months,  to  a  pre-
    arrival grant of leave to enter, such as previously could only be given
    by an immigration officer at the port.  The 2000 Order deals  with  the
    consequences of this, and the only change it makes in respect of  leave
    to remain is to stipulate that leave of more than six months  shall  no
    longer lapse  on  the  holder's  departure  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    Nothing is said about the grant of leave to remain.

9.   There is accordingly no need to accept Mr  Malik's  argument  that  the
    Biometric  Residence  Permit  issued  to  Mr  Patel  contains  all  the
    conditions to which his leave to remain  was  subject.   Its  principal
    purpose, as the letter of 19th August  2010  states,  is  to  show  the
    holder's  immigration  status  and  entitlements.    The   reader   can
    immediately see that the holder  is  a  student,  while  a  prospective
    employer can tell whether he can lawfully  employ  the  student  during
    term-time.  If Mr Malik is right, and the residence card itself is  the
    only proper source of information about what the holder is entitled  to
    do, then Mr Patel was only allowed to work for 20 hours each term.  The
    card does not say 20 hours per week (it does not even  say  hours,  but
    hrs).  What is written under 'Remarks'  on  the  card  is  a  shorthand
    summary of the condition which is likely to be most  important  to  the
    student in practical terms.  The employer and the  student  must  learn
    from another source (which  is  readily  available)  that  degree-level
    students are allowed to work for 20 hours a week during the  term,  and
    full-time during the vacation.

10.  The letter sent to Malik Law Chambers  was  accompanied  by  a  leaflet
    giving much more information, in a  simplified  form,  about  what  the
    grant of leave allowed or forbade Mr Patel to do - information which he
    could have gleaned, but with  more  difficulty,  from  the  Immigration
    Rules governing his leave.  For example, he  is  told  that  he  cannot
    claim public funds.  That is not endorsed on his residence permit,  but
    it has not been suggested that, because of this omission, Mr Patel  was
    entitled to have recourse to public funds.  In the same vein, Mr  Patel
    is told that he is restricted to  studying  at  the  institution  which
    issued his CAS, and that if he wants to change to a different  sponsor,
    he should make a fresh application.  The leaflet makes it clear that it
    is for information only and does not convey the grant of leave, but the
    information does convey in simple form the requirements  of  the  Rules
    for students, which were binding on Mr  Patel.   The  fact  that  those
    requirements could not all be squeezed onto the residence card does not
    mean that they were of no effect.  What was mentioned on the  residence
    card under the heading 'Remarks' cannot sensibly be  taken  to  specify
    all the conditions to which the holder was subject.

11.  It follows that the  unauthorised  switch  by  Mr  Patel  from  William
    Shakespeare College to Kingston College was indeed a breach of  one  of
    the conditions of his leave.  He had enrolled with William  Shakespeare
    College in April 2010, and the  CAS  issued  to  him  by  that  college
    enabled him to win a pending appeal in June 2010.   There  followed  in
    August, as we have seen above, the grant of leave to remain in order to
    study at William Shakespeare College.  But Mr Patel had  already  moved
    to  Kingston  College,  having   become   dissatisfied   with   William
    Shakespeare College.  In his Witness Statement of 2nd October 2013,  Mr
    Patel says that, having  previously  switched  sponsors  twice  without
    getting into any trouble over it, he was unaware of the need  to  apply
    to the UKBA for a change of sponsor, and that Kingston College did  not
    advise him to do so.  Nevertheless, the requirement is there at Part 6A
    of the Immigration Rules.

12.  What was clearly not appreciated by Judge  Doran  when  dismissing  the
    appeal was that breach of such a rule does not  automatically  lead  to
    the refusal of further leave.  As Part 9 of HC 395 makes plain, that is
    the normal consequence.  But the decision-maker  has  a  discretion  to
    waive the breach, while a First-tier judge must allow an  appeal  under
    s.86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act if he thinks that  a  discretion  under  the
    Rules should have been exercised differently.  In a Rule 24 Response to
    the grant of permission in the present  case,  the  Specialist  Appeals
    Team invited the Upper Tribunal to remit the matter back to Judge Doran
    "to rectify her (sic) decision by considering  whether  the  respondent
    should have exercised her discretion  differently  in  respect  of  the
    general ground for refusal under paragraph  322(3)."   This  invitation
    was discussed by the representatives before  me,  and  in  the  end  we
    reached the following position.

13.  As explained in Ukus (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  307
    (IAC), helpfully handed up by Mr Malik, there has to be an exercise  of
    discretion by the respondent before a  First-tier  judge  can  consider
    whether to exercise the discretion differently.  It is clear  from  the
    decision letter in the instant case that it simply did not occur to the
    decision-maker that there was a discretion to be exercised.  There  had
    been a contravention of rule 245ZY(c)(iv), and that was that.   So  the
    appropriate course must be to remit the matter, not to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but to the Secretary of State, for her  to  consider  whether
    the  appellant's  breach  of  condition  merits  the  refusal  of   his
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant.   It  will
    be open to Mr Patel to supplement his explanation for not  applying  to
    the Home Office for approval of his change of  sponsor,  summarised  at
    paragraph 11 above, and to draw to the attention of  the  Secretary  of
    State any further information which might assist her in exercising  her
    discretion.


     DECISION

     There has been an  error  of  law  on  one  aspect  of  the  First-tier
    determination, and to that extent the decision on the appeal is re-made
    by the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  limited  extent
    that the decision to refuse to vary the appellant's leave  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, such that the application for further leave is
    outstanding before the Secretary of State, and awaits the  exercise  of
    her discretion under the Immigration Rules.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          29th December 2013



