
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16071/2015
                                                               IA/16076/2015
                                                               IA/16080/2015
                                                               IA/16083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 October 2016                          |On 31 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                     Sathiyaseelan [A] (first appellant)
                       Ponvily [S] (second appellant)
                           [K S] (third appellant)
                          [B S] (fourth appellant)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The four appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka. The first appellant,
    born on 30 May 1976, is the husband of the second appellant, who was
    born on 8 November 1976.  The third and fourth appellants are their
    children born respectively on 12 January 2008 and 12 November 2010.

 2. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent to reject the
    appellants' application for leave to remain on the basis of their
    private and family life. Their ensuing appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wright. In a decision promulgated on 2 February 2016,
    the judge dismissed their appeal. The appellants are now appealing that
    decision.

Background

 3. The first appellant entered the UK on 28 March 2006 and made an
    unsuccessful asylum claim.  He remained thereafter without lawful
    leave.

 4. The second appellant entered the UK on 20 June 2007 as a student and
    has remained in the UK without lawful leave since her leave expired in
    2010.

 5. Both the third and fourth appellants were born in the UK.

 6. On 3 March 2015 the appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK on
    the basis of their private and family life.  At the time of the
    application the third appellant had been in the UK for just over seven
    years.

 7. The respondent did not accept that any of the appellants were able to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules or that there were
    exceptional circumstances to warrant allowing the appeal outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. With respect to the third appellant the respondent found that paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules was not satisfied on the basis that even
    though he had been living in the UK for seven years when the
    application was made it would not be unreasonable to expect him to move
    to Sri Lanka with his family.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their appeal
    was heard by Judge Wright.  The judge first considered the appeals
    under the Rules. He found (no argument having been made to the
    contrary) that the first, second and fourth appellants could not
    satisfy the Rules.

10. In respect of the third appellant, the judge identified that, as he had
    been in the UK for seven years, the issue to be resolved was whether it
    would be reasonable to expect him to leave. The judge found that it
    would. His reasoning was that it is in the third appellant's best
    interests to remain with his family and his family would be removed as
    a unit to Sri Lanka.  The judge found that the third appellant could
    "fairly easily adapt" to life in Sri Lanka on account of his young age,
    the absence of any significant medical issues or special needs, his
    familiarity with Tamil and the existence of a functioning education
    system in Sri Lanka.

11. The judge then turned to Article 8 ECHR and found there to be no
    compelling reasons to allow the appeal outside the Rules.  He
    considered the factors set out in Section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and found these did
    not support the appellants.  In respect of the first and second
    appellants the judge highlighted their lack of English or financial
    independence and that their private life was established whilst in the
    UK unlawfully or precariously.  The judge further took into account
    that the first and second appellants speak Tamil, spent much of their
    lives in Sri Lanka and have family in Sri Lanka.

12. The judge identified that the best interests of the appellants'
    children was a primary but not paramount consideration. He found it to
    be in their best interests to remain with their parents. Noting the
    requirements of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, he found it not
    unreasonable for the third and fourth appellants to leave the UK with
    their parents who would be returning to a country where they had lived
    most of their lives and with which they were familiar.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

13. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred in law in his
    approach to the third appellant's case as there was a failure to
    properly address, taking into account his particular individual
    circumstances, whether it would be reasonable for him to leave the UK
    and move to Sri Lanka. It is argued that the judge failed to consider
    that the third appellant was born in the UK, has never been to Sri
    Lanka, has a limited grasp of Tamil, has strong friendships and
    connections in the UK and would be moving with his family to a region
    in Sri Lanka (Mullaithivu) where conditions are highly challenging and
    the educational system is poor.

14. The grounds also argue that if the judge erred in respect of the third
    appellant it follows, having regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act,
    that the judge equally erred in respect of the other appellants.

15. At the error of law hearing I heard submissions from Mr Martin on
    behalf of the appellants and Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the respondent.
    Both representatives recognised that the central issue in this matter
    is whether it is reasonable for the third appellant to be removed to
    Sri Lanka. Submissions were made in respect of the recent Court of
    Appeal decision MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and the Upper
    Tribunal decision PB and Others (Article 8 conjoined family claims) Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108.

16. The essence of Mr Martin's argument was that the judge had failed to
    recognise that the test of reasonableness required there to be strong
    reasons or significant weight to justify the removal of a child who has
    been in the UK for seven years.  He cited the reference in MA at
    paragraph 49 to there having to be "powerful reasons".  He highlighted
    that the precariousness of a child's immigration status does not mean
    little weight should be given to the private life they have developed
    in the UK.  He also stressed that the test is not about the child's
    age.  An 8 year old could develop (and in this case had developed) a
    strong attachment and connection to the UK such that his removal would
    be unreasonable in all the circumstances.

17. Ms Fijiwala highlighted that in MA (Pakistan) the test of
    reasonableness includes wider public interest factors and therefore
    there was no error on the part of the judge in taking such factors into
    account.  She noted that the judge had considered a broad range of
    circumstances relevant to the third appellant including his age, the
    absence of leave to remain for his family, his ability to adapt, his
    educational circumstances and the absence of special needs or
    particular medical conditions that could not be treated in Sri Lanka,
    and based on these factors had reached a conclusion that was open to
    him on the evidence.

Consideration

18. The issue in this appeal is whether the judge erred in his approach to
    the test of reasonableness under 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules
    and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

19. In MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ explained the factors a Tribunal should take
    into account when applying the test of reasonableness (he found that
    the same test applies under the Rules and the 2002 Act). This includes
    that:

      a) A Tribunal must consider the child's best interests (which is a
         primary consideration).

      b) It can be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK even if his
         best interests would be served by remaining.

      c) The fact that a child has been in the UK for seven years must be
         given significant weight when carrying out the proportionality
         exercise such that there should be strong reasons for refusing him
         leave. This is because after seven years a child will have put down
         roots and developed social, cultural and educational links in the
         UK (and removal will be highly disruptive)

      d) An assessment of reasonableness will depend upon a careful analysis
         of the nature and extent of the child's links to the UK and to the
         country of return. A fact specific analysis is required when
         considering whether the need for immigration control outweighs the
         best interests of a child.

      e) Regard must be had to the wider public interest in effective
         immigration control and in this context the conduct of the child's
         parents, and their immigration history, is relevant. See MA
         (Pakistan) at [41]-[42], [88] and [101]. As explained at [88]; "the
         conduct of the parents is relevant to their own situation which
         bears upon the wider public interest and does not amount to blaming
         the children even if they may be prejudiced as a result".

20. Reading Judge Wright's decision as a whole, it is apparent that before
    concluding that it would be reasonable for the third appellant to leave
    the UK he considered a wide range of factors relevant to his particular
    circumstances. This included:

      a) his age (8 years old).

      b) the time he has spent in the UK (8 years).

      c) the absence of serous medical conditions that could not be treated
         in Sri Lanka.

      d) His knowledge of Tamil: the judge made clear findings, which were
         open to him on the evidence and which I accept, about the third
         appellant's familiarity with the language.

      e) that he is a good student with no special educational needs.

      f) his ability to adapt to life in in Sri Lanka (the judge found that
         his age, health, linguistic ability and family circumstances meant
         he could "fairly easily adapt").

      g) his mother worked in Sri Lanka and has gained further education and
         qualifications which make were well placed to find employment on
         return.

      h) he has wider family in Sri Lanka.

21. The judge also took into account, and gave weight to the fact that, the
    third appellant's parents are, and have remained for some time, in the
    UK unlawfully and that the public interest weighs strongly against
    allowing them to remain in the UK given their poor English, lack of
    financial independence and immigration history.

22. The judge has considered the particular circumstances of the third
    appellant, taking into account factors such as his age, health,
    education, language ability and connection to Sri Lanka. It is apparent
    the judge has considered the third appellant's connections in the UK
    and the implications for him of moving to Sri Lanka. The judge also
    gave weight to the immigration history of the third appellant's parents
    and the public interest in effective immigration. By taking these
    factors into account, the judge was approaching the question of
    reasonableness in a way that was consistent with MA (Pakistan).

23. The judge did not refer to there being "strong" or "powerful" reasons
    to refuse the third appellant leave to remain but it is clear from the
    decision that he found such reasons from a combination of factors
    including the immigration history of the third appellant's parents and
    the relative ease with which he could adapt to Sri Lanka given his age,
    lack of medical or educational problems, and family connections in Sri
    Lanka.

24. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the judge identified
    the correct legal test, applied it appropriately, and reached a
    conclusion that was open to him based on the evidence.  Accordingly, I
    find that the judge did not make a material error of law.

Decision

1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

2. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 28 October 2016               |


