
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16713/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th July 2016                        |On 8th August 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              saleem ur rehman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 16th October 2015.

 2. The appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan.  He  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision of 10th April 2015 to refuse to issue him an  EEA
    residence card as the spouse of a  Slovakian  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights here.  The respondent  believed  both  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience and  that  the  EEA  national  spouse  was  not
    exercising  treaty  rights.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that   Zuzana
    Kostenikova was a qualified person but he dismissed the appeal  because
    he was satisfied that this was indeed a marriage of convenience.

 3. Mrs Petterson, for the respondent, accepted that the judge had erred in
    his decision.

Findings and Conclusions

 4. The judge placed weight on the fact that the  appellant  had  not  been
    truthful  in  relation  to  his  studies.  There  were  three  previous
    decisions, that this was a marriage of convenience, made on 1st October
    2012, 27th November 2012 and 18th March 2013  and  he  said  that  they
    should not be displaced by the fact that the couple  now  had  a  child
    "given his continued dishonesty".

 5. The decision is set aside.

 6. The judge said at paragraph 4

         "IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  establishes
         only that there is an evidential burden on the claimant to  address
         evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is
         entered into for the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
         rights."

 7. It appears  that  the  judge  did  not  apply  the  correct  test.   In
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC) the then President of the Tribunal set out the  law  to  be
    applied and, at paragraph 14, wrote as follows

         "The United Kingdom has taken measures  to  prevent  parties  to  a
         marriage of convenience from  taking  advantage  of  the  Citizens'
         Directive by providing in the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
         Regulation 21 that 'spouse does not include a party to  a  marriage
         of convenience.'  No definition is given of marriage of convenience
         but  that  phrase  has  been  construed  in  the  context  of   the
         Immigration Rules as a marriage entered into without the  intention
         of matrimonial cohabitation and for the primary reason of  securing
         admission to the country.  The minister  appears  to  have  applied
         this approach when introducing the  Immigration  (EEA)  Order  1994
         that preceded the 2006 Regulations (see Macdonald's Immigration Law
         and Practice 8th Edition 2010 at 7.100).   Even  on  this  approach
         intent to cohabit as man and wife is inconsistent with  a  marriage
         of convenience."

 8. In simply citting the second part of the definition  i.e.  the  primary
    reason of securing admission to the country and not the first,  without
    the intention of matrimonial cohabitation,  the  judge  misapplied  the
    law.

 9. In this case there was clear evidence that the couple had cohabited  in
    that they have a child.

10. Furthermore the judge tested the appellant's claim to  have  learned  a
    little Slovakian by asking him at random a number  of  different  words
    which he appears to have answered correctly.  The appellant  could  not
    possibly have rehearsed the answers. The clear inference is that he has
    significant verbal contact with his wife.

11. Finally, as Mrs  Petterson  readily  acknowledged,  the  appellant  has
    consistently claimed that his was a genuine marriage which  appears  to
    have stood the test of time.  She was  happy  for  me  to  reverse  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred  in  law  and  his  decision  is  set  aside.   The
following decision is substituted.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                              Date 7 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
