
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16407/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2016                          |On 19th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 VIOLET [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Masih of Counsel instructed by Fursdon Knapper
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Andrew  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th November 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Nigerian citizen born 13th  April  1985.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  Student  on  13th  February
    2014.  She met a British citizen and became pregnant, and gave birth to
    a child on 25th November 2014.

 4. The Claimant's Tier 4 leave was curtailed and expired on  7th  February
    2015.  Before the expiry of her leave she applied for leave  to  remain
    based upon her family and private life.

 5. That application was refused on 22nd April 2015 and the appeal  against
    refusal was heard by the FtT on 9th November 2015.

 6. The FtT  heard  evidence  from  the  Claimant  and  noted  a  statutory
    declaration from the child's  father  which  stated  that  he  provided
    financial support, although he had not attended the hearing.

 7. The FtT found  that  the  Claimant  could  not  satisfy  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, and therefore EX.1 needed to  be
    considered, and the issue was whether it was reasonable to  expect  the
    British child to leave the United Kingdom.

 8. The FtT found that the child's  father  had  stated  in  his  statutory
    declaration that he would not allow his child to be taken  out  of  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. The FtT placed weight on the refusal by the child's father to allow the
    child to leave the United Kingdom  and  found  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave this  country.   Therefore  the
    appeal was allowed.

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the findings of the FtT  at
    paragraphs 16 and  17  that  EX.1  applies  are  entirely  inadequately
    reasoned.  The child was born on 25th November 2014 and at the date  of
    the FtT hearing was less than 1 year old.  It was contended that it was
    entirely reasonable to expect the child to remain  with  the  Appellant
    and return to Nigeria as a family unit.  It was contended that the  FtT
    had failed to adequately explain why the requirement under EX.1 was met
    on the facts of this case.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Scott-Baker  who  found  the
    Secretary of State's grounds disclosed an arguable error of law.

12. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary, that the grounds submitted by the Secretary
    of State amounted to a disagreement with the finding made by  the  FtT,
    but did not disclose a material error of law.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

14. Mrs Aboni relied upon the grounds contained within the application.   I
    was asked to note that the child's father had not attended the  hearing
    before the FtT.  If the Claimant left the  United  Kingdom,  the  child
    would not necessarily be left alone,  and  the  FtT  had  not  properly
    considered whether the child could be left with his father.  Mrs  Aboni
    submitted that the FtT decision displayed a lack of reasoned findings.

The Claimant's Submissions

15. Mrs Masih disagreed and relied upon  the  rule  24  response,  and  her
    lengthy skeleton argument.

16. Mrs Masih submitted that the FtT decision was adequately  reasoned  and
    the Secretary of State had accepted that EX.1 should be considered.

17. The Secretary of State's view that it would be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the UK was  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  contrary
    conclusion which had been reached by the FtT.  I was asked to note  the
    policy of the Secretary of State, which had been before  the  FtT,  and
    which is set out at paragraph 4 of the rule 24 response  and  which  is
    set out below;

         11.2.3   Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child
                to leave the UK?

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

18. I was asked to find the decision of the FtT disclosed no material error
    of law and should stand.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The Secretary of State accepts in the refusal decision dated 22nd April
    2015 that EX.1 should be considered.  For ease of reference I  set  out
    below EX.1(a);

         EX.1 This paragraph applies if

                (a)(i) the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child who -

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                             age of 18 years when the  applicant  was  first
                             granted leave on the basis that this  paragraph
                             applied;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                             continuously  for  at   least   the   7   years
                             immediately preceding the date of  application;
                             and

                (ii)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the UK;

20. It was common ground before the FtT that the child is British, and  the
    Respondent did not suggest that the Claimant did not have a genuine and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  her  child.   As  stated   in
    paragraph 15, the FtT recognised that  the  issue  in  the  appeal  was
    whether it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

21. The FtT then proceeded at paragraphs 16 and 17 to consider this  issue,
    and concluded that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

22. With reference to the child being British, Lady Hale in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 confirmed at paragraph 30 that;

         "Although nationality is not a  trump  card  it  is  of  particular
         importance in assessing the best interest of any child."

23. Lady Hale  went  on  to  state  at  paragraph  32  that  the  intrinsic
    importance of citizenship should not be played down, and  that  British
    children have rights which they will not be able to  exercise  if  they
    move to another country.

24. It is therefore clear from  the  above,  that  citizenship  is  a  very
    important consideration.  The FtT clearly took into  account  the  very
    young age of the child.  The FtT  placed  weight  upon  the  fact  that
    although the father was not  present,  he  had  submitted  a  statutory
    declaration, in which he stated that he would not give  his  permission
    for the child to be taken out of the jurisdiction.

25. In my view the FtT was entitled to place  weight  upon  that  evidence.
    The FtT was also entitled, although there was no specific reference  to
    this in the decision, to take into account the Respondent's own  policy
    regarding British children, which has been  set  out  earlier  in  this
    decision, and which was contained within the skeleton  argument  placed
    before the FtT.  That policy is  clear,  in  that  the  decision  maker
    acting on behalf of the Secretary of State must not take a decision  in
    relation to a parent or primary carer of a British citizen child, where
    the effect of that decision would be to force the child  to  leave  the
    EU, regardless of the child's age.

26. Mrs Aboni submitted that the FtT had not considered whether  the  child
    could be looked after by  the  father.   I  disagree  as  the  FtT  did
    consider this point stating at paragraph 17;

         "There is no evidence before me that the father would care for  the
         child or indeed would have the ability to do so.  In any  event  it
         must be in the best interest of a child at this age to remain  with
         his mother."

27. I therefore conclude the FtT  identified  the  relevant  issue  in  the
    appeal, considered the evidence, and reached a conclusion based on  the
    evidence that had been considered.

28. I do not accept that the decision is inadequately reasoned.  I set  out
    below the head note to Budhathoki (reasons for  decision)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC);

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

29. In my view the FtT complied with  the  obligation  set  out  above  and
    explained in clear and brief terms the reasons for the  decision.   The
    application made by the Secretary of State displays  disagreement  with
    the FtT decision, but does not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been  no  application
to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity.  I see no need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 6th December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the FtT stands and therefore so does  the  decision  not  to
make a fee award.


Signed                              Date 6 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

