
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/16147/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |              Determination & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                              |
|On 7 December 2015                     |              On 4 January 2016          |
|                                       |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Cheuk Lam Yin
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Lai Har Tsang, the Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 7  March  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  Cheuk  Lam  Yin
    (hereafter "the claimant") indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of
    his long residence in the UK under  paras  276A-D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 2 January 2015, Judge A E Walker allowed the  claimant's
    appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision was unlawful
    and a breach of the claimant's Art 8 rights.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal with  permission.



 4. The appeal was initially listed before me on  6  October  2015.   In  a
    decision dated 16 October 2015, I concluded that the  judge's  decision
    involved the making of an error of law and set her decision  aside.   I
    adjourned  the  appeal  in  order  that  the  claimant  could  have  an
    opportunity to produce any further evidence in  support  of  his  claim
    under Art 8.

 5. The resumed hearing was before me on 7 December 2015.

 6. The sole issue was  whether  the  claimant  had  established  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision breached Art 8.

The Hearing

 7. The claimant was not  legally  represented  but  was  assisted  by  his
    mother, the sponsor who spoke on his behalf.  In response to a question
    from me, the claimant and sponsor provided up-to-date information about
    the claimant's circumstances.  In  addition,  I  was  provided  with  a
    number of documents including photographs, an offer of  employment  for
    the claimant and a schedule of the periods of his residence in  the  UK
    since he first arrived.  Following the hearing, the  claimant  e-mailed
    to the Tribunal a number of further documents in support of his claim.

 8. In addition, the claimant provided me, through his mother, with a  copy
    of the Court of Appeal's decision in Singh and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA
    Civ 630.

The Facts

 9. The claimant is a British Overseas Citizen and a holder of a Hong  Kong
    Special Administrative Region passport.  He was born on 17 August 1991.
     He is, therefore, now 24 years old.

10. The claimant first arrived in the UK on 9 September 2003 with leave  as
    a student valid until 30 July 2004.  He was 12 years old when  he  came
    to attend school.  At that time, both his parents continued to live  in
    Hong Kong where his father was a police officer.

11. The claimant attended school in the following  years  and  subsequently
    attended Swansea University where he obtained an  undergraduate  degree
    and in September of this year obtained a masters degree  in  mechanical
    engineering.

12. Prior to 2010, the claimant lived during holidays with his relatives in
    South Wales, in particular an uncle who lived in Caerphilly.   However,
    during the summer periods the claimant returned to live  in  Hong  Kong
    with his parents.

13. In 2010 that position changed.  The claimant's mother came to  live  in
    the UK and the claimant lived together with  her  in  accommodation  in
    South Wales.  The claimant's father  remained  in  Hong  Kong  until  2
    October of this year when, following retirement as a police officer, he
    came to live in the  UK.   Both  the  claimant's  parents  are  British
    citizens.

14. During his period of study since he first arrived  in  September  2003,
    the claimant has had leave to remain as a student.  That leave was  due
    to expire on 30 October 2013.  However, on 18 October 2013 he  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  long
    residence,  in  particular  that  he  had  been  continuously  lawfully
    resident in the UK for ten years.  Before the judge,  it  was  accepted
    that during that period the claimant had been absent from the UK for  a
    total of 763 days in the ten year qualifying period  between  2003  and
    2010 attributable to the claimant returning at the end of  an  academic
    year to live with his parents in Hong Kong, to accompany his mother who
    needed to consult doctors in Hong Kong and in order for him  to  obtain
    appropriate visas which he would be unable  to  do  from  outside  Hong
    Kong.  The judge found that the claimant could not succeed, as a result
    of  these  absences,  in  establishing  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence and so was not entitled to indefinite leave to  remain  under
    para 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  finding  is  no  longer
    challenged but, as I shall return to shortly,  the  claimant  now  says
    that he can establish ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence  dating
    back from January 2016.

15. The current situation is that the claimant lives in  South  Wales  with
    his mother and father.  In September of  this  year  he  completed  his
    Masters degree and he is working part-time as a  waiter  and  searching
    for a job more appropriate to his qualification.  He provided  me  with
    an offer of a job as a sales associate in Cambridge contingent  on  him
    obtaining permission to carry out that work.

16. Apart from the claimant and his  parents,  the  claimant's  two  uncles
    together with his granduncle and his wife live together in  Caerphilly.
    A third uncle who used to live with them is currently living abroad.

17. The evidence of the claimant and sponsor was as  to  the  closeness  of
    their  relationship.   The  sponsor  told  me  that  the  claimant  was
    emotionally and financially dependent upon them when he was a  student.
    He remained so.  She told me that when she was apart from the  claimant
    living in Hong Kong she was affected by that.  She told me that it  was
    part of her culture that two generations  should  live  together.   The
    claimant is her only son and he would look after her.  The  expectation
    was that his family and any grandchildren would live with them.

The Appellant's Claim

18. The appellant's claim can be put simply.  He argues that he has "family
    life" with his parents in the UK.  He also has  private  life  with  an
    established lifestyle and friends in the UK.  If  removed,  his  family
    and private life will be interfered  with.   His  parents  are  getting
    older, they cannot travel as much and they are now retired and  do  not
    have so much money to travel.  It  is  important  to  them,  not  least
    because of their culture, that the claimant be allowed to live with his
    parents.

19. In addition, based upon the grid of periods of residence with  which  I
    was supplied, the claimant argues that he  will  meet  the  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence requirement in January 2016  when  he  will
    not fall foul of the requirement that he not be absent, in effect,  for
    more than 540 days over that ten year period.





The Respondent's Case

20. Mr Richards did not challenge  the  factual  basis  of  the  claimant's
    claim.  He submitted, however, that the claimant had not established he
    had "family life" for the purposes of Art 8.   He  submitted  that  the
    claimant is a 24 year old man and the evidence did not  establish  that
    there was more than a normal emotional tie  between  him  as  an  adult
    child and his parents particularly given the period of time he had been
    absent from them being educated in the UK.

21. In any event, Mr Richards submitted  that  any  interference  with  the
    claimant's family and private  life  was  proportionate.   He  did  not
    qualify under the Immigration Rules.  As regards his claim that he  met
    the ten year requirement in para 276B, Mr Richards submitted that  that
    point had not been reached and, at an appropriate time, within 28  days
    of his leave running out the applicant could make a fresh claim on that
    basis.  As I understood Mr Richards' submission, he argued that to take
    this matter into account would, in effect, be to  take  the  claimant's
    case as a "near miss" which was improper.  Mr Richards  submitted  that
    carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  weighing  the  public  interest
    against the Appellant's circumstances, given that his private life  was
    established when his status was precarious it should be  given  "little
    weight" under s.117B(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the NIA Act  2002")  and  the  public  interest  outweighed  the
    claimant's circumstances such that any interference  with  his  private
    and family life was justified.

Discussion

22. The applicable law is well-known and not a  matter  of  contention.   I
    can, as a result, set out as briefly as possible.

23. The claimant relied exclusively upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  Art 8 provides
    as follows:

         "8.1 Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         8.2  There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law AND is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

    In applying Art 8, I apply  the  five  stage  approach  set  out  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17] as follows.

    (1)  will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or family life?


    (2)  if so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


    (3)  if so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


    (4)  if so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others? and


    (5)  if so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

24. Where an individual cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  there
    must be "compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest such
    that  there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  (see,  e.g.
    SS(Congo) and others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and  Singh and Khalid v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74).

25. In assessing whether a breach of Art 8 is established the rights of all
    the family must be considered (see Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).

26. I turn now to consider each of the questions in Razgar.

27. First, has the claimant established family and/or private life  in  the
    UK?

28. The claimant relies upon the closeness of  his  relationship  with  his
    mother and father as establishing family life despite the fact that  he
    is an adult.

29. Whilst family life will  usually  exist  between  a  parent  and  child
    (offspring under the age of 18), and indeed will be presumed to  exist,
    no such presumption exists between  an  adult  child  and  his  or  her
    parents.  In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31, the Court  of  Appeal,
    applying the Strasbourg jurisprudence, held that "something more exists
    than normal emotional ties" (per Arden LJ at [25]).  Sedley  LJ  stated
    that without evidence of further elements of dependency, involving more
    than the normal emotional ties a relationship between  an  adult  child
    and a parent would not fall within Art 8 (at [15]-[19]).

30. Arden LJ said at [24]:

         "There is no presumption that a person has family life,  even  with
         the members of a person's  immediate  family.   The  court  has  to
         scrutinise the relevant factors.  Such factors include  identifying
         who are the near relatives of the  appellant,  the  nature  of  the
         links between them and the appellant, the  age  of  the  appellant,
         where and with whom he has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of
         contact he has maintained with the other members of the family with
         whom he claims to have a family life."

31. That approach has been applied both by the Strasbourg Court  (see  e.g.
    AA v UK [2012] INLR 1) and our domestic courts (see, e.g.  JB  India  &
    Others v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 234).   However,  it  is  recognised  that
    simply  because  a  child  reaches  majority,  any  family  life   that
    previously existed will not necessarily cease to exist  simply  because
    the child has reached the age of 18.   The  case  law  is  conveniently
    drawn together in the case of Singh and Singh  to  which  the  claimant
    referred me at [19] - [23]:

         "19. In Etti-Adegbola v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2009] EWCA Civ 1319,  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
             Tribunal had been correct to follow and to apply the  decision
             of this Court in Kugathas.  Pill LJ referred to what  Sullivan
             LJ had said in JB India, but continued:

             22.  ..... The facts in the present case, as accepted  by  the
                  tribunal, are of a mother who has  been  living  for  many
                  years now with two young adult sons in the same household.
                   They have been, and  are,  helping  and  supporting  each
                  other in the way  members  of  a  family  living  together
                  usually do.  They are not financially  dependent  on  each
                  other but there are undoubtedly emotional ties.   Some  of
                  the expression to which reference has  been  made  in  the
                  Strasbourg jurisprudence,  "committed  relationship",  and
                  "real and effective family ties", would  appear  to  cover
                  the  present  situation.   However,  I  accept  that   the
                  Strasbourg  jurisdiction  does  not  all  point  in   that
                  direction.  Moreover, I regard  myself  as  bound  by  the
                  decisions of this court to which I referred, in particular
                  the approval in the case of Kugathas of  the  Commission's
                  decision in S and the approach to that decision of  Sedley
                  LJ.  The test is that applied by the tribunal, as  appears
                  from the expression in the determination.   The  behaviour
                  is 'no way exceptional or beyond the norm'  (at  paragraph
                  24), an expression repeated in paragraph 26.

             23.  I follow that a distinction between underage children and
                  adult children may for many purposes  properly  be  drawn.
                  It is, however, common knowledge that many children,  both
                  in this jurisdiction and possibly in other member  states,
                  do remain in family homes beyond the age of  majority  and
                  at least until they are well into their twenties.   Having
                  regard to the ordinary use of words, I find  it  difficult
                  to say that family life determines, subject to exceptional
                  circumstances, when the child  or  children  attain  their
                  majority.

         20.  Nonetheless, on the  facts  as  found  by  the  Tribunal,  the
             appellant did not have a  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
             Article 8. Arden LJ agreed, and stated:

             35.  .... Whether family life exists for the purposes of Art 8
                  as between a parent and an adult child must depend on  the
                  facts.   I  do  not  think  it   necessary   automatically
                  determines on obtaining majority, but I am satisfied  that
                  the appellant failed to establish family life  before  the
                  immigration judge and that there is no basis on which this
                  court can interfere with that decision.

         21.  Etherton LJ also agreed:

             37.  On the basis Kugathas, particularly paragraphs  [14]  and
                  [16] in the judgment of Sedley LJ and  paragraph  [25]  in
                  the judgment  of  Arden  LJ,  the  Judge  was  correct  to
                  conclude that there  was  no  family  life  engagement  of
                  Article 8 of the Convention.

         22.  In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  HK  (Turkey)
             [2010] EWCA Civ 583, Scott Baker LJ said, in a  judgment  with
             which the other members of the Court of Appeal agreed:

             16.  .... Normal emotional ties will exist  between  an  adult
                  child and his  parent  or  other  members  of  his  family
                  regardless of proximity and where they live.  Scrutinising
                  the relevant facts,  as  one  is  obliged  to  do,  it  is
                  apparent that the respondent had lied in the same house as
                  his parents  since  1994.   He  reached  his  majority  in
                  September 2005 but continued to live at home.  Undoubtedly
                  he had family life while he was growing up and I would not
                  regard  it  as  suddenly  cut  off  when  he  reached  his
                  majority.

         23.  AP (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
             EWCA Civ 89  was  decided  without  reference  to  Article  8.
             However, in the course of his judgment, McCombe LJ said:

             45.  It seems to me that adult children (male or  female)  who
                  are  young  students,  from  most   backgrounds,   usually
                  continue to form an important part of the family in  which
                  they  have  grown  up.   They  attend  their  courses  and
                  gravitate to their homes during  the  holidays,  and  upon
                  graduation, while (as the FTT put it) they seek  to  "make
                  their own way" in the world.  Such a child  is  very  much
                  part of the on-going family unit and, until such  a  child
                  does fly the nest, his or her belonging to the  family  is
                  as strong as ever.  The  proportionality  of  interference
                  with the family  rights  of  the  various  family  members
                  should  receive,  I  think,   careful   consideration   in
                  individual cases where this type of issue arises."

32. In Singh and Singh, Sir Stanley Burnton said at [24]:

         "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead to
         any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article 8  in
         cases involving adult children.  In the  case  of  adults,  in  the
         context of immigration  control,  there  is  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existences or absence of family life for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
         European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly in  Kugathas
         did not include any requirement of exceptionality.  It all  depends
         on the facts.  The love and affection  between  an  adult  and  his
         parents or siblings will not of itself  justify  a  finding  of   a
         family life.  There has to be something more.  A young adult living
         with his parents or siblings will normally have a family life to be
         respected under Article 8.  A child enjoying a family life with his
         parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life  at  midnight
         as he turns 18 years of age.  On the  other  hand,  a  young  adult
         living independently of his parents may well not have a family life
         for the purposes of Article 8."

33. At [25], Sir Stanley Burnton pointed out, referring to  the  Strasbourg
    Court's decision in AA,  that  whether  an  applicant  had  established
    family life for the purposes of Art  8  was  likely  to  be  "arid  and
    academic" as, in any event, the relationship would likely give rise  to
    private life and that the real issue would be  the  proportionality  of
    any interference.

34. Turning to the  circumstances  of  the  claimant,  I  accept  that  the
    claimant has a close relationship with his parents, in  particular  his
    mother.  I accept that there is an emotional tie between them and  some
    financial dependency although the claimant has now begun working.   The
    claimant and his mother have lived together in the UK  since  2010  and
    with his father since October of  this  year.   The  closeness  of  the
    relationship is, perhaps, illustrated by the fact that the claimant has
    in the past returned to Hong  Kong  to  accompany  his  mother  to  the
    doctors.  I bear in mind what the sponsor told me about the  importance
    and context of family in the claimant's culture.  Of course,  the  fact
    that family is important to the claimant -  something  which  would  be
    common in many cultures - would not necessarily entail the existence of
    "family life" under Art 8.  Article 8 is not concerned with the  simple
    issue of whether individuals are "family" but, as Arden LJ pointed  out
    in Kugathas, taking all the facts into account whether the substance of
    the relationship entails such closeness that it goes beyond the  normal
    relationship between an adult  child  and  parents.   It  may  well  be
    thought not to be unusual for some adult children to be close to  their
    parents; just as some might be, by contrast, estranged from them.

35. I also bear in mind what is said in the case law, helpfully  summarised
    in Singh and Singh that an adult child does not  necessarily  cease  to
    have family life with his parents simply on attaining majority.

36. In this case, the claimant reached the age of 18 before his mother came
    to the UK in 2010.  Whilst the  claimant  continues  to  live  with  is
    parents, he  has  studied  at  university  to  both  undergraduate  and
    graduate level.  He is currently working part-time  and  contemplating,
    if permitted by the Home Office, to work full-time in  Cambridge  which
    is, of course, the opposite side of the country.

37. Although the sponsor spoke of her wish  to  have  the  support  of  the
    claimant as she and her husband grew old, there was no evidence  before
    me (and certainly nothing I could discern by looking at the sponsor and
    her husband) to show that she required that  support   presently.   Any
    future need is necessarily speculative.

38. Despite the fact that the claimant lives with his parents, the evidence
    does not establish in my judgment the more than normal emotional  bonds
    or dependency that would exist between parents and an adult child  aged
    24.  The claimant is, in fact, striking out on his own both in terms of
    his tertiary education and employment.

39. Despite the fact that this is a close-knit family, I am  not  satisfied
    on a balance of probabilities that the evidence  establishes  that  the
    relationships amount to "family life" for the purposes of Art 8.

40. However, bearing in mind what was said by Sir Stanley Burnton  at  [24]
    of Singh and Singh, I have no doubt that the  relationships  amount  to
    private life for the purposes of Art 8 and any interference  with  that
    private life must be proportionate.

41. I also note other aspects of the claimant's  private  life  which  were
    addressed in the evidence before the judge including  his  friendships,
    work and study in the UK (see especially  para  34  of  Judge  Walker's
    determination).  He also has other family in South Wales - two  uncles,
    a granduncle and his wife - with whom I accept private life exists.  It
    was not suggested before me that any family life existed with his other
    relatives  and  there  is  no  sound  evidence,  given  the  claimant's
    circumstances, that could support such a finding.

42. Turning then to the second question  in  Razgar,  if  the  claimant  is
    removed to Hong Kong there will,  in  my  judgment  be  a  sufficiently
    serious interference with  his  private  life  (in  the  sense  of  his
    relationships and other matters I have described above) so as to engage
    Art 8.1.

43. Turning to the  third  question,  there  is  no  doubt  that  any  such
    interference will be in accordance with the law.  The  claimant  cannot
    succeed under the Immigration Rules as Judge Walker found and, at best,
    he may be able to meet the requirements of para 276B in the future.

44. Fourthly, any such interference  will  be  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society for the economic wellbeing of the country or for the prevention
    of disorder or crime.

45. The crucial issue is whether any  interference  is  established  to  be
    proportionate.

46. The answer to that question (see Lord Bingham at [20] in Razgar):

         "involve[s] the striking of a fair balance between  the  rights  of
         the individual and the interests of the community which is inherent
         in the whole of the Convention."

47. In determining the issue of proportionality, I must also "have  regard"
    to the considerations listed in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

48. First, the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the
    public interest (s.117B(1)).  Secondly, it is in  the  public  interest
    that the claimant speaks English.  Although no evidence was led on this
    issue; I see no treason not to accept that the  appellant  is  able  to
    speak English having obtained undergraduate  and  postgraduate  degrees
    from Swansea (see s.117B(2)).  Thirdly, it is in  the  public  interest
    that the claimant is financially independent.  Again, no  evidence  was
    led on this issue  apart  from  the  evidence  that  the  claimant  was
    dependent on his parents financially and had a part-time job  currently
    and intended  to  obtain  further  employment.   For  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(3) I am prepared to accept that the claimant will be financially
    independent.   Fourthly,  the  claimant's   private   life   has   been
    established  when  his  immigration   status   is   "precarious"   and,
    consequently, by virtue of s.117B(5) "little weight" must be  given  to
    that private life.

49. Further, in carrying out the balancing  exercise,  since  the  claimant
    cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  the  public  interest  is
    entitled to  such  weight  that  only  "compelling"  circumstances  can
    outweigh it.

50. Although I accept that the relationships between the claimant  and  his
    mother and father are close, the claimant is an adult with  significant
    qualifications in order to seek employment in Hong  Kong.   Before  the
    judge, the evidence was that the claimant's parents  owned  a  flat  in
    Hong Kong.  Despite the fact that the claimant's  father  had  recently
    come to the UK to live, I was shown no evidence that they no longer own
    that flat.  If that is the case, it would be available to the  claimant
    in which to live.  In any event, given  that  I  am  satisfied  of  his
    employment prospects, I see no reason to doubt that he would be able to
    accommodate and live in Hong Kong as a result of his own income and, if
    necessary, any supplementary financial support from his parents.

51. Although I fully acknowledge  the  sponsor's  evidence  concerning  the
    cultural context of family, and the fact that she does not want  to  be
    without the claimant, the evidence  does  not  establish  that  if  the
    claimant had to live in Hong Kong there would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the sponsor and the claimant's father.  Nothing in the
    evidence establishes that the claimant's parents  are  elderly  or  are
    unable to look after themselves satisfactorily  without  the  claimants
    being present.  The claimant's father is a  retired  Hong  Kong  police
    officer and, I have no evidence that their financial  means  would  not
    allow visits to Hong Kong by them or visits by the claimant to the  UK.
    Art 8 does not confer a right upon an adult  child  to  live  with  his
    family in the UK.  Skype has revolutionised the  ability  to  have,  in
    effect, face-to-face contact with  friends  and  relatives  over  great
    distances.  Taken together with visits, this allows  the  claimant  and
    his family to remain in close contact even if he lives in Hong Kong.

52. Finally, although it was said that he claimant will be able to  succeed
    on the basis of 10 years residence in January; that is  an  application
    yet to be made  and  circumstances  which  do  not  presently  pertain.
    Neither by reference  to  the  previous  application  based  upon  long
    residence or any future application can the applicant  gain  any  sound
    purchase based upon a 'near miss' or like argument to support his Art 8
    claim (see Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72).

53. In my judgment, the claimant's circumstances (taken together with those
    of  his  parents  and  relatives)  do  not   amount   to   "compelling"
    circumstances so as to outweigh the public interest.   I  am  satisfied
    that the claimant's removal is proportionate under Art 8.2.

54. For these reasons, the applicant has failed to establish  a  breach  of
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

55. For the reason set out in  my  decision  dated  16  October  2015,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of an error  of  law.   In  my  earlier
    decision, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision.

56. I now remake the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

Anonymity

57. The sponsor invited me to make an anonymity order in order  to  protect
    the privacy of the family.  This is not a claim involving  children  or
    of  any  risk  to  the  individuals  concerned.   Any  order  must   be
    proportionate have regard to  the  public  interest  in  open  justice.
    Weighting all the  circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  it  would  be
    proportionate to grant anonymity in the circumstances of  the  claimant
    and his family.  Accordingly, no anonymity direction is made.

Signed

A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal no fee award is payable.

Signed

A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
