
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/16879/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 June 2017                        |On 21 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [b s]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been given  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  in  which   he   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 17  April  2015
    to refuse to issue him a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  [  ]  1986.   He  was
    last admitted to the UK on 2 October 2010.  He said  at  paragraphs  15
    and 16 of his witness statement, he came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student to study Information Technology.  He did  not  pass  the  final
    examination and therefore did not finish his course.   He  then  joined
    another  college  to  study  3D  Animation  and  Media  which  included
    photography as part of the course.   He  completed  this  course.   The
    college lost its licence in June 2012  and  he  was  sent  a  60  days'
    curtailment letter by the respondent.   He  applied  as  a  student  of
    Khalsa College to renew his Tier 4  student  visa.   He  submitted  his
    application through Khalsa  College  around  August  2012.   As  Khalsa
    College was not a highly trusted sponsor, he was not allowed  to  start
    the course until he received his student  leave.   Since  his  previous
    college (Harrow International) lost its licence, he was  not  attending
    any college.  He did not hear anything from the Home Office and finally
    they refused his application around February 2013.  He appealed against
    that decision and the appeal was allowed in November 2013.

3.   In April 2014 the respondent granted him three months' leave to  remain
    valid until 29 July 2014.  He met  his  wife  for  the  first  time  in
    November 2012 and throughout their relationship he  was  not  attending
    any college.  They began to cohabit in October 2013.  They attempted to
    marry on 25 June 2014 but on the day, an official from the Home  Office
    took them away for  questioning.   They  were  able  to  marry  at  the
    Islington registry on 16 July 2014.  On 28 July 2014 before the  expiry
    of his leave to remain, he made he made the application that forms  the
    subject of this appeal.

4.   Mr Tufan submitted that it was immaterial that the appellant  made  his
    application at a time when he had leave to remain. This is  because  an
    application for a residence card under the EEA Regulations can be  made
    at any time without the applicant being here lawfully at  the  time  of
    the application.

5.   The main issue on which the appellant was granted permission to  appeal
    the judge's decision was that the judge arguably failed to set  out  in
    fuller detail the question of the switching of the burden of proof.  Mr
    Tufan relied on the Court of Appeal's decision in Rosa  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 14 where it was held at paragraph 27 as follows:

         "... When translated into the position before the tribunal, that is
         tantamount to saying that the legal burden of proof in relation  to
         marriage of convenience lies on the Secretary of State but that  if
         the Secretary of State adduces evidence capable of pointing to  the
         conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience, the  evidential
         burden shifts to the applicant."

6.   At paragraph 29 the Court of Appeal held:

         "... The result  that  ...  the  tribunal  must  have  intended  is
         achieved if the legal burden of proof  lies  on  the  Secretary  of
         State throughout but the evidential burden can shift, as  explained
         in Papajorgji ... that is the correct analysis."

7.   In the respondent's Rule 24 reply, the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    judge may not have strictly followed the process set out in  Papajorgji
    but argued that in the absence of the EEA spouse or any  real  evidence
    from her there was in reality nothing to address the  concerns  of  the
    Secretary of State, there no material error on the part of the judge.

8.   I disagree.   The  appellant  submitted  a  bundle  of  189  pages,  of
    evidence from family and friends, photographs of  the  history  of  the
    relationship between him and his  EEA  spouse  and  evidence  of  their
    cohabitation  at  various  addresses.   There  had  been  a  visit   by
    Immigration Officers to the address where the appellant and the sponsor
    were staying and the Immigration Officers found them at that address. I
    find that there was no mention of this by the respondent in her refusal
    letter and I also find that the judge failed to take this evidence into
    account.

9.   The judge said he was not drawing any adverse inference from  the  fact
    that the appellant's partner did not attend the hearing, yet he  failed
    to consider that the partner had submitted a joint statement  with  the
    appellant.  I find that whilst the judge may have a point in  asserting
    that the thousand or so questions put to the appellant and the  sponsor
    by the Home Office interviewing officer  may  have  been  questions  of
    clarifications or elaborations, I find that  he  failed  to  adequately
    consider the questions which both the appellant  and  the  sponsor  had
    answered correctly.

10.  I find that at page 5 of  the  determination  the  judge  repeated  the
    reasons given by the respondent which the judge had already recorded at
    paragraph 3 as his reasons for finding that  the  sponsor  had  a  very
    superficial knowledge of  the  appellant's  academic  career.   In  the
    absence of his consideration of the other  evidence  submitted  by  the
    appellant, it cannot  be  said  with  some  certainty  that  the  judge
    considered whether the evidential burden had shifted to  the  appellant
    and if it had, whether  the  appellant  had  satisfied  the  evidential
    burden upon him.  Accordingly, I find that the judge failed  to  follow
    the process set out in Papajorgji.

11.  In the light of the above, I find that the judge's  decision  disclosed
    a material error of law such that his decision cannot stand.  I set  it
    aside in order for it to be re-made.

Notice of Decision

12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to be heard in  Taylor  House  by  a
    judge other than FtTJ Devittie.

Directions

1.   Time estimate - 2 hours.

2.   The appellant and the EEA spouse should submit a  supplementary  bundle
    dealing with all the issues that are to be relied on.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 20 June2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



















