

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/16255/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |                  Determination   |
|                                     |Promulgated                       |
|On January 23, 2015                  |                  On January      |
|                                     |30,2015                           |
|                                     |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR ATM JAHANGIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Spurling, Counsel, instructed by PGA Solicitors
      LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  The  appellant  was  granted
    leave to enter as Tier 4 (General) student on October  17,  2009  valid
    until October 31, 2011. This leave was extended for  him  to  study  at
    West End College commencing on February 13,  2012  until  February  13,
    2013. The college's licence was revoked on August 1, 2012. On April  3,
    2012 he commenced a  supplementary  course  at  the  London  Ambassador
    College. On July 31, 2013 he submitted an application to vary his leave
    as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  but  the  respondent  refused  this  on
    September 18, 2013.

 3. On October 9, 2013 he submitted a Tier 4 (General) Student  application
    but this was refused by the respondent on March 17,  2014  and  at  the
    same time directions for his removal pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 were given.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 3, 2014 and  the  matter  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Black (hereinafter referred  to
    as the "FtTJ") on October 21, 2014 and in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    October 29, 2014 she found the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law and remitted it back to the respondent for further consideration.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  November  3,  2014.  She
    submitted the FtTJ erred by allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the
    limited extent because the  appellant  was  not  undertaking  his  main
    course of study and the FtTJ erred by allowing the  appellant's  appeal
    to succeed.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Astle granted permission to appeal  on
    December 9, 2014 stating there was an arguable error in  law  based  on
    the grounds.

 7. The appellant was in attendance in court and was represented as set out
    above.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  the  appellant
    had undertaken two courses. He submitted his  primary  course  was  the
    course at West End College and when  this  course  was  stopped  he  no
    longer met the Rules because his supplementary course then  became  his
    primary course. He accepted that the grounds of appeal  only  succeeded
    if the second course was not a supplemental course and he agreed  there
    was no definition of what a supplemental course was.


 9. Mr Spurling agreed the grounds could only succeed if the second  course
    was not a supplemental course and he submitted the FtTJ had  considered
    the evidence, in the absence of an appearance by the respondent at  the
    original hearing, and decided that the decision  was  unlawful  as  the
    respondent had not properly considered all the facts of the case and in
    particular whether the second course was a supplemental  course.  There
    was no requirement for the second course to be carried out at the  same
    time as the first course and there was  no  merit  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

10. This appeal was the second bite of the cherry. Original refusal  letter
    says he was in breach by starting this course but that was not what was
    being advanced today. The timeline  shows  he  was  not  in  breach  as
    claimed in the refusal letter because when he began the  second  course
    he was studying at West End College in accordance with his permission.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The FtTJ concluded at paragraph  [8]  of  her  determination  that  the
    respondent did not consider the issue of whether the studies undertaken
    were  supplementary.  The  refusal  letter  referred  to  the  fact  he
    commenced a course at West End College on  February  13,  2012  and  in
    April 2012 he commenced a supplementary  course  at  London  Ambassador
    College. His original sponsor did not lose  its  licence  until  August
    2012 at which time the respondent curtailed his leave and gave  him  60
    days to find a new sponsor. He chose at that time to issue a  Tier  One
    application and this extended his leave under Section 3C.


12. It seems clear from the refusal letter the respondent decided  that  he
    had to make a fresh application to study at London  Ambassador  College
    and had no regard that this may be covered by paragraph 245W(c)(iv)  HC
    395.

13. I am satisfied the decision taken  by  the  FtTJ  was  a  sensible  and
    correct approach. As Mr Duffy properly concedes there is no  definition
    of what a supplemental course is and this was something the  respondent
    has not considered.

14. I therefore uphold the FtTJ's decision and dismiss the appeal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law.

16. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  amend  that
    order.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the original decision.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
