





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16133/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                   |              Decision & Reasons       |
|                                        |Promulgated                            |
|On: 23rd July 2015                      |              On: 13th August 2015     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                    Mrs Rubab Hassan Mohammed Taki Kanji
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, counsel (instructed by Aschfords Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Tanzania, born on 30 November 1941. She
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge who dismissed her appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse a grant of leave to remain as a dependent relative.


   2. The appellant has visited the UK on many occasions  since  1984  as  a
      visitor. She last entered the UK on 27 June 2013. On 23 December  2013
      she applied for leave  to  remain  indefinitely  "in  the  context  of
      Article 8 ECHR" [3].


   3. The Judge has set out her  statement  in  great  detail  [5].  In  her
      statement accompanying her application she said that she was a 72 year
      old Tanzanian citizen. However, she has resided in Kenya for the  last
      46 years on a "dependant's pass." Her husband passed away  on  7  July
      2011. She has a daughter who lives in the  UK  with  her  husband  and
      their three sons. The appellant owns a flat in Mombasa.


   4. She has visited the UK on five occasions prior to her last  visit  and
      has never overstayed. After her husband  passed  away,  she  has  felt
      extremely low, lonely and lost. Her health has worsened. She is unable
      to live in Mombasa any more. She is scared to live on her own and  has
      experienced nightmares.  She  has  twice  been  burgled.  She  has  no
      siblings in Mombasa. Her in laws are not able to support her.


   5. She claimed  to  suffer  from  many  health  problems.  Her  condition
      worsened since last year. She asserted that she is unfit to travel and
      has severe osteoarthritis in both her knees. She finds it difficult to
      carry out daily tasks involving walking or climbing stairs. In Mombasa
      she has fallen many times  in  the  street  and  has  been  helped  by
      strangers. On one occasion in 2013, she fell to the ground in a public
      area and fractured her nose. Her walking has not only slowed down  but
      has also reduced her confidence. Her daughter and son in law could not
      come to Mombasa to look after her because of  their  work  commitments
      and so she came to the UK. She has high blood  cholesterol  and  needs
      medication to keep it under control. She has an  over-active  thyroid,
      requiring her to have medication for life.


   6. She referred to the help she has  received  from  family  members.  In
      Mombasa she had to use public transport which was mainly  by  rickshaw
      taxi. Her late husband's business closed down  in  January  2013.  She
      receives no monthly income. The flat does not generate income. She has
      lived in Mombasa as her husband's dependant and now  that  he  is  not
      around, it will not be possible for her. She left  Tanzania  46  years
      ago and living there  again  is  not  feasible.  Renting  a  house  in
      Tanzania would be very expensive for her as at present  she  does  not
      pay any rent. The move and the expenses  there  would  be  financially
      impossible. She is scared of having a live in  housemaid  due  to  her
      previous experiences. The Judge  also  considered  lengthy  statements
      filed by the appellant's son in law and a number  of  members  of  her
      close family.


   7. The Judge considered the appellant's claim since the implementation of
      Appendix FM of the rules. The requirements of such an application  are
      set out in paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4-5 of that appendix. The  rules  state
      that adult dependent relative applications must be made  from  outside
      the UK [32].


   8. Further, he noted that the specified evidence provisions  in  Appendix
      FM-SE requires that evidence referred to in paragraphs 34-37  must  be
      provided. The requirements are consequently more rigorous.  He  stated
      that one of the specific objectives of the changes was to ensure  that
      visit visas should not be  abused.  Accordingly,  the  possibility  of
      making an in-country application under the rules has  been  eliminated
      [33-34].


   9. The Judge dealt with the appellant's case on the basis  that  she  had
      not always intended to remain in the UK. She did have a return  ticket
      [35]. There  was  accommodation  and  the  means  to  look  after  the
      appellant properly. The relatives had the best intentions  in  wishing
      to do so.


  10. Although the argument before  him  was  put  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant would have met the requirements of the new rules and that it
      would be disproportionate to send her back, the Judge stated that  the
      flaw in that argument was that "....it will almost invariably  be  far
      from clear whether that would have  been  the  case,  particularly  in
      looking closely at all the hurdles set by the new rules" [37].  Making
      an application such as the present one "....completely (and  unfairly)
      bypasses altogether the requirements of the new rules."  It  was  also
      far from clear that they would have been met in this  particular  case
      [38].


  11. Independent medical evidence under the rules "must" come from a doctor
      or other healthcare professional in the home country  who  can  assess
      the appellant in her own environment. The brief medical  reports  from
      Kenya are historical in nature and do not address the matters that the
      rules require at all [39].


  12. The Judge had regard to a report from an  independent  social  worker;
      who gave no indication of medical qualifications [41]. The report  did
      not even  acknowledge  the  existence  of  the  immigration  rules  in
      relation to these matters [41].


  13. As the Judge "understood it" the appellant still has a home  in  Kenya
      to which she had been intending to return [42].  Her  claim  that  she
      would not be able to  go  back  to  live  in  Kenya  on  what  was  "a
      dependant's pass" was not accepted by the Judge in the absence of  any
      evidence in this respect [43]. Residence in Kenya for the best part of
      50 years "must count for  a  lot  and  the  appellant  was  of  course
      perfectly able to go on living  there  for  several  years  after  her
      husband died." [43]


  14. The Judge stated [44] that there was some confusion caused by the fact
      that the removal directions are to Tanzania. This is  the  country  of
      her citizenship. She has not lived there for all  that  time.  If  the
      removal  directions  are  appropriate  and  what  the  precise  inter-
      relationship is between Kenya and Tanzania on matters such as this  is
      something upon which he heard no evidence at  all.  That  would  be  a
      matter for the respondent when the time came for the family to respond
      to if they wished [44].


  15. A decision to remove was however considered.  The  respondent  decided
      that she should be removed by way of directions under s.47 of the 2006
      Act.


  16. It was further stated in the respondent's decision that if  she  chose
      not to appeal the decision, or if her appeal  were  unsuccessful,  she
      must leave the UK as soon as possible, when her leave to  remain  here
      expires. If she does not leave the UK voluntarily, she will be removed
      "to Tanzania." That decision was served on the appellant on  20  March
      2014.


  17. The Judge further found that the requirements  of  the  new  rules  in
      relation to  Article  8  were  not  met.  Nor  would  there  be  "very
      significant obstacles" to her integration into life in the country  to
      which she would be returned  [45].  That  country  was  stated  to  be
      Tanzania.


  18.  Even  assuming  there  were   exceptional   circumstances   requiring
      consideration beyond the rules, he found that  requiring  her  "to  go
      home" would be proportionate in the overall interests  of  immigration
      control.  He  had  regard  to  paragraph  117B  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and  in  particular   that   the
      maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
      interest [46].


  19. The Judge stated that it is important that the  new  rules  for  entry
      clearance of adult dependent relatives  are  not  simply  bypassed  by
      obtaining a visit visa and then making an in country application which
      is precluded by the rules. He found that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances in this case warranting consideration beyond the rules.


  20. The appeal was accordingly dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and
      on human rights grounds.


  21. On 23 April 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. There  was  merit  in  the
      assertion that the Judge failed to give adequate consideration to  the
      medical and other evidence in regard  to  the  appellant's  healthcare
      needs and that inadequate consideration was given to her  position  on
      return to Tanzania.


  22. Mr Solomon submitted that the Judge's reasoning that the current rules
      had eliminated altogether the possibility  of  making  an  in  country
      application [34] is incompatible with "the proposition in  Chikwamba".
      The Judge failed to pay sufficient  regard  to  its  significance.  In
      Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, the  House  of  Lords  made  plain  that  in
      appeals where the only matter weighing on the respondent's side of  an
      Article 8 proportionality balance is the public policy of requiring an
      application to be made under the rules from  abroad,  that  legitimate
      objective would usually  be  outweighed  by  factors  resting  on  the
      appellant's side of the balance. Mr Solomon also relied on  the  Court
      of Appeal's subsequent decision in Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.


  23. It is further contended that the Judge did  not  have  regard  to  the
      decision  in  Chen  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
      separation -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00189  where  Upper
      Tribunal  Judge  Gill  stated  that  Appendix  FM  does  not   include
      consideration of the question of whether it would be  disproportionate
      to expect an individual to return to his home country to make an entry
      clearance application to re-join family members in the UK.  There  may
      be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life
      being enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary separation to  enable
      an individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
      disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the individual to place
      before the secretary of state evidence that such temporary  separation
      will interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It  will  not
      be enough to rely solely on case law concerning Chikwamba.


  24. Mr Solomon referred to paragraph 33 of his  skeleton  argument  before
      the First-tier Tribunal which revealed that he had relied on Chikwamba
      and Hayat. He submitted that there was  no  sensible  reason  why  the
      appellant should be required to leave to make an application for entry
      clearance, given the disruption that would be caused, having regard in
      particular to her vulnerability.  The  'Chikwamba'  principle  is  not
      confined to cases where children  are  involved.  He  referred  to  MA
      (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953 where Lord Justice Sullivan stated that
      the  real  question  was  not  whether  there   were   "insurmountable
      obstacles" to the appellant's returning to Pakistan in order  to  make
      an application for entry clearance from there, but whether  there  was
      any sensible reason as to why he should be required to do so.


  25. Mr Solomon submitted that the finding by the Judge that  it  was  "far
      from clear" that the requirements of the rules would have been met  in
      this particular case [38]  is  flawed.  He  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons for that finding. Nor do the rules (FM and FM-SE) provide that
      specified evidence must be provided in relation to the requirements of
      Appendix FM. The relevant paragraphs provide  that  evidence  "should"
      (not "must") take the form set out  in  paragraph  33.  Nor  does  the
      appendix require that the evidence must come from a  doctor  or  other
      healthcare professional in the home country [33].


  26. Nor did the Judge take sufficient or any account  of  the  appellant's
      son in law's evidence that it would be very difficult to  get  a  full
      time carer or nurse in Kenya as they are hardly  available  and  quite
      expensive to manage. Nor was sufficient account taken of the fact that
      the appellant had been burgled twice in her own home in previous years
      and felt terrified about this happening again as she would be  on  her
      own in the flat. On one occasion she had a live in housemaid  and  has
      been scared of having such a housemaid at home at night.


  27. Nor did the Judge take proper account of the appellant's evidence that
      although she looked after herself  during  the  two  years  after  her
      husband died, her difficulties had simply increased the whole time and
      that her health has worsened. Whilst in Mombasa she  has  fallen  many
      times in the street and on one occasion (early  in  2013)  fell  in  a
      public area and fractured her nose. Nor was  her  daughter's  evidence
      properly assessed that when the appellant came here they were  shocked
      with what they saw. Her mother had  lost  a  lot  of  weight  and  was
      unstable on her feet. They were  not  aware  that  her  condition  had
      deteriorated to this extent. She did not look like she knew  what  she
      was doing. All this was contained in the daughter's witness statement.




  28. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it had been argued that
      the appellant had been living in Kenya on a dependant's pass and would
      not be able to go back there to live. The finding by  the  Judge  that
      there was an absence of any evidence in this respect  was  unsupported
      by the statement from her son in law dated 18 February 2013  where  he
      claimed that the appellant had been living in Kenya as a dependant  of
      her husband and had such pass. However, that pass expires in  February
      2014 and now that her husband has passed away she will  no  longer  be
      able to acquire a dependant's pass.


  29. The finding by the Judge that residence in the country for the past 50
      years must count for a lot 'is purely speculative'.


  30. Mr Solomon also submitted that the removal directions are to Tanzania.
      It was therefore incumbent upon the Judge to determine  the  claim  on
      the basis of removal to that state. He had failed adequately to assess
      the position on that basis. That is particularly so having  regard  to
      his finding as regards paragraph 276ADE of the rules which  speaks  of
      "very significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
      country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


  31. He referred to his skeleton argument,  where  he  contended  that  the
      appellant would no longer be  able  to  acquire  a  dependant's  pass.
      Directions for removal are to be to Tanzania. She has no  ties  there.
      Alternatively  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
      integration. She has not lived there for some 46 years. She is old and
      vulnerable. She has nowhere to live and no-one to whom  she  can  turn
      for support. The appellant had travelled on a Tanzanian  passport  and
      her dependant's pass had expired in February 2014.


  32. Mr Solomon accordingly submitted that  the  Judge  had  "irrationally"
      decided that the appellant's situation should not be considered  under
      Article 8 outside the rules. However,  the  rules  do  not  adequately
      recognise the relationship of an in country adult  dependent  relative
      unless she has leave as such; insufficient account  is  taken  of  her
      welfare as an elderly and vulnerable widow; the rules take no  account
      of the appellant's physical and moral integrity;  the  claim  involves
      the separation of a close and committed family unit (paragraph  15  of
      the grounds).


  33. In the circumstances, Mr Solomon submitted that there  is  a  material
      error that has been established and the decision would have to be  set
      aside and re-made. He submitted that this was an appropriate case  for
      the appeal to be remitted for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


  34. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  removal
      decision is a "non issue" if  the  decision  is  ultimately  taken  to
      remove the appellant to  Tanzania.  This  can  be  challenged  if  the
      respondent were to insist on sending her there.


  35. He submitted that the Judge had proper regard to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant had property in Kenya  and  submitted  that  the  respondent
      would not force her removal to Tanzania.


  36.  The  Judge  properly  concluded  that  the  appellant's  was  not  an
      exceptional case. At paragraph 37 the Judge stated that thousands upon
      thousands of elderly relatives become immobile and  suffer  from  such
      conditions of arthritis and are subject to the  risk  of  falling  and
      other problems,  generally  becoming  frailer.  The  difficulties  are
      caused by bereavement at the appellant's age.  The  vast  majority  of
      those affected in this way have to do the best they can in their  home
      country unless they meet the requirements of the new rules  for  entry
      clearance.


  37. At paragraph 46 of the determination, the  Judge  in  fact  considered
      that requiring her to go home would be proportionate  in  the  overall
      interests of immigration control. He had proper regard to the 2002 Act
      and in particular the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control
      which is in the public interest.


  38. As to the reliance by Mr Solomon  on  Zhang,  he  submitted  that  the
      administrative court found that the wording of the  immigration  rules
      was in effect  ultra  vires.  That  case  is  not  authority  for  the
      proposition that the Chikwamba 'principle' is applicable here.


  39. Chen supra, also referred to the proportionality of the requirement of
      temporary separation in order to make an application from abroad.  The
      individual must show relevant evidence that temporary separation  will
      interfere disproportionately with protected rights.


  40. Mr Tufan relied on Agyarko and Others, R (on  the  application  of)  v
      SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440 (Court of Appeal). There the Court of Appeal,
      in considering the applicability  of  Chikwamba  stated  that  it  was
      possible to envisage a Chikwamba type case arising in which Article  8
      might require that leave to remain be granted outside the rules,  even
      though it could not be said that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
      to the appellant and their spouse or partner continuing  their  family
      life overseas. In a case involving precarious family life, it would be
      necessary to establish that there were  exceptional  circumstances  to
      warrant such a conclusion.


  41. Mr Tufan also relied on Singh v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  (Court  of
      Appeal). There, the Court stated that the  Izuazu/Nagre  approach  had
      been applied in many cases before the Tribunals. Those are set out and
      considered from  paragraphs  36  onwards.  Neither  MM  (Lebanon)  nor
      Ganesabalan undermines the point made by Sales J in paragraphs  30  of
      Nagre which, together with his endorsement of the approach in  Izuazu,
      remains good law.


  42. In reply, Mr Solomon submitted that the Judge  was  required  to  deal
      properly with the anticipated removal of  the  appellant  to  Tanzana.
      This had not been done.


     Assessment


  43. I have set out the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  some
      detail. I have also referred to the submissions made on behalf of  the
      appellant, including  the  identification  of  cases  and  submissions
      expressly made by Mr Solomon as set out in his skeleton.


  44. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  Judge  Kebede
      found that there was arguable merit in the assertion  that  the  Judge
      gave inadequate consideration, inter alia, to the appellant's position
      on return to Tanzania.


  45. It is evident from the evidence and submissions before the  First-tier
      Tribunal that she had been residing in Kenya for the  past  46  years,
      together with her late husband. He passed away in July 2011.


  46. There was evidence placed before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
      appellant's dependent's pass in Kenya expired in  February  2014.  The
      burden was on the appellant to establish her case on  the  balance  of
      probabilities. She had presented evidence from her son in law in which
      it was claimed that her pass expired in February 2014 and that as  her
      husband had passed away, she would no  longer  be  able  to  claim  or
      acquire a dependent's pass. The significance of that evidence was  not
      properly considered by the Judge.


  47. I also consider that the Judge's assertion that residence in Kenya for
      some 46 years must count for a lot [43] was speculative.


  48. The Judge was required to consider the  appellant's  position  on  the
      hypothetical  basis  that  she  would  be  returned  to  Tanzania.  No
      consideration was given to the significant problems that  she  claimed
      would result from a removal there. In  particular,  the  finding  that
      there would not be very significant obstacles to her integration  into
      the country to which she would have to go if required to leave had not
      been properly considered or assessed. Regard had  to  be  had  to  her
      multiple health conditions, her care needs, as well as the  fact  that
      she had not lived in Tanzania for over 46 years.


  49. I also find that the  Judge  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
      significance  of  decisions  including   Chikwamba,   Hayat   and   MA
      (Pakistan), supra.


  50. The report of the independent social worker as well  as  the  evidence
      from her daughter and son in law fully set out her care needs and  her
      current problems.


  51. In addition, the evidence as  to  the  asserted  inability  to  obtain
      adequate care from abroad and the appellant's fears of remaining alone
      was not properly assessed by  the  Judge.  Evidence  relating  to  the
      difficulties of obtaining a full time carer  or  nurse  in  Kenya  was
      dealt with by the son in law in his evidence.  The  issue  apart  from
      expense was also  the  difficulty  of  finding  someone  reliable  and
      trustworthy to look after a person in the  appellant's  position.  The
      appellant had also stated that she had been scared of having a live in
      housemaid at home at night, particularly having  regard  to  the  fact
      that she had been burgled on one occasion when the housemaid had  been
      living there.


  52. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of material errors. I accordingly set  it
      aside. The decision will have to be re-made.


  53. I have  had  regard  to  Mr  Solomon's  submission  that  this  is  an
      appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made. In applying the President's Practice Statement, I
      find that the appellant has been deprived of the opportunity of having
      her case properly put and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


  54. The appeal is accordingly remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh decision to be made. The necessary arrangements will accordingly
      be made.


           Notice of Decision


         The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of
material errors on a       point of law. The  decision  is  accordingly  set
aside and will be remitted for a fresh       decision  to  be  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.


         No anonymity direction is made.


         Signed                              Date:  8/8/2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




