
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16013/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th June 2013                              |on June 2013                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              WASHINGTON KAVHAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Hodgetts instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr McGirr Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. On 16th November  2011  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted  the
        appellant permission to appeal against the decision of a  panel  of
        the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed his appeal against a decision
        to deport him from the United Kingdom made pursuant  to  section  5
        Immigration Act 1971.


     2. On the 22nd April 2013 Principle  Resident  Judge  Southern  issued
        directions in which it is  recorded  that  it  was  agreed  by  the
        parties that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  contains
        an error of law such that it should be set aside and  the  decision
        remade.


     3. The appeal comes before me for the purposes of the Resumed hearing.
        Having considered the evidence in detail I substitute a decision by
        allowing the appeal, as advised in court, and now give my reasons.



Background


     4. The appellant was born on the 6th December 1958 and is a citizen of
        Zimbabwe. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 29th  July  1990  and
        thereafter was granted various periods of leave to enter.  On  19th
        October 2002 he submitted a further application for leave to remain
        as a work permit holder which was refused. He  was  a  professional
        musician in Zimbabwe.


     5. On 23rd February  2003  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  witness
        intimidation on a guilty plea and  on  27th  February  2003,  after
        trial, of threats to kill, false imprisonment, attempted rape, rape
        and indecent assault on his former wife, for which he was sentenced
        to six years and nine months imprisonment. He  was  ordered  to  be
        placed upon the sex offenders register indefinitely and recommended
        for deportation by the trial  judge.  Applications  to  appeal  his
        conviction and to seek the assistance of the Criminal  Case  Review
        Commission were unsuccessful.


     6. On 26th June 2007 the respondent  notified  the  appellant  of  his
        intention  to  deport  him  to  Zimbabwe.  A  number   of   further
        applications were made  which  are  detailed  in  the  respondent's
        letter dated 29th June 2010 and the First-tier determination  [para
        4-6].


     7. This Tribunal is tasked with applying the relevant law to the facts
        of this appeal. The appellant seeks to rely upon  Article  3  ECHR.
        The United Kingdom is a signatory to that Convention and  bound  by
        its terms. In addition, the Human Rights  Act  1998  gives  further
        legal effect in the United Kingdom to the  fundamental  rights  and
        freedoms contained in the ECHR which Judges must apply.  Section  6
        of the Human Rights Act specifically states:


         6    Acts of public authorities.E+W+S+N.I.
              (1) It is unlawful for a public authority  to  act  in  a  way
which is                        incompatible with a Convention right.

              (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an act if-

                  (a)  as the result of one or more  provisions  of  primary
legislation,                     the  authority   could   not   have   acted
differently; or

                  (b)  in the case of one or more  provisions  of,  or  made
under,                          primary legislation which cannot be read  or
given effect in a                       way which  is  compatible  with  the
Convention rights, the                           authority was acting so  as
to give effect to or enforce those                    provisions.

              (3) In this section "public authority" includes-

                  (a)  a court or tribunal, and

                  (b)  any person certain of whose functions  are  functions
of a public                     nature,

              but does not include either House of Parliament  or  a  person
exercising              functions  in   connection   with   proceedings   in
Parliament.



     8. This Tribunal is therefore legally obliged to apply the ECHR unless
        and until Parliament repeals the  legislation  and/or  revises  the
        United Kingdom's obligations under the Convention.


     9. This appeal engages Article 3 ECHR which states:


              Article 3 - Prohibition of torture


              No one  shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
   degrading treatment              or punishment.


    10. In A v The  Netherlands  (Application  no.  4900/06)  ECtHR  (Third
        Section),  reported  on  20th  July  2010,   several   governments,
        including the United Kingdom, intervened  in  the  proceedings  and
        sought to challenge what they considered to be  Strasbourg's  rigid
        application of the  absolute  prohibition  on  ill-treatment  under
        Article 3. They argued that the Court's interpretation of Article 3
        meant that risk of ill-treatment could not be weighed  against  the
        reasons  for  expulsion,  even  national  security  and  that  this
        approach  prevented  them  in  practice  from  enforcing  expulsion
        measures. The States proposed that if evidence was  presented  that
        the individual posed a  threat  to  national  security,  then  that
        individual should have to prove that "it was more likely than  not"
        that they would be subject to ill-treatment. It was held  that  the
        prohibition of torture or ill-treatment was absolute in nature.  It
        was not possible to weigh the risk  of  ill-treatment  against  the
        reasons put forward for the expulsion in order to determine whether
        the responsibility of the State was engaged under Article 3.


    11. It is therefore an absolute  right  and  not  one  subject  to  the
        doctrine of proportionality which is relevant to Article 8 claims.




Discussion



    12. It is the unique profile of the appellant which places him at  risk
        on return. The Secretary of State conceded  before  Judge  Southern
        that upon return to Harare Airport it is reasonably likely that the
        appellant's former association with the musician Thomas Mapfumo and
        the group  known  as  the  Bhundu  Boys  will  be  known  by  those
        monitoring arrivals from the United Kingdom.


    13. The relevant case when considering risk on return at the  point  of
        entry is HS (returning asylum seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
        00094.  In HS the Tribunal held that:


              (i)      failed asylum seekers do not, as such, face a risk of
   being subjected,                 on return to Zimbabwe, to persecution or
   serious ill-treatment. That               will be the  case  whether  the
   return is voluntary or involuntary,                    escorted or not.


              (ii)     Re-affirmed that the  findings  in  respect  of  risk
   categories in SM and                  Others (MDC  -  Internal  flight  -
   risk  categories)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]                 UKIAT  00100,  as
   adopted, affirmed  and  supplemented  in  AA  (Risk                   for
   involuntary   returnees)   Zimbabwe   CG   [2006]   UKAIT   00061.    The
   Tribunal also identified one further risk category, being those  seen  to
          be active in  association  with  human  rights  or  civil  society
              organisations where  evidence  suggests  that  the  particular
                  organisation has been identified by the authorities  as  a
   critic or                    opponent of the Zimbabwean regime;


               (iii)     Found  that  the  process  of  screening  returning
   passengers is an                      intelligence led  process  and  the
   CIO will generally have  identified                  from  the  passenger
   manifest in advance, based upon such                        intelligence,
   those   passengers   in   whom   there   is   any   possible    interest.
   The fact  of  having  made  an  asylum  claim  abroad  is  not  something
     that in itself will give rise to adverse interest on return;


              (iv)     Adopted and reaffirmed the findings in AA  (Risk  for
   involuntary                  returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 in
   respect  of  the                         general  absence  of  real  risk
   associated with any  monitoring  of                       returnees  that
   might    take    place     after     such     persons     have     passed
   through the airport and returned to their  home  area  or  re-established
          themselves in a new area;


              (v)      Found  that  country  conditions  have  continued  to
   deteriorate but are                   not  generally  such  as  to  bring
   about an infringement of Convention                rights  for  returnees
   or to require the grant of humanitarian                     protection.


    14. It is not disputed before me that there is a two stage  process  at
        the airport. The first is an interview  to  establish  whether  the
        deportee is of any interest to the  CIO  which  there  will  be  if
        questioning  reveals  they  have  a  political  profile  considered
        adverse to the Zimbabwe government. Further interrogation may occur
        away from the airport at the relevant branch of the CIO. It is this
        second stage interrogation away from the airport which carries with
        it a real risk of serious mistreatment sufficient to  constitute  a
        breach of Article 3 -  see  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary  returnees)
        Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT  00061  at  paragraph  251.  This  is  not
        disputed before me.


    15. The reason the appellant will be of interest arises from  the  fact
        he played in two bands, the Bhundu  Boys  and  the  Thomas  Mapfumo
        Black's Unlimited Band. This is  not  disputed  before  me  and  Mr
        Hodgetts provided a reference to a clip placed  on  U-Tube  showing
        the appellant playing bass guitar at a concert by Thomas Mapfumo in
        the United Kingdom on 24th May 2013. The clip was uploaded  on  the
        30th May 2013 and shows his presence and name clearly displayed  on
        the title page of the video.


    16. Mr McGirr submitted the reason the Secretary of State  opposes  the
        appeal, despite the concession, was because there was  no  evidence
        the appellant was at risk on return as  his  involvement  with  the
        band and Thomas Mapfumo had been a number of years ago. This may be
        the case but the U-Tube clip shows recent activity and  the  expert
        report, to which I shall refer below and which was available  prior
        to the hearing, shows the risk remains.  However  dated  activities
        may be it is how an individual will be viewed  in  the  eyes  of  a
        potential persecution which is the relevant consideration.


    17. Thomas Mapfumo is a famous  politically  orientated  musician  from
        Zimbabwe who has been highly  critical  of  the  regime  of  Robert
        Mugabe as a result of which he was forced into exile  in  2005,  in
        the USA, and has not returned to Zimbabwe since.  There is  country
        material showing individuals in Zimbabwe being warned not  to  play
        his music as it was alleged it could incite  violence  against  the
        government. An album 'Corruption' was critical of Robert Mugabe  on
        which the appellant played.


    18. The expert report of Dr Kibble dated 28th  May  2013  sets  out  in
        detail the political developments in Zimbabwe and the perception of
        the authorities to the music of the bands in question. At paragraph
        56 it is stated:


          "High profile music performers such as the Bhundu Boys,  and  even
   more,           Thomas  Mapfumo  and  his  associates,  have  long   been
   perceived as oppositional        to ZANU (PF), and have been subjected to
   both formal and informal processes        of exclusion, vilification  and
   threats.  One can note here that  Mr  Kavhai  played       on  the  album
   'Corruption'  which  marked  the  breakdown   of   the   formally   close
   relationship between Mapfumo  and  ZANU-PF.   Stewart  continues  'It  is
   inconceivable that someone with the stature of  Mr  Kavhai  will  not  be
   perceived      as having the associations of the Bhundu Boys and  Mapfumo
   with 'opposition        politics' and anti-ZANU  statements  and  songs."




    19. The report refer to the date of elections in Zimbabwe having to  be
        announced by the end of June 2013 and violence associated with such
        periods which is not contested before me.


    20. I find the appellant has substantiated his claim that  he  will  be
        identified by the CIO when studying the passenger manifest.  It  is
        conceded that his association with the bands in question will  also
        be known which will result in not only initially questioning but  a
        real risk of his  being  taken  to  the  CIO  offices  for  further
        interrogation during which process there is a real risk he will  be
        ill-treated in a way that engages Article 3. There is no protection
        from the State against such treatment as it is the security arm  of
        the State which will be responsible for his interrogation. Even  if
        eventually allowed to pass into  Zimbabwe  thereafter,  I  find  it
        proved that events during the second  stage  interrogation  process
        means the appeal must be allowed.


Decision

    21. The First-tier Tribunal panel have been found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and their decision set aside. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5th June 2013












