


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      IA/16741/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 13th December 2016                        |On: 15th December 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                        Two-Girls Makhosazana Mhlanga
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, agent instructed by RBC Immigration
                       Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of South Africa date of birth 5th  November
    1976. She appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ransley) dated 13th September 2016 to dismiss her human
    rights and protection appeal.


    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. There were two limbs to the  Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Both were rejected, and both give rise, one way  or  another,
    to a challenge before me.


 3. The first concerned the Appellant's claim to protection on the  grounds
    that her husband's family blame her for the death of her father-in-law,
    and that they would cause her serious harm as a result. It is said that
    the gentleman in question was a national of Zimbabwe who  died  shortly
    after visiting the Appellant and  her  husband  in  South  Africa.  His
    family accuse her of having  used  witchcraft  against  him,  and  have
    issued death threats against her. All  of  this  was  rejected  by  the
    Tribunal. The gentleman's death certificate set out two  clear  reasons
    for death (septicaemia and severe cystitis) and there was  no  credible
    evidence that he had visited the Appellant as claimed, or that she  was
    somehow being blamed for his demise.   There was further a  sufficiency
    of protection against any feared harm.

 4. Before me Dr Mynott acknowledged that the grounds make no challenge  to
    the conclusions as to the availability of protection in  South  Africa,
    and that as such he was not  pursuing  the  protection  claim.  He  did
    however make complaint about the standard of proof that was applied  to
    the Appellant's evidence of her own subjective fears: at paragraph 5 of
    the determination the Tribunal directs itself to consider  the  account
    on  the  'balance  of  probabilities'.   The  applicable  standard   in
    asylum/Article 3 appeals is one of  'reasonable  likelihood'  or  'real
    risk'. Dr Mynott submits  that  this  error  is  material  because  the
    Appellant's fear - or lack of  it  -  was  a  relevant  factor  in  the
    consideration of Article 8, and whether there are obstacles  to  family
    life continuing in South Africa.  I deal with this matter  below  under
    the heading 'the burden and standard of proof'.

 5.  The  second  limb  was  squarely  concerned  with  Article  8.     The
    Appellant's case was that she had arrived clandestinely in  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2015 in order to be with her British husband.    She
    had previously sought entry clearance to  join  him,  and  having  been
    unsuccessful both as a 'visitor' as a 'partner' had  decided  to  enter
    the  country  illegally  and  make  an  application  'in-country'.  She
    asserted that she had a subsisting relationship with  her  husband  and
    his son.  It was accepted by the Respondent that the  Appellant  was  a
    'partner' under the terms of Appendix FM because she  and  her  husband
    had been validly married. The question was whether they would  be  able
    to meet the requirements of EX.1 (b) and  EX.2,  and  show  that  there
    would be "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing in  South
    Africa. Judge Ransley found that  they  could  not,  and  there  is  no
    challenge to that finding. There was however an  alternative  argument,
    which rested on the Appellant's relationship with her stepson.  It  was
    submitted  on  her  behalf  that  she  enjoyed  a   "genuine   parental
    relationship" with this minor and that it would not be  reasonable  for
    him to leave the  United  Kingdom;  as  such  she  would  succeed  with
    reference to EX.1(a).  That argument was rejected on the basis that the
    Appellant did not enjoy a 'parental relationship' with the boy at all.


 6. Before me the Appellant challenges that conclusion on  the  basis  that
    the term "parental relationship" in EX.1 and 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has  a  wider  meaning  than  the  term
    'parent' as used elsewhere in the Rules, and defined at paragraph 6.  I
    deal with this ground below under the heading 'The Meaning of 'Parental
    Relationship''.



    The Standard and Burden of Proof


 7. At paragraph 5 of the determination  the  Tribunal  directs  itself  as
    follows:


         "The burden of proof lies on the Appellant; the standard  of  proof
         is on a balance of probabilities".


 8. The parties were in agreement that this  was  a  misdirection.  In  the
    context of the protection appeal it was wrong because the  standard  of
    proof was lower than the normal civil standard. The matter should  have
    been considered applying the standard of 'reasonable  likelihood'.   In
    the context of Article 8 it  was  an  over-simplification.  Whilst  the
    burden did lie on the Appellant to establish that she had a family life
    and that the decision would interfere  with  it,  the  standard  to  be
    applied here was relatively low. Thereafter it was for  the  Respondent
    to show that the decision was lawful, necessary in a democratic society
    and proportionate.


 9. Notwithstanding his concession about paragraph 5 Mr Bates  pointed  out
    that at paragraph 28 the  Tribunal  does  use  the  phrase  'reasonably
    likely'. Dr Mynott in turn submitted that this made  the  determination
    unclear as to what standard was applied and in those  circumstances  it
    had to be set aside.

10. I am not satisfied that the  error  at  paragraph  5  was  in  any  way
    material.

11. I deal with the protection claim first. This  was  a  plainly  hopeless
    case which did not engage the Refugee  Convention,  did  not  establish
    risk and no matter what  standard  of  proof  was  applied,  failed  on
    internal flight  and  sufficiency  of  protection  grounds.  Dr  Mynott
    accepted as much before me. He submitted that  the  error  did  however
    remain  relevant  because  it  led  to  the  Tribunal  discounting  the
    subjective fears held by the Appellant. Since any subjective fears had,
    with cogent reasoning, been found to be without  objective  foundation,
    it is very difficult to see how they could have assisted the  Appellant
    in establishing that there  were  any  obstacles  to  her  family  life
    continuing somewhere in South Africa, nor indeed to showing  it  to  be
    unreasonable to expect her to comply with the Immigration Rules.

12. As for Article 8 the misdirection as to standard had no impact  on  the
    case at all. That is  because  the  Tribunal  expressly  accepted  that
    Article 8 was engaged.   In respect of where the burden lay  in  Razgar
    questions 3-5  the  Tribunal  was  properly  guided  by  the  statutory
    framework and the Rules.   It is appropriate that the reasoning in this
    section of the determination is considered below.




    The Meaning of 'Parental Relationship'


13. The salient facts were that the Appellant had married a man who already
    had a son by a previous marriage. His son was, at the date  of  appeal,
    seventeen years old. He  was  living  with  his  biological  mother  in
    Coventry as he had been since his own arrival in the United Kingdom  in
    2008.  The boy had first met the Appellant  when  she  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2015. He sees her, and his  father,  when  he
    comes to visit them during school holidays.  In the year preceding  the
    appeal he had also spent one long weekend with them in Manchester.


14. At paragraph 55 the determination notes  the  discrepancy  between  the
    Appellant's evidence that the boy addresses her as 'Mum'  and  his  own
    letter to the court in which he described her  as  his  'Step-Mum'.  Of
    this Judge Ransley concludes "I  do  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    stepson would call the Appellant 'mum' when he first met the  Appellant
    only a year ago and his biological mother is still alive". The  grounds
    focus on this alleged acceptance that the boy does view  the  Appellant
    as his step-mother. In those circumstances, it is submitted, it  should
    have been found that there  is  a  genuine  parental  relationship.  Dr
    Mynott further places reliance on the finding  at  paragraph  44:  "the
    Appellant has formed a family life with her husband and  stepson  since
    entering the United Kingdom....".   He submits that this finding cannot
    be squared with the final conclusion that s117B(6)(a)  is  not  engaged
    because the Appellant does not have a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with her husband's son.

15. There does at first blush appear to be  something  of  a  contradiction
    between the statement at 44 that there is  a  'family  life',  and  the
    reasoned findings at paragraphs 46-57  that  there  is  not  a  genuine
    parental relationship. Having considered  the  submissions  and  having
    looked with care at the determination  I  am  satisfied  that  the  two
    findings are not in fact incompatible. If I am wrong then I  find,  for
    the reasons that follow, that the  only  error  was  the  statement  at
    paragraph 44.

16. The Tribunal directed itself to the guidance in R (on  the  application
    of RK) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (section  117B(6);
    'parental relationship') IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC):



      1.    It is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
         responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.


      2.    Whether a person who  is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
         "parental relationship" with a child for the purposes of  s.117B(6)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 depends on  the
         individual circumstances and whether the role that individual plays
         establishes he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.


      3.   Applying that  approach,  apart  from  the  situation  of  split
         families where relationships between parents have broken  down  and
         an actual or de facto step-parent exists, it will be  unusual,  but
         not impossible, for more than 2 individuals  to  have  a  "parental
         relationship" with a child. However, the  relationships  between  a
         child and professional or voluntary carers or  family  friends  are
         not "parental relationships".




17. It further had regard to the Respondent's published guidance[2] on this
    term, as did the Tribunal in RK:



         " 11.2.1 Is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?

         Where the application is being considered under paragraph  EX.1.(a)
         in respect of the 10-year partner or parent  routes,  the  decision
         maker  must  decide  whether  the  applicant  has  a  'genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship' with  the  child.  This  will  be
         particularly relevant to cases where the child is the child of  the
         applicant's partner, or where the parent is  not  living  with  the
         child.

         The phrase goes beyond  the  strict  legal  definition  of  parent,
         reflected in the definition of  'parent'  in  paragraph  6  of  the
         Immigration Rules, to encompass situations in which  the  applicant
         is playing a genuinely parental role in a child's life whether that
         is recognised as a matter of law or not.

         This means that an applicant living with a child of  their  partner
         and taking a step-parent role in the  child's  life  could  have  a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with them,  even  if
         they had not formally adopted the child,  but  only  if  the  other
         biological parent played no part in the child's life, or there  was
         extremely  limited  contact  between  the  child  and   the   other
         biological parent. But in a case where the other biological  parent
         continued to maintain a close relationship with the child, even  if
         they were not  living  with  them,  a  new  partner  of  the  other
         biological parent could not normally have  a  role  equating  to  a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with them,  even  if
         they had not formally adopted the child,  but  only  if  the  other
         biological parent played no part in the child's life, or there  was
         extremely  limited  contact  between  the  child  and   the   other
         biological parent. But in a case where the other biological  parent
         continued to maintain a close relationship with the child, even  if
         they were not  living  with  them,  a  new  partner  of  the  other
         biological parent could not normally have a  role  equating  to  'a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with the child.

         In considering whether the applicant has a 'genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship' the  following  factors  are  likely  to  be
         relevant:

         Does the applicant have a parental relationship with the child?

        . what is the relationship - biological, adopted, step child, legal
          guardian? Are they the child's de facto primary carer

        . is the applicant willing and able to look after the child?

        . are they physically able to care for the child?

         Unless  there  were  very  exceptional  circumstances,   we   would
         generally expect that only  two  people  could  be  in  a  parental
         relationship with the child.

         Is it a genuine and subsisting relationship?

         . does the child live with the person?

         . where does the applicant live in relation to the child?

         . how regularly do they see one another?

         . are there any relevant court  orders  governing  access  to  the
           child?

         . is there any evidence provided within the application as to  the
           views of the child, other family members or social work or other
           relevant professionals?

         . to what extent is the applicant making an active contribution to
           the child's life?

           Factors which might prompt closer scrutiny include:

         . the person has little or no contact with the child or contact is
           irregular;

         . any contact is only recent in nature;

         . support is only financial in nature;  there  is  no  contact  or
           emotional support; and/or

         . the child is largely independent of the person.

         Other people who spend time with,  or  reside  with  the  child  in
         addition to their parents, such as their grandparent, aunt or uncle
         or other family member, or a close friend of the family, would  not
         generally be considered to have a parental  relationship  with  the
         child for the purposes of this guidance."


18. Having had regard to that guidance the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that the relationship was  relatively  new;  in  the  year  before  the
    hearing the Appellant had only seen her  step-son  on  four  occasions,
    mainly during the holidays; he has lived  all  of  his  life  with  his
    mother who had always been his primary carer; since the  child  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2008 he has only had limited contact with  his
    father. Looking at those facts in the round, and applying the guidance,
    the Tribunal concluded that  this  was  not  what  could  be  termed  a
    parental relationship. That is a conclusion with which I wholly  agree.
    There was no evidence at all before the Tribunal to indicate  that  the
    Appellant had "stepped into  the  shoes"  of  the  boy's  mother.   The
    statute  requires  the  applicant   to   demonstrate   not   simply   a
    geographical, biological or legal connection to a child, but an  actual
    relationship which involves the adult assuming the role of parent.   It
    is to be hoped that the boy is fond of, or even loves  his  stepmother,
    and that in the weeks or long weekends  that  he  spends  with  her  he
    considers her, as his father's wife, to be part  of  his  family  unit.
    That does not mean that she has a parental role as it is meant  in  the
    statute and paragraph EX.1.


19. Dr Mynott placed reliance on the guidance in RK to the effect  that  it
    is not  impossible  for  more  than  two  adults  to  have  a  parental
    relationship with a child.   His difficulty is that the evidence  falls
    far short of establishing that this was the case here. Virtually all of
    the factors identified in the guidance  weigh  against  the  Appellant.
    The child does not live with her. She has irregular contact  with  him.
    They  live  in  different  cities.  The  contact   is   only   recently
    established. The child is largely independent.  There  is  no  evidence
    that she provides for him financially.  She may be able and willing  to
    provide physical care for him - but at 17 he hardly needed this.

20. I was further taken to the guidance published by the  Respondent  under
    the heading 'Exceptional Circumstances' [at 9.2]:

         "the decision maker should not usually make a decision that  forces
         a family to split if there is no criminality to add weight  to  the
         public interest in removal"


    Dr  Mynott  submitted  that  there  being  no  criminality  the  policy
    indicated that leave to  remain  should  be  granted.   I  reject  that
    argument on two fronts. Firstly, there may not have been a  conviction,
    but illegal migration  across  borders  is  actually  a  criminal  act.
    Secondly, there is in this case no family split  as  a  result  of  the
    decision. The family are already split. The boy has not lived with  his
    father since he was an infant and the removal  of  the  Appellant  will
    make no difference to his relationship with his father.   Even  if  the
    Appellant's husband elects to go to South Africa with her,  there  will
    be nothing to prevent his  contact  with  his  son  continuing  at  its
    present frequency and duration, since there are no obstacles to the boy
    visiting him there, nor indeed  his  own  intermittent  return  to  the
    United Kingdom.


21. I should add for the sake of completeness that even if the grounds  had
    both been made out, the position today is such that it is impossible to
    see how the Appellant could  succeed  in  a  re-made  decision  in  her
    appeal. She has been in the United Kingdom less than two years and  has
    had very limited contact with her step-son.  At  the  date  of  today's
    hearing he is now an adult.




    Decisions


22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside.

23. There is no direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            13th December
                                    2016




                           -----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on the 19th July 2016

[2] All of the Respondent's guidance cited in this determination can be
found in the document 'Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a partner or parent)
and Private Life: Ten Year Routes' published in August 2015.

