
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16451/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 29 July 2014              |
|Ex Tempore                                    |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Prabhdeep Singh
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Turner, instructed through the Direct Access
provisions


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Creswell promulgated on 12  November  2013  whereby
    the judge allowed Mr Prabhdeep Singh's appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under paragraph 245DD  of  HC
    395 (as amended).

 2. The grounds of the application asserted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant succeeded on Article 8 but (a) failed to  deal
    with the Gulshan test and (b) failed  to  make  any  findings  of  fact
    whatsoever as regards Mr Singh's private life.

 3. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, who set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's judgment and gave further directions as  to
    the conduct of this matter which included  further  submissions  to  be
    made by both sides.

 4. Mr Turner, who appears for Mr Singh but did not appear  below,  put  in
    written submissions dated 31 March  which  surprisingly,  as  Mr  Avery
    pointed out in his written submissions of even date,  referred  to  the
    wrong Rules. The relevant Rules which were the subject  matter  of  the
    appeal are those helpfully appended to Mr  Avery's  submissions  namely
    those in force between 6 April 2013 and 30 April 2013.  These  read  as
    follows:

         "41-SD   The specified documents in Table 4 and paragraph 41 are as
                follows:

                (a)    The specified documents to  show  evidence  of  money
                    available to invest are one or  more  of  the  following
                    specified documents:

                    ...

                    (ii)   for money held in the UK only, a recent  personal
                        bank or building society statement from each of the
                        UK financial institutions holding the  funds  which
                        confirms the  amount  of  money  available  to  the
                        applicant (or the entrepreneurial team if  applying
                        under  the  provisions  in  paragraph  52  of  this
                        Appendix).   The   statement   must   satisfy   the
                        following requirements:

                        (1)    the statements must  be  original  documents
                             and not copies;

                        (2)    the bank or  building  society  holding  the
                             money must be based in the UK and regulated  by
                             the Financial Services Authority;

                        (3)    the money must be in cash  in  the  account,
                             not individual savings accounts or assets  such
                             as stocks and shares;

                        (4)    the account must be in the  applicant's  own
                             name only (or both names for an entrepreneurial
                             team), not in the name of a business  or  third
                             party;

                        (5)    each statement must be on the  institution's
                             official stationery and confirm the applicant's
                             name  and,  where  relevant,  the   applicant's
                             entrepreneurial  team  partner's   name),   the
                             account number, the date of the statement,  and
                             the financial institution's name and logo;

                        (6)    the bank or building society statement  must
                             have been issued by the authorised official  of
                             that institution and produced within the  three
                             months  immediately  before  the  date  of  the
                             application; and

                        (7)     if  the   statements   are   printouts   of
                             electronic statements from an  online  account,
                             they must be either accompanied by a supporting
                             letter from the bank,  on  the  company  headed
                             paper,  confirming  the  authenticity  of   the
                             statements, or bear the official stamp  of  the
                             bank in question on each page of the statement;
                             ..."

 5. Mr Turner accepted that his client could not comply with these Rules at
    the time of the relevant decision by the  caseworker.  He  nevertheless
    submitted that he is entitled to rely on the  "evidential  flexibility"
    policy that was in existence at  the  time.   There  are  a  number  of
    problems with that submission which we have pointed out to Mr Turner in
    the course of the hearing.

 6. The first is that Rule 245AA, which was promulgated and came into force
    on 6 September 2012, reads as follows:

         "245AA   Documents not submitted with applications

                  (a)  where Part 6A or any Appendices referred to  in  Part
                      6A state that specified documents must  be  provided,
                      the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or
                      the Secretary of State will only  consider  documents
                      that have been submitted with  the  application,  and
                      will only  consider  documents  submitted  after  the
                      application where they are  submitted  in  accordance
                      with subparagraph (b).

                  (b)  If the applicant has submitted specified documents in
                      which:

                      (i)  some of the documents in a  sequence  have  been
                           omitted (for example, if one bank statement  from
                           a series is missing);

                      (ii) a document is in the wrong format (for  example,
                           if  a  letter  is  not  on  letterhead  paper  as
                           specified); or

                      (iii)    a document is a copy  and  not  an  original
                           document; or

                      (iv) a document does not contain all of the specified
                           information;

                      the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or
                      the Secretary of State may contact the  applicant  or
                      his representative in writing and request the correct
                      documents.  The requested documents must be  received
                      at the address specified in the request within  seven
                      working days of the date of the request."

 7. It is abundantly clear from the plain wording that the Rule is directed
    towards documents which actually exist at  the  time.   It  is  equally
    plain that on the facts Mr Singh did not fall  within  any  of  (b)(i),
    (ii), (iii) or (iv).  Undaunted, Mr Turner sought to shift  ground  and
    rely on a further part of 245AA under subparagraph (d) which  reads  as
    follows:

         "(d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i)  in the wrong format; or

             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iii)     which  does  not  contain  all  of   the   specified
                  information, but the  missing  information  is  verifiable
                  from:

                  (1)  other documents submitted with the application,

                  (2)  the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                      document, or

                  (3)  the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

         the application may be granted exceptionally,  provided  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State is
         satisfied  that  the  specified  documents  are  genuine  and   the
         applicant meets all the other requirements."

    It was not clear to the court, however, why Mr Turner  sought  to  rely
    alternatively on subparagraph (d) since it seems to us  plain  that  Mr
    Singh did not fall within those relevant criteria either.

 8. Mr Turner shifted ground again to what he thought was  safer  territory
    in relation to the evidential flexibility policy version 1.1. This  was
    considered by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank
    letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC) by Mr  Justice
    McCloskey and Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.  In  that  judgment  the
    court said as follows:

         "15. The cornerstone of  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  properly
             analysed, consists of an assertion. The assertion  is  to  the
             effect  that  an  'evidential  flexibility'  policy  of  sorts
             survived the introduction  of  paragraph  245AA.   The  latter
             provision of the Rules came into  operation  on  06  September
             2012.  It is common ground that paragraph 245AA  governed  all
             of  the  applications  for  entrepreneurial   migrant   status
             generating this cluster of appeals. The FtT's  primary  reason
             for rejecting this ground of appeal was  the  absence  of  any
             evidence that some policy,  independent  and  freestanding  of
             paragraph 245AA, also applied to these applications: see [32].
              We endorse this reasoning and conclusion.  In  doing  so,  we
             highlight the distinction between argument and evidence.   The
             question of whether a policy exists, in  whatever  context  it
             arises, is a question of fact.  This ground  of  appeal  fails
             because it has no supporting evidence, direct or inferential."

 9. Mr Turner asked for an adjournment, which we gave him this  morning  in
    order to garner such evidence. He then produced some  screenshots  from
    the UKBA "Archived" website  entitled  "PBS  process  instructions  and
    evidential flexibility guidance for caseworkers, 2009 to 2013" which he
    submitted demonstrated that version 1.1 of the  evidential  flexibility
    policy still existed, albeit that some of it might have  migrated  into
    further versions of 245AA.

10. Mr  Walker  for  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  had  an  adequate
    opportunity to consider all these materials, produced by Mr Turner, nor
    have we. We park its admissibility for the moment because, even  if  Mr
    Turner is correct that he is able to produce evidence to  suggest  that
    the evidential flexibility policy still exists in some form, there is a
    much more  fundamental  problem  which  he  faces.  There  is  a  clear
    direction to caseworkers in this policy as follows (emphasis added):

         "We  will  only  go  out  for  additional  information  in  certain
         circumstances which would lead to the approval of the  application.
         Before we go out to the applicant we  must  have  established  that
         evidence  exists,  or  have  sufficient  reason  to   believe   the
         information exists.  Examples include, (but are not limited to):

         1.   bank statements missing from a series;

         2.    evidence  of  specific  qualifications  has   been   provided
             previously;

         3.   evidence detailed on a CAS/courses missing;

         4.   named deposits on bank statements from  an  employer,  but  no
             wages slips provided.

         ...

         The evidence listed in Annex  A  is  not  exhaustive  but  provides
         caseworkers with guidance as to circumstances when evidence can  be
         requested."

    Annex A lists a variety of case types where information or certificates
    or wage slips are missing.  It refers, for instance in  relation  to  a
    Tier 1  (Entrepreneur),  to  "missing  information  from  the  required
    letters/documents".

11. It is a condition precedent to the requirement for  the  caseworker  to
    seek further evidence that the caseworker must  have  established  that
    either "the evidence exists" or that  the  caseworker  "has  sufficient
    reason to believe that the [missing] information exists".

12. This is consistent with the decision in SSHD v  Rodriguez  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 2 that the evidential flexibility policy was not designed  to  give
    an applicant the opportunity to remedy any defect or inadequacy in  the
    application or supporting documentation so as to save  the  application
    from refusal after substantive consideration.   The  purpose  is  quite
    obviously to enable an applicant who has left out,  for  instance,  one
    bank statement out of a series or forgotten  to  include  a  particular
    certificate to remedy that minor error or oversight. The purpose of the
    policy is not to enable the applicant to create fresh documentation.

13. Undaunted by this,  Mr  Turner  seeks  to  shift  to  ground  again  by
    suggesting that the caseworker was  somehow  at  fault  in  not  having
    requested further information, as he put it, and  giving  Mr  Singh  an
    opportunity to go to the bank and get the bank to draw up the  relevant
    document. This was a breathtaking submission of nil merit.

14. The caseworker's clear decision and findings are recorded in  the  GCID
    case record sheet dated 15 April 2013 as follows:

         "Reason for refusing application:

         Applicant isn't named on the third party bank letter.  Third  party
         bank letter missing for two of  the  bank  accounts.   App  has  no
         access to funds."

15. Mr Turner then sought to criticise the Secretary of State on  the  hoof
    by suggesting that there is no evidence that the caseworker  considered
    the evidential flexibility policy. He ignores the  basic  point.  There
    was simply no  evidence  before  the  caseworker  that  "the  [missing]
    evidence existed and no evidence that the caseworker had any reason  to
    believe that the missing information existed".

16. The fundamental problem which Mr Turner  persistently  ignores  is  the
    fact that the policy speaks in the present, not the  future  tense.  We
    repeat: it is trite that the purpose of the policy  is  not  to  enable
    applicants to go away and create new documents or new information as Mr
    Turner's argument supposes. The purpose of the policy and  the  proviso
    is simply to enable applicants who fail to  include  in  the  documents
    submitted particular pages or information which already exists.

17. Mr Turner's hypothesis that the  caseworker  should  have  enabled  the
    applicant to go away and get the bank to create new  documents  showing
    his access to these funds is arrant nonsense. That is entirely contrary
    to the proviso in the policy set out above and to the basic purpose  of
    the evidential flexibility policy itself.

18. The fact of the matter is that Mr Singh was not able to comply with the
    Rules because the relevant documentation simply did not exist.  However
    many times we pointed that out to Mr Turner  he  persisted  in  arguing
    heretically that the policy  (a)  required  caseworkers  to  point  out
    defects in documentation and (b) such defects could then  be  cured  by
    the manufacture or production of future documents.  If that  was  right
    it would drive a coach and horses through paragraph 245AA and the well-
    known purpose of the policy  itself.  Mr  Turner's  submission  in  our
    judgment was obviously wrong and a waste of the Court's valuable time.



Article 8

19. The original grounds of appeal also submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.   We  proceeded  to
    hear submissions on the Article  8  point.  Mr  Turner  chose  to  make
    submissions. We can deal with them very shortly.

20. It is axiomatic that where an applicant falls  outside  the  Rules  the
    applicant has to satisfy the Gulshan test and  demonstrate  that  there
    are exceptional, compelling or compassionate circumstances  to  justify
    deciding the matter  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.   Mr
    Turner's submissions ignored Gulshan entirely. Further, his submissions
    about Article 8 fell woefully short of an Article  8  case,  let  alone
    fulfilling the high test in Gulshan. We reject that further grounds  of
    appeal also.

21. For all those reasons in our judgment this appeal is  on  any  analysis
    hopeless and is dismissed.

Decision

     1. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. His decision
        has been set aside. We remake the decision as follows. This appeal
        is dismissed.


   Anonymity


     2. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   We
        make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as no  application  for  anonymity  has
        been made and is not justified on the facts.



Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave

