
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16219/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 22 October 2013                        |On 25 October 2013          |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                          MR VIGNESH KUMAR PERVMAL
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr M Sowerby of
           counsel instructed by Sahida & Co Legal Services
          For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 23 March 1987.
      He has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Atkinson (the FTTJ) who dismissed  his  appeal  against
      the respondent's decision of 23 April 2013 to refuse to vary his leave
      to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 11 July 2011 having been granted  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student visa valid for a period expiring on 29 August
      2012. On 29 August 2012 he applied for a variation  of  leave  in  the
      same capacity which was refused  on  23  April  2013.  The  respondent
      accepted that the appellant was entitled to the required 10 points for
      Maintenance (Funds) but concluded that he  was  not  entitled  to  the
      required 30 points for Attributes -  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
      Studies (CAS) because he  had  not  shown  that  he  met  the  minimum
      standard of English requirements.


   3. The appellant appealed and asked for the appeal to  be  determined  on
      the papers which is what the FTTJ did on 12 August 2013. He  concluded
      that the  three  certificates  produced  by  the  appellant  from  the
      Educational Testing Service (ETS) did not  meet  the  requirements  of
      Appendix B paragraph 10 and Appendix O of the Immigration Rules. These
      required the passing of the proficiency tests  to  be  set  out  in  a
      single document. He dismissed the appeal.


   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal arguing that the FTTJ  erred
      in law. Firstly, by failing to conclude that on  the  evidence  before
      him the appellant had shown that he did comply with  the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules and secondly, by applying the law in force at
      17 July 2013 rather than at the date of the application.


   5. The judge who granted permission to appeal was of the  view  that  the
      FTTJ erred in law by failing to allow the appeal against the  decision
      to remove the appellant under s47 of the 2006 Act. He stated that this
      was one of the grounds of appeal, although I cannot  find  it  in  the
      grounds before me. I interpret the grant of permission  to  appeal  as
      permission to argue all grounds and neither  representative  suggested
      otherwise.


   6. Mr Saunders conceded that the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  and  should  have
      allowed the appeal against the decision to remove the appellant by way
      of directions under s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
      2006 and that I should substitute my decision to do so.


   7. The provisions which set out what the appellant had  to  establish  in
      order to show that he satisfied the English language  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules are extremely complicated. However,  it  is  not
      necessary to go through all the possible requirements  because  it  is
      common ground, accepted by both representatives,  that  the  appellant
      did not qualify for any of the exemptions and was required to  produce
      valid original English-language test certificate(s)  from  an  English
      language test provider approved by the  respondent.  The  question  of
      whether this can be done in one or more than  one  certificate  is  in
      issue in this appeal.


   8. What the appellant produced was  three  TOEIC  official  score  report
      certificates. The first, dated 17 July 2012 shows that he  passed  the
      writing test but failed the speaking test. The second, dated  31  July
      2012, shows that he passed the listening and reading test. The  third,
      dated 1 August 2012, shows that he passed the speaking test.


   9. The wording of the relevant section of the refusal letter of 23  April
      2013 is;


        "Therefore, as you do not meet any  of  the  exemptions,  you  must
        provide the original English-language test  certificate,  which  is
        still valid, from an English language test provider approved by the
        Secretary of State as specified in Appendix O  of  the  Immigration
        Rules. However, you failed to do so.
        You have  submitted  3  TOEIC  certificates  from  the  Educational
        Testing Service (ETS) in support of your application. You  have  to
        show the required minimum scores  for  the  reading  and  listening
        components on one certificate of the  same  date  as  well  as  the
        speaking and writing components on  one  certificate  of  the  same
        date, to show that you have achieved or exceeded CEFR level  BI  in
        all four components.
        Therefore, we cannot accept the TOEIC certificate  dated  1  August
        2012 you have provided in support of your application  which  shows
        only the Speaking score and not the Writing.
        As you have failed to provide an appropriate  certificate  to  show
        you have achieved or exceeded level B1 of  the  CEFR  in  all  four
        components  (reading,  listening,  speaking   and   writing),   and
        therefore have not met this requirement, you have not achieved  the
        maximum standard of  English  required  and  no  points  have  been
        awarded for your CAS."


  10. Paragraph 118(b)(iii)(4) of Appendix A to the Immigration  Rules  sets
      out the requirement that;


         (4) the applicant provides the specified documents from an  English
         language test provider approved by the Secretary of State for these
         purposes as listed in Appendix O, which clearly show:


         i. the applicant's name,


         ii. that the applicant has achieved or exceeded  level  B1  of  the
         Council of Europe's Common European Framework for Language learning
         in all four components (reading, writing, speaking and  listening),
         unless exempted from sitting  a  component  on  the  basis  of  the
         applicant's disability,


         iii. the date of the award, and


         iv. that the test is within its validity date (where applicable)."


  11. It  is  common  ground  accepted  by  both  representatives  that  the
      certificates produced by the appellant from TOEIC came from an English
      language test provider approved by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
      purposes of Appendix A as listed in Appendix O. In relation  to  TOEIC
      all that Appendix  O  contains  under  the  column  headed  "Documents
      required with application" are the words "Score report". The documents
      submitted by the appellant are so titled. I find that Appendix  A  and
      Appendix O provide little assistance  and  no  clear  guidance  as  to
      whether one certificate or more than one certificate  is  permissible.
      The former refers to "specified  documents"  in  the  plural  and  the
      latter to "Score report" in the singular.


  12. Mr Sowerby has produced a number of documents  printed  out  from  the
      TOEIC website which, I find, give a clear indication  that  there  are
      two sets of tests; one a speaking and writing test  and  the  other  a
      listening and reading test. This is supported by  the  refusal  letter
      although this is not without its inconsistencies. Although  there  are
      references to an "original English-language test certificate" and  "an
      appropriate certificate" both in the singular I find  that  the  words
      "You have to show the required minimum  scores  for  the  reading  and
      listening components on one certificate of the same date  as  well  as
      the speaking and writing components on one  certificate  of  the  same
      date" combined with the information from the TOEIC  website  establish
      that two TOEIC tests  are  the  normal  course  and  accepted  by  the
      respondent under the Immigration Rules,  one  for  the  listening  and
      reading  components  and  the  other  for  the  speaking  and  writing
      components.


  13. An indication that the position was considered unclear and  needed  to
      be clarified can be gleaned from the amendment  to  Appendix  O  which
      came into effect on 1 October 2013. The new rule reads; "Where two  or
      more components (reading,  writing,  speaking  and  listening)  of  an
      English-language test are examined and awarded together, for example a
      combined exam and certificate for  reading  and  writing  skills,  the
      specified evidence submitted  by  the  applicant  must  show  that  he
      achieved the required scores in all the relevant components  during  a
      single sitting of that examination, unless  exempted  from  sitting  a
      component on the basis of his disability...."


  14. I find that the FTTJ erred in  law  in  concluding  that  the  English
      language  proficiency  requirements  had  to  be  shown  in  a  single
      certificate or document.


  15. I set aside his decision which both representatives agreed and I  find
      can be remade without  receiving  or  hearing  further  evidence.  The
      representatives also agreed that the submissions they  had  made  were
      all that they wished to say in relation to remaking the decision.

  16. I find that over a short period between 17 July and 1 August 2012  the
      appellant has established that he passed tests which, if two  or  more
      tests were permissible,  demonstrated  the  necessary  proficiency  in
      English. He failed the speaking test on 17 July but  passed  it  on  1
      August. The other components were passed  at  the  first  attempt.  Mr
      Saunders accepted that on the basis of what is said in the  letter  of
      23 April 2013 the appellant would have succeeded if,  when  he  re-sat
      and passed the speaking test he  had  at  the  same  time  re-sat  the
      writing test and passed them together even if the test with the  other
      two components had been sat and passed together on a different date.


  17. Nothing in the material to which my attention has been directed  shows
      and I find that the Immigration Rules in force  at  the  date  of  the
      appellant's application and the decision did not  did  not  contain  a
      clear requirement that the English-language qualification must be  set
      out in one certificate, that the tests could not be broken  down  into
      one or more components with those components being tested on different
      dates or that a component failed on one occasion could not be  retaken
      and passed  on  another  occasion.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
      established that tests passed by him  and  the  certificates  produced
      meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


  18. In the circumstances it is not necessary for me to  determine  whether
      there was unfairness to the appellant or whether the respondent failed
      to  follow  any  policy  in  relation  to  giving  the  appellant  the
      opportunity to provide missing or inadequate documentation.


  19. Having set aside the FTTJ's decision I remake it. I allow  the  appeal
      against the decision to remove the  appellant  by  way  of  directions
      under s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. I  also
      allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 23
      October 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

