
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16658/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  22nd October 2014                           |On 6th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                               MRS SYEDA ZAHRA

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Salmon, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Batiste who, in a decision promulgated on the 16th July  2014,  dismissed
   her appeal against the respondent's refusal of her application for an EEA
   Residence Card as confirmation of a derivative right of  residence  under
   European Union treaties, transposed into UK law by Regulation 15A of  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  currently  resides  with  her
   British husband and children  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Her  appeal  was
   dismissed under the Regulations because the First-tier Tribunal judge was
   not satisfied that the appellant was the primary carer of  her  children,
   concluding instead that she shared that responsibility with her  husband.
   It followed from this that the children would  be  able  to  remain  with
   their father if the appellant was required to leave the United Kingdom.

3. At paragraph 7 of his determination, Judge  Batiste  made  the  following
   observation:

    A ... discussion took place as  to  whether  Article  8  arose  in  the
    current appeal. I find that it does not. The present application is for
    a derivative residence card. It  is  made  clear  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter that a decision was not made under  Article  8;  that  a
    decision not to issue a derivative residence card does  not  in  itself
    require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom; and if attempts were
    made to remove the appellant she would have a separate  opportunity  to
    make  representations  against  that  removal.  As   a   result,   this
    determination does not consider Article 8.

4. Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal  against  that  part
   of the determination in the following terms:

    There is no widely accepted  view  whether  Judges  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should deal with Article 8 claims in determinations of  appeal
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 when there are no  removal
    directions. The judgment in JM (Liberia) v SSHD [200 ] (sic)  EWCA  Civ
    (sic) was before the 2006 Regulations came into force.  The  Judge  was
    right to  note  there  were  no  directions  for  the  removal  of  the
    appellant.  The  appellant  had  filed  the  judgment  in   Berrhab   v
    Netherlands (Appellant. No. 10730/84) which it is arguable placed  some
    requirement on the Judge to consider substantively the Article 8 claim.
    Permission to appeal is granted.

5. In my judgement, the case of Berrhab v Netherlands does  not  assist  the
   appellant. In that case, the European Court of Human Rights held that  it
   was the Dutch government's refusal to grant the applicant a new  resident
   permit and "his resulting  expulsion"  which,  together,  constituted  an
   unjustified interference with the applicant's rights under Article  8  of
   the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
   Fundamental Freedoms [see paragraph 22; emphasis added]. In this  appeal,
   the issue is whether mere refusal by  the  respondent  to  recognise  the
   appellant's claim to a right of residence under European  Union  treaties
   was, without more, sufficient to  engage  the  appellant's  rights  under
   Article 8.

6. Mr  Salmond  in  any  event  placed  rather  greater  reliance  upon  the
   judgement of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of  Justice  in  the
   case of Dereci [2011] Case C-256/11, and in particular paragraphs 72  and
   73:

    72. Thus, in the present case, if the referring court considers, in the
    light of the circumstances of the disputes  in  the  main  proceedings,
    that the situation of the applicants in the main proceedings is covered
    by European Union law, it must examine whether  the  refusal  of  their
    right of residence undermines the right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life provided for in Article 7 of  the  Charter.  On  the  other
    hand, if it takes the  view  that  the  situation  is  not  covered  by
    European Union Law, it must undertake  that  examination  in  light  of
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR.

    73. All the Member States are, after all, parties  to  the  ECHR  which
    enshrines the right to respect for private and family life  in  Article
    8.

7. The above passages have to be  read  in  context.  The  main  proceedings
   concerned  a  Turkish  national  who  asserted  his  rights   under   the
   "standstill" clause of the Ankara agreement. The issue in the  subsidiary
   proceedings was whether the applicant's right to respect for private  and
   family life fell to be considered under Article 7 of the European Charter
   or the equivalent right under Article 8 of the  ECHR.  In  my  view,  the
   European Court  of  Justice  was  merely  seeking  to  explain  that  the
   circumstances in which an EU citizen's rights under the European  Charter
   may be engaged are limited to  the  operation  of  EU  law,  whereas  the
   commensurate rights under the ECHR are of wider application. The  Court's
   observations in paragraphs 72  and  73  were  thus  predicated  upon  the
   assumption that the facts of a particular  case  required  the  competent
   authority to consider a citizen's right to respect for private and family
   life, in order to explain the respective  spheres  of  operation  of  the
   Charter  and  ECHR.  It  was  not  however  purporting  to  set   out   a
   comprehensive list of the circumstances  in  which  the  right  would  be
   engaged in the first place.

8. I am thus satisfied that the question of whether the First-tier  Tribunal
   was right not to consider the appellant's case under  Article  8  of  the
   1950  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights   and
   Fundamental Freedoms is ultimately one of jurisdiction. The  Tribunal  is
   of course a creature of statute whose jurisdiction  is  circumscribed  by
   the provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  It
   may thus  only  consider  an  appeal  against  one  of  the  'immigration
   decisions' listed in Section 82, and only then by reference to one of the
   grounds that are listed in Section 84.

9. By virtue of paragraph 1 of  Schedule  1  of  the  Immigration  (European
   Economic Area) Regulation 2006, an EEA decision is to be treated  "as  if
   it were an appeal against an immigration decision under  Section  82(1)".
   The right of appeal against an EEA decision thus arises because it is  to
   be treated "as if" it were an appeal  against  an  immigration  decision,
   rather than because it is listed as such under Section  82  of  the  2002
   Act.

10. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal judge dismissed the  appeal  on
   the basis that the only ground of appeal that was available under Section
   84 was that contained within sub-section (1)(d),

         (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the family
         of an EEA national and the decision breaches the appellant's rights
         under Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the
         United Kingdom.

   Permission has not been granted to argue that dismissal of the appeal  on
   that ground was an error of law.  Rather,  the  issue  in  contention  is
   whether the Tribunal ought also to have  considered  the  appeal  on  the
   ground contained within sub-section (1)(g), namely, "that removal of  the
   appellant from the United  Kingdom  in  consequence  of  the  immigration
   decision would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee
   Convention or would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
   1998 as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights".

11. The 2002 Act contains a complete codification of the  rights  of  appeal
   to the Tribunal  which  it  created.  Its  individual  provisions  should
   therefore be construed as  part  of  a  coherent  whole  rather  than  in
   isolation. There is thus a clear correlation between Section 82(2)(d) and
   Section 84(1)(g) of the Act. Under the former  provision,  a  person  may
   appeal against a decision to refuse to vary his or her leave to enter  or
   remain in the UK, only "if the result of the refusal is that  the  person
   has no leave to enter and remain". Under the latter provision,  a  person
   may only appeal  on  this  ground  if  his  or  her  removal  arises  "in
   consequence of" the immigration decision in question. If follows that  if
   a person does not have extant leave to remain in the UK at the time  when
   his or her application for further leave to remain is refused, then their
   subsequent removal will not "in consequence of" that  refusal,  but  will
   instead be the consequence of the fact they  were  already  without  such
   leave at the time when the immigration decision was made.

12. In JM (Liberia) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2006]
   EWCA Civ 1402, the Court of Appeal  held  that  where  a  person  appeals
   against a decision to refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or  remain
   in the UK, it is unnecessary for that person's removal to be imminent  in
   order for the appellant to be able to rely upon the ground  contained  in
   Section 84(1)(g). However, that reasoning does not in my view lead to the
   conclusion that it is also unnecessary for there  to  be  a  causal  link
   between the  'immigration  decision'  in  question  and  the  appellant's
   subsequent hypothetical removal. For this reason,  and  for  the  reasons
   that are set out below, I conclude that  the  concession  by  the  Senior
   Presenting Officer in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs)
   [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC),  which was supposedly based upon  the  reasoning
   in JM (Liberia), was wrongly made. Moreover, it was not a concession that
   Mr Dewnycz was prepared to make in this appeal.

13. By contrast with a grant  of  leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration
   Rules, a person's right to reside in the UK under  EEA  treaties  is  not
   dependent upon a decision by the Secretary of State. It  depends  instead
   upon the circumstances of the relevant EEA national at the time  when  he
   or she is asserting the right in question. One  of  the  consequences  of
   this is that the existence of a person's right of  residence  may  change
   between the time when the Secretary of State decides to refuse  to  issue
   him or her with a Residence Card and the time when she comes to  consider
   removing that person from the UK. The EEA national in question  may  thus
   not have been a "qualified person" under Regulation 6 at  the  time  when
   the Secretary of State  refused  to  issue  a  Residence  Card,  but  may
   nevertheless have become such a person by the time that removal is  being
   contemplated. A decision to refuse to issue a Residence Card and a  later
   decision to remove the person  who  applied  for  it  are  not  therefore
   causally linked. On the contrary, they are discrete decisions based  upon
   the circumstances existing at the particular time when they are made.

14. It follows from the above that it was not an error of law for the First-
   tier Tribunal to decline to consider whether the appellant's removal  "in
   consequence" of the decision to refuse to issue her with a Residence Card
   would be incompatible with her  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  EHCR.
   Indeed, the Tribunal would in my judgement have erred had it purported to
   allow the appeal on this ground. This appeal must therefore be dismissed.

15. Before leaving this appeal, I would like to stress  that  the  issue  in
   any application that the appellant may make for leave to  remain  on  the
   basis of her Article-8 rights would be quite different  from  that  which
   arose in  her  application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card.  It  would  be
   unnecessary, for example, for the appellant to  show  that  she  was  the
   "primary carer" of her British children. The sole issue, under  both  the
   Immigration Rules and Section 117B of the  2002  Act,  is  likely  to  be
   whether it would be reasonable for the appellant's British children to be
   deprived of their birthright by leaving the UK in order to  follow  their
   mother to Pakistan.

Decision

16. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           5th November 2014


