
IAC-MD-BFD-V1
                                    [pic]
First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16053/2014
     IA/16059/2014
     IA/16066/2014
     IA/16046/2014
     IA/16047/2014
     IA/16048/2014
     IA/16049/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th December 2014              |On 16th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                    mr mazhar iqbal - principal Appellant
                    MRS SAMINA KOUSAR - SECOND Appellant
                    MISS KOOMAL MAZHAR - THIRD Appellant
                    MISS SAIMA MAZHAR - FOURTH Appellant
                     MISS AISHA MAZHAR - FIFTH Appellant
                    MISS MONEEBA MAZHAR - SIXTH Appellant
                   MR MUHAMMAD ZEESHAN - SEVENTH APPELLANT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The  principal  Appellant  and
    second Appellant are husband and wife. The  remaining  five  Appellants
    are their children although the third and  fourth  Appellants  are  now
    adults.

 2. The principal Appellant Mazhar Iqbal entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.  The  other  Appellants  entered  as   his
    dependents -  clearly  therefore  the  outcome  of  their  appeals  are
    dependent upon that of the principal Appellant.

 3. The Appellants had appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cox)
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 4th March 2014 refusing to
    granted  them  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  issuing
    directions for their removal under section 47 of the Immigration Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

Background

 4. The Appellants cases  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The  principal
    Appellant is 48 years of age  and  trained  and  gained  experience  of
    carpentry work in Pakistan. On 4th May 2005 he entered the UK  to  take
    up employment as a carpenter supervisor at Highgate Beds Limited.

 5. He was joined in March 2008 by his wife and the  third,  fourth,  fifth
    and sixth Appellants who at  that  point  were  their  dependents.  The
    seventh Appellant was born in the United Kingdom on 23rd January 2009.

 6. Various applications were made by the principal Appellant to remain  in
    the United Kingdom. Suffice to say for the purposes of this decision, a
    problem arose in 2009  with  a  certificate  of  sponsorship  from  his
    employers and for  a  short  period  in  2009  he  (and  therefore  his
    dependents) remained in the UK without leave.

 7. In January 2010 all Appellants were granted leave to remain until  20th
    October 2011; subsequently further leave to remain  was  granted  until
    October 2013.

 8. In February 2013 the principal Appellant applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain and his application was followed by those of  his  dependents
    on 24th October 2013. It is  these  applications  that  the  Respondent
    refused under 245HF(c) and 276(ADE) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. When the matter came before the FtT, it was accepted by all  Appellants
    that they could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    This is recorded by Judge Cox in [44] of his determination,

         "On the totality of the evidence, I find that I am  satisfied  that
         there was a gap in the Appellant's lawful residence in the  UK  and
         he therefore failed to meet the requirements of paragraph  245HF(c)
         and (g) and accordingly, the remaining Appellants  failed  to  meet
         the requirements of 319E & 319J."

10. He further said at [50],

         "Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Appellants do  not  meet  the
         requirements of the rules  and  the  Respondent's  decision  is  in
         accordance with the immigration rules."

11. Following on from that, there being no issue that  the  Appellants  did
    not satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  the  argument
    before the Judge centred on Article 8. Having heard evidence the  Judge
    dismissed all appeals.

12. The Appellants sought permission  to  appeal.  Permission  was  refused
    initially in the First-tier Tribunal because it was  decided  that  the
    applications had not been lodged in  time.  Renewed  applications  were
    made to the Upper Tribunal and permission to appeal was granted by  UTJ
    King in the following terms:

         "The first appellant applied  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2  (General)
         Migrant on 11th February 2013 and a similar  application  was  made
         for his dependents in October 2013. It was accepted that none  meet
         the immigration rules and thus the judge went  onto  consider  Art8
         (sic) as set  out  in  Gulshan.  However  I  find  the  conclusions
         difficult to follow, In relation to the 5th Appellant  for  example
         the Judge appears to accept that there would be unjustifiable harsh
         consequences for her on return. It is difficult to  understand  why
         such findings in respect of her should not satisfy the  appropriate
         test."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the determination  of
    FtT Cox discloses an error of law such that the decision  needs  to  be
    set aside and remade.

Error of Law

13. So far as Article 8 ECHR is concerned, it seems the Judge  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 as set out in Gulshan.  He  said  at   [55]  of  his
    determination the following;

         "The Appellant's Counsel submitted that "the concept of exceptional
         circumstances  must   be   assessed   from   the   perspective   of
         proportionality and with  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in  mind"  and
         that, in effect, the Gulshan approach is erroneous.  However, in my
         view Ahmed does not suggest that Gulshan is wrong  and  as  such  I
         have to consider the 2 stage test set out therein."

14. However having made that observation the Judge went on to make findings
    at [58] as follows;

         "The Fifth Appellant came to the UK at  a  formative  time  of  her
         life.  She was ten years old and within a year of  her  arrival  in
         the UK she started at secondary school.  She has two elder  sisters
         and I accept her evidence that she has fundamentally changed  since
         coming to the UK.  In my view this is  not  a  surprise.   She  has
         enjoyed a way of life that she would not have had in  Pakistan.   I
         am satisfied that this goes to the core of  her  identity  and  her
         being.  Her experiences in the UK  has  fundamentally  changed  her
         outlook on life.  She wishes to pursue her  education  and  have  a
         career.  She fears she will simply not be able to do  this  if  she
         were returned to Pakistan."

15. He follows this up in [60] by saying;

         "In these circumstances,  I  would  also  have  allowed  the  other
         Appellants' appeals (domino effect).  Since, as a minor, the  Fifth
         Appellant would have needed her  parents  to  look  after  her  and
         therefore I would have allowed their appeals.  Whilst the sixth and
         seventh Appellants are minors  and  are  also  dependant  on  their
         parents, as such it follows that  their  appeals  would  have  been
         allowed.  In relation to the Third and Fourth Appellants,  I  found
         that there is a very close relationship between  the  three  eldest
         sisters.  For example, I observed during  the  hearing  that  there
         were regular glances between the sisters that  demonstrated  to  me
         that they have a way of communicating and a close  bond  that  goes
         beyond the normal ties of a sibling relationship.  In my view  this
         is not surprising.  They are all of a very similar age and would no
         doubt have all gone through a number of shared  experiences  during
         formative stages of their lives.  I would have concluded that their
         appeals should also be allowed, otherwise it would breach the Fifth
         Appellant's right to respect for her family life."

16. It is my finding that the Judge has not adequately analysed whether the
    Respondent's refusal of the  fifth  Appellant's  claim  (and  therefore
    those of her parents and minor siblings) results  in  an  unjustifiably
    harsh consequence such as to be disproportionate. As  outlined  in  the
    grant of permission, the Judge's conclusions are difficult  to  follow,
    especially those in relation to the fifth Appellant.

17. Although Mr Diwnycz did not strongly  press  a  defence  of  the  FtT's
    determination, he did rely upon the Rule 24 response and submitted that
    when read as a whole it was apparent that the Judge had considered  all
    relevant matters.

18. I do not agree. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in law.  He  failed
    to provide adequate reasons for the findings reached and in  particular
    fails to set out why the fifth Appellant's circumstances do not satisfy
    the appropriate test.

19. So far as disposal is concerned both representatives were of  the  view
    that should  I  find  the  FtT's  determination  legally  unsustainable
    because of error of law, then the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier for a full and  fresh  hearing.  No  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.

Notice of Decision

20. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge C E Roberts
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal



