
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 15 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            abdul raheem mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national  of  India,  born  on  25  June  1986.   He
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated 9 April 2015.  A Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal J S Law  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    stating that the appellant had not provided any grounds of appeal.   He
    alluded to Section 15(2)(c) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 that provides that the Tribunal may determine an
    appeal without a hearing if:

         "A party has failed to comply with a provision of these Rules or  a
         direction of the Tribunal and the Tribunal is satisfied that in all
         the circumstances, including the extent  of  the  failure  and  any
         reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine the appeal without a
         hearing".


2.   The judge was satisfied that as no grounds of appeal were provided  and
    having considered the papers as a whole and in the absence  of  grounds
    of appeal, he finds no basis to conclude that the respondent's decision
    was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and  the  appeal  must
    therefore fail and he accordingly dismissed the appeal.


3.   Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    J M Holmes in a decision dated 22 October 2015 and subsequently granted
    on 11 February 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  stating  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge did not take into account, given  that  he  was
    not represented, the appellant's letter dated 12 June  2015  which  was
    sufficient  to  formulate  a  ground  of  appeal  which  was  that  the
    respondent had not provided the appellant with the relevant  papers  to
    procure a new sponsor.

4.   At the hearing the Home Office Senior Presenting Officer very  sensibly
    submitted that the decision is clearly not in accordance with  the  law
    because the respondent has failed in her own policy  by  not  providing
    the appellant with the certified copies of his documents sufficient for
    him to obtain a new sponsor.  She invited me that I should  remit  this
    appeal back to the Secretary of State for her to do the same  and  give
    the appellant the necessary time  and  opportunity  to  provide  a  new
    sponsor.  I agreed with the submissions.

5.   I therefore find that the decision is not in accordance  with  the  law
    and that it be remitted back to the Secretary of State  awaiting  their
    lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the limited extent stated above

No anonymity direction is made.
No fee order is made



Signed                                  Date 8th day of April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed                                  Date 8 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


