
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
ia/16243/2015

                                                     ia/16249/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 March 2018                           | On 14 March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            1) MRS SHAMINDER KAUR
                             2) HARDAS BIR SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Plowright, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
                    Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal on procedural  irregularity
    grounds from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lisa  Gibbs
    sitting at Hatton Cross on  29  June  2017)  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the decision of a Border Force Officer made on 1 September 2014
    to refuse the first appellant leave to enter as a student on the ground
    that her existing student leave had been curtailed to expire before her
    attempt to re-enter the UK, and so she no longer  had  valid  leave  to
    enter the UK. The second appellant, whose date  of  birth  is  29  July
    2012, is the first appellant's child, and he  joined  in  his  mother's
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as her dependent.

 2. The delay in their appeals being heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    explained in the decision of Judge Gibbs at paragraphs [4] to  [9].  On
    25 April 2016 the Tribunal held that the first appellant's husband, who
    is the father of the second appellant, did not have a right  of  appeal
    in respect of the refusal of entry to his wife. A  substantive  hearing
    of the appeals of mother  and  son  was  scheduled  to  take  place  in
    December 2016. On this occasion, Mr Plowright of  Counsel  appeared  on
    behalf of the appellants.  After  lengthy  submissions  (which  are  on
    file), an adjournment was granted on the basis that the respondent  had
    served documents which raised "new issues". Directions  were  made  and
    the respondent subsequently provided "a further submission".

 3. The appeals came before Judge Gibbs on 29 June 2017  at  Hatton  Cross.
    The respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer, but  there  was
    no appearance by the first  appellant  or  by  a  legal  representative
    acting on her behalf.

 4. The Judge went on to hear the appeals  in  the  absence  of  the  first
    appellant, and in her subsequent decision  she  gave  her  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals.

 5. At paragraph [10] of her decision, she explained why she had  proceeded
    to hear the appeals pursuant to Rule 28. She  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellants and Hunter Stone Law had been given a  notice  of  the  day,
    time and place of the hearing and no good reason had been provided  for
    their non-attendance.

 6. The appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on the ground that neither they nor Hunter Stone Law had in  fact  been
    notified of the hearing. On 19 December 2017, Judge Pooler granted them
    permission to appeal because, while noting that  Judge  Gibbs  declared
    herself satisfied that the appellants had been served with a notice  of
    hearing, "there appears to be no evidence of any  such  notice  in  the
    Tribunal's files".

 7. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I confirmed from inspection of the file that there was  no  Notice
    of Hearing for a hearing on 29 June 2017.  According  to  Hunter  Stone
    Law, the Tribunal at Hatton Cross had subsequently  confirmed  to  them
    orally that no notice of hearing had been sent out.

 8. It is a mystery therefore how the appeals  came  to  be  listed  before
    Judge Gibbs on 29 June 2017 and also how there was a Presenting Officer
    in attendance, which would suggest that she had advance notice that the
    appeals had been listed for hearing on that day.

 9. Nonetheless, the respondent has not offered any evidence in rebuttal of
    the claim that the appellants did not receive notice  of  the  hearing,
    and Mr Jarvis did not seek to persuade me that they had  been  notified
    of the hearing.

10. Accordingly, I find that  the  appellants  were  not  notified  of  the
    hearing; and that, by  disposing  of  their  appeals  on  the  mistaken
    premise to the contrary, the Judge committed a procedural  irregularity
    which was capable of making a material difference  to  the  outcome  or
    fairness of the proceedings.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error
    of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

12. These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross
    for a de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Gibbs.  None of
    the findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be  preserved.






Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that the appellants require anonymity for these proceedings in  the
Upper Tribunal.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




