
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16938/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 March 2015                             |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                        Mr Nafees Ahmed Hasan Bagdadi
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF SATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Pennington-Benton of Counsel instructed by
                    Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain promulgated on 11 December 2014 dismissing the appeal of Mr
    Bagdadi against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 2 April 2014 to refuse to vary leave to remain and  to
    remove him from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a national  of  India  born  on  21  April  1973.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 5 November 2009 as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Migrant with leave until 31 July  2011.   On  24  August  2011  he  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    valid until 24 August 2013.  On 23 August 2013 he made  an  application
    for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).   On  13  March
    2014 the Appellant was interviewed by the Respondent in connection with
    his application.  The application was then refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 2 April  2014,  and  a
    Section 47 decision was also communicated by way of that letter.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in her determination.  The Appellant sought  permission
    to appeal which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on  4
    February 2015.


5.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 12 February 2015.


Consideration

6.   The Appellant's Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  application  was  based  on  his
    business  enterprise,  SNM  Solutions   Limited,   offering   marketing
    services.   The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  in  respect  of   the
    Appellant's business proposition.  The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant genuinely intended and was  able  to  establish  his
    business within the next six months or that he  genuinely  intended  to
    invest the money that he said was available for investment.


7.   The Secretary of State  essentially  addressed  three  aspects  of  the
    application in the RFRL:

    (i) In respect of the viability and credibility of the  source  of  the
    money held by the Appellant in his UK-based account;

    (ii) The viability and credibility of the  Appellant's  business  plans
    and market research into his chosen business sector; and

    (iii) The Appellant's previous educational and business experience.

    These matters were essentially factors listed under paragraphs 245DD(i)
    of the Immigration Rules as being some of a number of disparate factors
    relevant to an assessment under paragraph 245DD(h) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Immigration Rules are a matter  of  record  and  I  do  not
    propose to set them out here.


8.    On  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  essentially  upheld  the
    Respondent's decision.


9.   On  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  primary  reliance  is  placed  on
    essentially a single submission - albeit it is argued that  it  impacts
    upon each of the contentious areas  identified  above.   The  principal
    submission is based on the decision in Ahmed v Secretary of State (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC).  This is a decision which
    has implications that usually provide difficulties for Appellants  such
    as Mr Bagdadi.  The head note to the case of Ahmed is in the  following
    terms:

         "1.  Where a provision of the Rules  (such  as  that  in  paragraph
             245DD(k)) provides that points will  not  be  awarded  if  the
             decision-maker is not satisfied  as  to  another  (non-points-
             scoring) aspect of the Rule, the non-points-scoring aspect and
             the requirement for points are inextricably linked.


         2.   As a result, the prohibition on new evidence in Section 85A(4)
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to
             the non-points-scoring aspect of the Rule: the prohibition  is
             in relation to new  evidence  that  goes  to  the  scoring  of
             points."


10.  The position is encapsulated at paragraph 5 of the  decision  in  Ahmed
    in the following terms: having cited the substance of Section  58A  the
    Tribunal continues

         "The purpose of that provision is quite clear.  It is that where  a
         points-based application is made and refused, the assessment by the
         Judge is to be of the material that was before  the  decision-maker
         rather than a new consideration of new material.   In  other  words
         the appeal if it is successful is on the basis that  the  decision-
         maker with the material before him should  have  made  a  different
         decision, not on the basis that a different way of  presenting  the
         application would have produced a different decision."


11.  In the context of the present case  Mr  Pennington-Benton  argues  that
    the  Judge  repeatedly  erred  in  according  adverse  weight  to   the
    Appellant's failure to produce supporting evidence to  corroborate  his
    assertions or otherwise to address the issues and  concerns  raised  by
    the Respondent.  It is said that  the  Appellant  was  advised  not  to
    submit any further evidence as it was not admissible  pursuant  to  the
    guidance contained in the decision of Ahmed and accordingly  the  Judge
    was in error to attach adverse weight to the failure to submit evidence
    that was in any event inadmissible.


12.  That the Judge did find the absence of supporting evidence  an  adverse
    factor is not seriously disputed by Ms  Holmes  today.   Indeed  it  is
    evident on the face of the determination that this is  the  case  at  a
    number of points.  For example, in respect of the issue with regard  to
    the source of funds  the  Judge  says  this  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision:

         "He said in his witness statement that his  father  wanted  him  to
         establish a business in the  United  Kingdom  but  he  provided  no
         evidence from his father to corroborate this claim."


    And then in the same context at paragraph 12 the Judge says:


         "I therefore do not know the source of the funds, and I do not know
         whether they are genuinely available to the Appellant.  They are in
         his account, but the Appellant has not substantiated his claim that
         they have come from his father and from his previous earnings."


13.  Similarly, in respect of the Appellant's previous experience the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge says this at paragraph 20:

         "In the notice of decision the Respondent refers to  experience  as
         sales executive working in Dubai and as a marketing manager working
         in Mumbai but I have no evidence of either of  these.   Given  that
         the Respondent was not satisfied as to his previous experience,  it
         would have been reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to  have  provided
         evidence of this claimed experience."




14.  However, Ms Holmes argues that at least insofar as the issue of  market
    research and the business plan is  concerned  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made sustainable findings by reference to matters that  were  not
    directly related to the failure to produce  supporting  evidence  post-
    application or postdecision.  I  will  address  those  matters  in  due
    course but before I do so it is appropriate to give some further regard
    to the overall context in  which  those  matters  will  require  to  be
    considered.


15.  As identified above,  there  were  really  three  areas  of  contention
    raised by the Respondent.  In  respect  of  the  source  of  funds  the
    position was that the Appellant had been asked about the money  in  his
    bank account during the interview that was conducted on 13 March  2014.
    The record of interview is on file in the Respondent's bundle that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant had  produced  documents
    at that interview that confirmed the source of  the  funds  essentially
    having been transferred from his  father.   In  the  Respondent's  RFRL
    whilst reference is made to the Appellant's bank accounts no  reference
    is made to the transfers that were  seen  at  the  interview.   In  the
    circumstances the following observation in the RFRL-

         "from this evidence I am unable  to  assess  the  source  of  these
         funds, therefore, I am not satisfied  that  you  have  proven  that
         there is viable and  credible  source  to  the  funds  required  as
         referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A"


    is  not  obviously  sustainable  and  indeed  before   me   Ms   Holmes
    acknowledges that she would not seek to argue that there was a  logical
    support for the conclusion bearing in mind what had transpired  at  the
    interview.


16.  As regards the qualifications of the Appellant, the  relevant  part  of
    the RFRL is in the following terms:

         "You have a Master of Business Administration awarded by University
         of Wales gained 2 August 2011.
         You also stated that you have a  Bachelor  in  Commerce  gained  in
         India; no evidence of this has been seen.
         You have experience as a sales executive working  in  Dubai,  as  a
         Marketing manager working in Mumbai.  With experience in the United
         Kingdom, as a team leader for EDF and N Power also as a  consultant
         for Q4.
         As a result  of  the  above  I  am  not  satisfied  that  you  have
         demonstrated that you are suitable qualified or have  any  relevant
         experience to run a marketing business."


17.  Ms Holmes acknowledges that there is a 'gap'  between  the  listing  of
    the Appellant's qualifications and experience and the conclusion stated
    that this does not demonstrate that he is  suitably  qualified  or  has
    relevant experience.  This passage of the RFRL is in fact devoid of any
    reasons, and Ms Holmes acknowledges that she would not be in a position
    to support the 'reasoning' accordingly.


18.  That leaves the issue of the business plan  and  the  market  research.
    In this respect the RFRL identifies that the Appellant's business  plan
    was essentially a copy of a standard plan and observes "given that  you
    are claiming  to  be  offering  services  which  will  be  tailored  to
    individual clients the contract does not demonstrate this".  It is also
    said that the Appellant gave little detail of the market research  that
    he had carried out into his potential market.


19.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed the issue of the business  plan
    and market research from paragraph 14 of the decision.  Within that, as
    has been identified during the course of submissions today,  the  Judge
    on at least four occasions makes reference to the absence of supporting
    evidence and at paragraph 16  the  Judge  states  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's claim to have spoken to a particular business "there was no
    evidence to substantiate  his  claim  that  he  had  approached  them".
    Within the same paragraph in respect of two other business concerns the
    Judge states: "He was asked if he had any evidence to show that this is
    what he had done for these companies and said that he had  not  brought
    it with him as he had not been asked to".  I pause  to  note  that  the
    reference to  "not  been  asked  to"  echoes  the  assertion  that  the
    Appellant was advised that any new evidence would be inadmissible.  The
    Judge repeats a reference to this particular matter  in  the  following
    sentence, stating:

         "Given that his application was refused because the Respondent  did
         not consider him to be a genuine entrepreneur I find his failure to
         provide evidence of the work he claims to have done casts doubt  on
         the genuineness of his application."


20.  A further reference to the absence of evidence  is  made  at  paragraph
    17:

         "He said in his statement that his actual business plan  was  notes
         scribbled on an A5 pad but he provided no  evidence  of  this.   He
         said that he had had to digitalise the business plan to put it into
         a presentable format but  did  not  give  any  further  details  or
         explanation of how he  came  up  with  his  business  plan  in  his
         statement",




21.  There is a  yet  further  reference  to  the  absence  of  evidence  at
paragraph 18:


         "I find that the Appellant has provided no  evidence  of  the  work
         that he has been doing, and that all of the  businesses  with  whom
         the Appellant claims to be doing business are owned by friends."


22.  Over and above these quoted references  there  are  references  to  the
    Appellant's oral evidence.  I have already included  in  the  quotation
    from paragraph 17 the reference to an absence of an explanation of  how
    the Appellant had come up with his business plan in  the  first  place.
    At paragraph 18 the Judge stated that she found the Appellant not to be
    credible with regard to the services that he was providing  to  two  of
    the businesses with whom he claimed to have contracts:

         "The Appellant said that he was selling  the  products  from  these
         companies on eBay and Google.  He was  asked  why  these  companies
         would need him to do this and said that these people were in retail
         and did not have much time to handle online sales.   He  said  that
         they were busy handling customers, stock and staff.  I did not find
         this to be a reasonable explanation.  The companies he claims to be
         doing market research for operate in logistics (Zygon) and  kitchen
         design (Space Project) and I find that it  is  unlikely  that  they
         would need the Appellant's services in  order  to  advertise  their
         products online, given that he said that Zygon had  been  operating
         for two to three years and Space Project for about ten years."


23.  The Judge also expressed concerns about the  Appellant's  abilities  in
    the following passage, also from paragraph 18:

         "The Appellant also  said  at  the  hearing  effectiveness  of  the
         marketing for these companies by using Google  ads.   He  was  then
         asked whether he had put any of these companies onto Google ads and
         said that he had not, but that he would ask IT  specialists  to  do
         so.  Given that using Google ads was one of the main ways  that  he
         said he would help to maximise the effectiveness of the  marketing,
         I find that it casts doubt on his claim that this is central to his
         methods, given that he has not done it yet."


24.  It is clear in my judgment  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    regard not merely to the  absence  of  supporting  documents  but  also
    aspects of the Appellant's presentation and his  answers  under  cross-
    examination.  However, I  must  consider  this  assessment  within  the
    overall  context  of  the  Appellant's  application  and  appeal.    As
    identified within the Judge's reasoning in respect of  market  research
    and business plan there are at least  four  passages  where  the  Judge
    erroneously accords weight to the absence of supporting evidence.  That
    must also be seen in the overall context of the errors  in  respect  of
    the other aspects  of  the  case,  that  is  to  say  to  do  with  the
    Appellant's source of funds and  his  previous  experience.   I  remind
    myself that under paragraph 245DD(h), which is what  the  Secretary  of
    State has  invoked,  a  decision-maker  is  required  to  undertake  an
    evaluative process with reference to the factors in paragraph 245DD(i).


25.  It seems to me that there are deficiencies in both  reasoning  and  the
    approach to the admissibility of evidence in respect of some  of  those
    disparate factors and, looking  at  the  case  'in  the  round',  I  am
    persuaded that those errors are not such that it can be said  that  the
    residual aspects with regard to credibility safely support the  Judge's
    overall conclusion.  In the circumstances I  find  that  the  error  in
    respect of the approach to evidence in not following  the  guidance  in
    Ahmed as to the meaning and effect of  Section  85A(4)  is  a  material
    error such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  must  be
    set aside.


26.  In  reaching  that  conclusion,  and  in  the  context  of  considering
    remaking the decision, it seems to me that the effect of the errors  is
    to have deprived the Appellant of a true and fair  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and  in  the  circumstances  the  most  appropriate
    outcome is for there to be a  further  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in front of any Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain.  The scope of that hearing and the evidence  that  may  or
    may not be admissible will need to  be  considered  very  carefully  in
    light of the decision of Ahmed or any other case that may follow it.  I
    am given to understand that there may be a challenge to  the  substance
    of that decision albeit not necessarily a challenge within the  context
    of that  appeal  because  in  that  particular  appeal  the  Appellants
    withdrew their appeal once the error of law point had gone against them
    and so there would be no onward appeal in that particular case.


27.  Finally I should just  mention  Article  8.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dealt with Article 8 in paragraph 23 on the basis that it was not
    apparent that Article 8 was being pursued.  There has been no challenge
    to that aspect of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  and  so  the  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8   remains
    unimpugned: accordingly it is only in respect of the Immigration  Rules
    that the decision requires to be remade.


Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


29.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain.


30.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
on 24 March 2015



Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
