
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16698/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2014                             |On 18 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                           mr mohammad idrees khan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Khan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


            DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW


Introduction

1.   The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to dismiss his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse leave
    to remain in the UK on  the  grounds  of  his  marriage  to  a  British
    citizen.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  was  born  on  15  January
    1979.  On 29 March 2011 he was given limited leave to remain in the  UK
    until 29 March 2013 as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) permit holder.  On 28
    March 2013 he applied for a variation of his leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis that he had formed a relationship  with  Ms  Hussain,  a  British
    citizen.  That was the application which was refused by the  respondent
    on 29 April 2013 who  gave  notice  of  her  intention  to  remove  the
    appellant from the UK by directions under Section 47  (Removal:  Person
    with  Statutorily  Extended  Leave)  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appellant appealed that refusal to the First-tier Tribunal  and  an
    oral hearing took place on 12 March  2014  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge K F Walters  (the  Immigration  Judge).   The  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  concluding  that  the   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules were not met and that the UK would not be  in  breach
    of its obligations under the European Convention on Human  Rights  1950
    (ECHR).

Proceedings Before the Upper Tribunal

4.   By an application for permission to appeal received on 19 May 2014  the
    appellant sought to appeal the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which had been promulgated on 17 March 2014, on  the  grounds  that  it
    revealed errors of law which merited a review.  The appellant,  it  was
    contended in the grounds, in  fact  met  the  requirements  of  Section
    E.LTRP3.1  and  E.LTRP1.7  (financial  threshold  and  subsistence   of
    marriage).  The Immigration Judge erred in law by failing to take  into
    account material documentary  evidence  submitted  in  the  appellant's
    bundle which confirmed that the evidential requirements of Appendix  FM
    and FMSE, in which the above  Sections  were  contained,  were  met  in
    respect of the appellant's income from employment and/or  shares.   The
    Immigration Judge had misdirected himself.  The grounds also state that
    the finding  that  the  parties  were  not  living  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship  in  paragraph  20  of  the  determination  was
    contrary to the weight of the evidence,  both  oral  and  written,  and
    therefore erroneous.  The Immigration Judge  ought  to  have  concluded
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

5.   The appellant applied for  permission  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert
    thought that there may have been an error of law as to  the  dates  the
    Immigration  Judge  made  his  assessment  of  whether  the   financial
    requirements of the Rules were met but he did not  consider  that  this
    was material to the outcome of the appeal.

6.   The appellant renewed his application  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  3  June
    2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen decided that the application  contained
    arguable merits which made it appropriate to grant permission.

7.   The respondent subsequently submitted a Rule  24  response,  indicating
    that she opposed  the  appeal  because  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had reached a decision which was open to  him.   Although  the
    Immigration Judge had, arguably, looked at the evidence  on  the  wrong
    date, this did not affect the fundamental conclusion that the  marriage
    was not genuine and subsisting.  Accordingly, permission to appeal  was
    given.

8.   Standard directions were sent out on 10 July 2014 indicating  that  the
    Upper Tribunal would not consider evidence which  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  unless  it  specifically  decided  to  admit  that
    evidence.

The Hearing

9.   Mr Khan placed reliance on the guidance for permission  to  appeal  and
    in particular paragraphs 9 and 10 of that guidance.  Where  points  are
    "obvious" the Tribunal considering an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal should consider granting permission on those  grounds,  even  if
    they were not raised.  It was pointed out that the sponsor had been  in
    receipt of disability living allowance ("DLA") and  I  was  invited  to
    consider "new evidence" from the Department of Work and  Pensions.   It
    was also suggested that there may be a need to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  In the event I were to find a material error of  law  Mr  Khan
    indicated that he would apply to put forward new evidence  which  would
    include details of the DLA position.

10.  Turning to the  substantive  grounds,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    Immigration Judge had wrongly applied Section  85(4)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and regarded the  evidence
    for the appellant as being "restricted" to that available at  the  date
    of the  decision.   This  was  incorrect.   This  was  an  "in-country"
    application and not "out of country" application.

11.  Secondly,  it  was  submitted  by  Mr  Khan  that  all  the  evidential
    requirements in Appendix FMSE were met.  Paragraph 9 of  that  appendix
    detailed the documents that are required.  It does not require  audited
    accounts.   It  was  submitted  that  the  bank  statements,   dividend
    certificates and other documents submitted were sufficient to discharge
    the requirements of the  Rule.   In  any  event,  it  was  questionable
    whether  the  rigorous  requirements  of  Appendix  FMSE   applied   in
    circumstances where a sponsor is in receipt of a DLA.  At this point  I
    was referred to paragraph 5 of the supplemental witness statement.

12.  As far as the materiality of the omissions  in  the  determination  are
    concerned, this depended on the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the subsistence of the relationship.  It was submitted that
    the First-tier Tribunal had  fallen  into  error  in  its  decision  in
    relation to the subsistence of the relationship.  Under  this  head  it
    was pointed out that the evidence  of  how  the  parties  had  met  and
    married under Islamic law on 2 February 2013 was given.  It was pointed
    out before the First-tier Tribunal that they started living together in
    London in June 2013.  Thereafter, for about eleven  weeks,  they  would
    each travel backwards and forwards between London and Birmingham.  They
    married in March 2013 under a civil ceremony but could not move  in  to
    live with each other until June 2013.  It was contended by Mr Khan that
    his client wished to obtain a positive decision  for  leave  to  remain
    before he moved to Birmingham.  However, this had to  be  seen  in  the
    context of earlier periods of cohabitation, for example, in  2012.   By
    the date of the hearing in March  2014  the  parties  had  been  living
    together since June 2013.

13.  Mr Khan then turned to other issues.

14.  Finally, it was submitted that the  evidence  overwhelmingly  showed  a
    degree of love and affection between the sponsor and appellant.  It was
    a material error of law for the Immigration judge not to so find.  This
    was an in-country application which should succeed on the grounds  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship.   However,  that  had
    been established.

15.  The respondent submitted that the  documentary  evidence  provided  was
    copied.  I was invited not to allow any additional evidence relating to
    DLA which undermined the suggestion that the sponsor was  working.   It
    would require a fresh application to adduce such new evidence which had
    not been considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  Mr Avery then went on to deal with the subsistence of the  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor in the UK.  He submitted that the
    judge had looked at the  evidence  as  a  whole  but  made  an  adverse
    credibility  finding  because  the  appellant  and  the   sponsor   had
    apparently taken many months to begin cohabitation.  It  was  described
    as a "fundamental point" that the sponsor appears not to have disclosed
    that she was living off DLA, nor was the appellant aware of that  fact.
    If they had a close relationship this was a surprising  omission.   The
    conclusion in relation to the subsistence of the relationship  was  one
    the Immigration Judge was entitled to come to on the evidence.

17.  Finally, Mr Khan submitted that there was a  lack  of  analysis  as  to
    what evidence was considered by the judge and what weight should attach
    to it.

18.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law and, if there  was,  whether  it  was
    appropriate to allow additional evidence to be adduced  in  support  of
    the appellant's case.

Discussion and conclusions

19.  The appellant originally entered the UK on 29 March 2011 as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) permit holder but the  present  application  was  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship  with  Sofia
    Hussain, the sponsor.  The respondent  decided  on  28  March  2013  to
    refuse further leave to remain and to make directions for  his  removal
    from the UK under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006.  A right of appeal against those decisions was under  Section
    82(1) as the decision notice stated.

20.  It is not clear how the reference to  Section  85(4)  and  (5)  in  the
    determination promulgated on 17  March  2014  came  to  appear  in  the
    determination.  However, the Immigration Judge plainly erred in law  in
    so far as he limited his consideration  of  the  evidence  to  that  in
    existence at the date of decision or that which pertained at that date.
     That did not mean that the date of decision was  irrelevant.   It  was
    still incumbent upon the appellant to submit all relevant  evidence  in
    support of his application for further leave to remain and the  absence
    of such evidence may well give rise  to  issues  of  credibility.   The
    decision was not made under the points-based scheme but under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules in the form which they took at the date  of
    the decision.

21.  The decision of the respondent was to refuse further  leave  to  remain
    because she was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  established  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  with  the  sponsor,  nor  was  she
    satisfied that the appellant met the financial requirements of Appendix
    FM.  The Immigration Judge agreed with these conclusions.

22.  Given the error contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the  determination,
    where the Immigration Judge erroneously refers  to  the  limitation  on
    consideration of post-decision evidence, the question before the  Upper
    Tribunal is whether this had  a  material  effect  on  the  Immigration
    Judge's conclusions under both these heads?  In other words,  does  the
    Immigration Judge's erroneous conclusion that he was unable to consider
    post-decision evidence mean that his conclusions both that the marriage
    was not "genuine and subsisting" and that the financial requirements of
    the Rules were not met cannot stand?

23.  I consider the question of subsistence of the relationship  first.   It
    seems that the Immigration Judge heard evidence from the appellant  and
    the sponsor and found that the sponsor's oral evidence corroborated her
    statement  and  that  of  the  appellant  (see  paragraph  18  of   the
    determination).  The Immigration Judge applied the correct standard  of
    proof in paragraph 7 of his decision.  The Immigration Judge considered
    the period of cohabitation since June 2013 but was sceptical as to  the
    manner in which the relationship was formed and considered a number  of
    answers to  questions  that  were  raised  during  the  hearing  to  be
    unsatisfactory.  It does not  seem  from  the  determination  that  the
    perceived limitation on post-decision evidence dictated any part of the
    Immigration Judge's conclusions in this respect.  He clearly reached an
    adverse view on the credibility of the relationship for three reasons:

    (1)  the Immigration Judge thought that the  parties  would  have  made
        attempts to cohabit before they did;


    (2)  the appellant would have a greater degree of knowledge  about  the
        sponsor's finances than was demonstrated and in particular the fact
        that she was claiming benefits;


    (3)  they would have discussed with each other the consequences of  the
        appeal failing.


24.  The grounds suggest  that  these  conclusions  were  "contrary  to  the
    weight of the  evidence"  and  if  all  the  documents  in  the  bundle
    submitted were properly weighed up the  Immigration  Judge  would  have
    reached a different conclusion.

25.  I am afraid I do not agree with this  analysis.   This  amounts  to  no
    more than a disagreement with  the  decision.   The  Immigration  Judge
    plainly did weigh up the evidence in a  sufficiently  careful  way  for
    this part of his  decision  to  be  sustainable.   He  heard  the  oral
    evidence and made an assessment of that evidence.  It is not  for  this
    Tribunal to second guess it.

26.  I have therefore reached the conclusion that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was entitled to reach the decision  it  came  to  in  relation  to  the
    subsistence of the relationship.  That  conclusion  was  fatal  to  the
    appellant establishing  that  he  met  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  Were the Immigration Judge's decisions solely based on  a
    failure to satisfy the financial requirements  of  the  Rules  I  would
    undoubtedly have set it aside and the decision would fall to be  remade
    by  this  Tribunal.   However,  for  the  reasons  given   above,   the
    Immigration Judge's conclusions in  relation  to  the  genuineness  and
    subsisting nature of the relationship are fatal  to  such  an  argument
    succeeding.

27.  For these reasons I do  not  find  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

My Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.  Accordingly the decision to dismiss the appeal both on  immigration
grounds and on grounds that the appellant should be  granted  further  leave
to remain on the basis that his protected human rights would  be  interfered
with stand.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
