
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16090/2015
                                                               IA/10759/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 March 2016                         |On 18 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                SAJJAD AHMED
                            ANNA MEZOFINE HORVATH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. T. Mahmood, Kenneth Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heatherington, promulgated on 5 August 2015, in which he
    dismissed  the  first  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision to refuse to issue a residence card  as  confirmation  of  his
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations, and in which he dismissed the  second  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to issue removal directions.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The Judge failed to make any findings as to A1 & A2's claim that  they
    initially communicated with each other via Erezy Translating or  as  to
    the level of communication between them at the  date  of  the  hearing.
    The Judge appears to accept that the respondent had met the  evidential
    burden and raised a reasonable  suspicion,  although  no  reasons  were
    given for this  finding.   Despite  expressly  stating  the  evidential
    burden in [35] the Judge went on to find  in  [37]  that  "Taking  into
    account the entirety of the evidence I found the oral  evidence  to  be
    rehearsed and unconvincing",  which  arguably  indicates  that  he  has
    applied too high a standard of proof.  Finally, it is arguable that the
    comments made in relation to A1 & A2's  differing  ages  and  ethnicity
    were inappropriate."


 3. The Appellants attended the hearing.  I  heard  oral  submissions  from
    both representatives, following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Mahmood relied on the grounds of appeal.


 5. Mr. McVeety accepted that  there  was  no  "out  and  out  finding"  in
    paragraph [35] that the Respondent had met the burden of proof to  show
    that there was a reasonable suspicion that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  I was referred to paragraph [25]  where  the  judge  made
    findings on how the Appellants met and their inability to  communicate.
    He submitted that the judge did not have  to  make  a  finding  on  how
    exactly they had communicated.  In paragraph [26] he  found  that  they
    had had to use Google to communicate.


 6. He submitted that it was not in doubt that  the  judge  had  considered
    that  the  Respondent  had  met  the  evidential  burden  justifying  a
    reasonable suspicion.  I was referred to paragraph [31].  The judge had
    found that this was the  first  Appellant's  sixth  application  for  a
    residence card.   The  first  application  which  involved  the  second
    Appellant was made six days after the refusal of the first  Appellant's
    application with a different EEA national.  He accepted that it had not
    been expressly referred to, but submitted that the clear inference  was
    that the judge had accepted that there was a reasonable suspicion  that
    the marriage was a marriage of convenience.


 7. In relation to the fact that the age gap between the two Appellants had
    not been put to them, he submitted that it was a  fact  which  did  not
    have to be put to them and was of obvious relevance.  He submitted that
    the grounds did not state why the judge's findings  were  not  open  to
    him.  There was nothing factually  wrong  with  his  findings.   I  was
    referred to page 17 of the grounds  where  it  was  submitted  that  an
    honest and plausible explanation had been  given,  but  the  judge  had
    rejected this and had made findings to the contrary.   Nothing  in  the
    grounds pointed to where the judge had made  a  factual  error,  or  an
    error of law.  A common sense approach to Papajorgji showed that if the
    judge had found that it was a marriage of  convenience,  he  had  found
    that the Respondent had discharged the burden of proof.


 8. Mr. Mahmood submitted that it was clear that the judge  had  taken  the
    Appellants' ages and ethnicity into consideration, although he did  not
    go as far as to say that it was prejudicial.  The judge had  noted  the
    amount of previous applications made by  the  first  Appellant.   These
    factors had been taken into account.  In paragraph [30]  he  had  found
    that there was only a small number of inconsistent answers given at the
    marriage interview.  The judge had applied a higher standard  of  proof
    than the balance of probabilities.


 9. I was referred to  paragraph  [36].   The  judge  had  found  that  the
    statement of  the  second  Appellant's  daughter  was  not  independent
    evidence.  However she had adopted this evidence in  court.   If  there
    had been issues regarding her evidence, this could have been challenged
    in cross-examination, but this did not take place.  Instead  the  judge
    had concluded that it was not independent evidence.  The statements had
    addressed the concerns set out in paragraph [35].


Error of law


10. I have carefully considered the grounds of appeal, which run to some 12
    pages and largely attempt to re-argue the case put  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


11. Although the judge does not expressly set out that he  finds  that  the
    Respondent has satisfied the burden of proof to  justify  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage is one of convenience, I find  that  it  is
    clear from paragraph [35] that he considers  that  the  Respondent  has
    provided evidence justifying the reasonable suspicion that the marriage
    is one of convenience.  He states:


    "The central question in this appeal is whether the relationship of the
    appellants is genuine.  The evidential burden is on the  appellants  to
    address the evidence that justifies the reasonable suspicion  that  the
    predominant purpose of the marriage of the  appellants  was  to  secure
    residence rights.  I have considered the factors which are inclined  to
    show that the relationship was genuine  against  those  which  indicate
    otherwise.  I have considered all of the documentary and oral evidence,
    including the photographs, submitted to me and the submissions."


    He then lists ten factors that he took into account.


12. I find that it is clear from this paragraph  that  he  considered  that
    there was evidence justifying the reasonable suspicion.  He set out the
    relevant case law in paragraph [23], and was  aware  that  the  initial
    burden rests on the Respondent.  In paragraph [25], the first paragraph
    of his findings, he refers to the difficulties which the Appellants had
    in communicating when they met.  In paragraph [30]  he  refers  to  the
    fact that at interview they knew little about each other's backgrounds.
     He refers to  the  six  applications  made  by  the  first  Appellant,
    including the fact that the first application which involved the second
    Appellant was made six days after the refusal of  an  application  made
    with a different EEA national [31].  Further he  has  referred  to  the
    fact that four applications have been refused as evidence of a  durable
    relationship was lacking, [32].  I find that it is clear from paragraph
    [35], and the preceding paragraphs, that the judge considered that  the
    Respondent had  met  the  intital  burden,  and  that  the  burden  had
    therefore shifted to the Appellants.

13. I find that there is nothing in the decision to suggest that the  judge
    applied a higher burden of proof than the balance of probabilities.   I
    have found above that although he did  not  expressly  state  that  the
    Respondent had met the initial burden, it is clear that  he  considered
    that this burden had been met.  In  paragraph  [34]  the  judge  states
    "When assessing the evidence I made my findings of fact on the  balance
    of probabilities".  There is nothing to suggest that this  is  not  the
    case.  The judge found the  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellants  to  be
    rehearsed and unconvincing [37].  He has given reasons for this, and  I
    find that this finding was open to him.  I do not  find  that  this  is
    evidence that the judge has applied a higher burden  of  proof  to  the
    evidence of the Appellants.


14. The findings made in paragraph [27] to  [29]  are  mere  statements  of
    fact.  It was submitted that these were not put to the Appellants,  but
    given that they are statements of what is clearly the case,  I  do  not
    find that this is an error of law.  When setting out the factors  taken
    into account in paragraph [35] the judge does not refer to them.  There
    is nothing to suggest that he has placed any, let alone  undue,  weight
    on these factors.


15. In relation to the Appellants' inability to communicate when they  met,
    and indeed after that, I find that the judge set  out  the  Appellants'
    own evidence of their inability to  communicate  when  they  first  met
    [25].  Given the second Appellant's evidence that  she  did  not  speak
    English, the finding that they were unable to communicate in  the  same
    language is a finding that was open to the judge.  He states that it is
    difficult to know how they exchanged telephone  numbers,  and  even  if
    this was by using Erezy Translating, I do not find that it is an  error
    of law that he did not make a finding on this.  His finding  that  they
    could not communicate in the same language is a finding that  was  open
    to him on the basis of the evidence before him, and  this  finding  has
    not been challenged.  In paragraph  [26]  he  states  that  the  second
    Appellant claimed to have used Google to assist her after that, but  he
    finds that even at the date of the hearing, he is  not  satisfied  that
    they are able to communicate with each other fluently


16. The Appellants have not submitted that the judge erred in law by taking
    into account any of the factors set out in paragraph [35].  I find that
    these factors were all relevant factors and it was open to the judge to
    take them into account when coming to his conclusion.


Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of a material error of  law  and  I
do not set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date 14 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

