
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16764/2014
     IA/16765/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |                      Decision & Reasons|
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 2 June 2015                      |                      On 5 June 2015    |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                         nayankumar maganbhai patel
                         NRUPALBEN NAYANKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The appellants, who  are  citizens  of  India  and  husband  and  wife,
    appealed against immigration decisions taken against each of them on 31
    March 2014 together with respective forms IS151A  providing  for  their
    removal from the United Kingdom.

2.   Their appeals were heard on 21 January 2015 by  Judge  Hussain  sitting
    at Richmond.  Both parties were represented, the appellants by  Counsel
    instructed by  their  present  representatives.   Judge  Hussain  heard
    submissions on the preliminary issue whether the appellants had a right
    of appeal exercisable  within  the  United  Kingdom.   Contingently  on
    finding that they did, he heard  the  appeals  substantively.   In  his
    determination of 9 February 2015, promulgated on the following day,  he
    concluded that they did not have rights of  appeal  exercisable  within
    the United Kingdom.  He therefore dealt with the appeals on that  basis
    and without considering them substantively.

3.   The appellants sought permission to appeal, which  was  granted  on  17
    April 2015 by Judge Parkes in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellants seek permission to appeal against a decision of
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on  10  February
             2014 whereby the appellants' appeals against the Secretary  of
             State's decision were found to be invalid. The application  is
             in time and is admitted.


         2.   The question of the appellant's right of appeal was raised  at
             the hearing. The judge found that the appellants did not  have
             an in-country right of appeal and that, whilst  they  remained
             in the UK there was no valid appeal. This  was  on  the  basis
             that the decision  under appeal was a decision  to remove them
             and not a decision to vary their leave, reliance was placed on
             Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ 1436.


         3.   At the time of the removal the appellants had  LTR.    On  the
             same day as the removal  notice  was  served,  31/3/2014,  the
             appellants were served with an IS151A which  stated  that  his
             LTR was cancelled. It is arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
             relation to the variation of the appellant's leave. The  judge
             was right in finding that no human rights application had been
              made pre-decision.


         4.   The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted."

4.   The error of law hearing was listed before me for 10.00 a.m. on 2  June
    2015.   There  was  no  appearance  by   the   appellants   nor   their
    representatives,  Malik  Law  Chambers.   At  my  request   the   usher
    telephoned the representatives at 10.20 a.m.  They reported  that  they
    had told the appellants of the date of the hearing  and  had  requested
    fees in order to instruct Counsel, whenceforth they had  heard  nothing
    from them. They were therefore without instructions and  would  not  be
    attending the  hearing,  for  which  they  apologised  for  not  having
    informed the Tribunal. Their letter to that effect arrived later in the
    day.

5.   I conveyed this information  to  Mr  Avery.   In  the  exercise  of  my
    discretion I heard the appeal in the  absence  of  the  appellants  and
    their representatives.  Mr Avery made submissions, which I  have  taken
    into account, together with the grounds  of  appeal.    I  reserved  my
    decision.

Determination

6.   The appellants' submissions are set out in  their  grounds  of  appeal.
    They are essentially that the decisions were decisions  to  vary  their
    leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom,  made  under  Section
    82(2)(e) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  On  that
    basis  Section  92  of  the  2002  Act  conferred  a  right  of  appeal
    exercisable with the  United  Kingdom.   However  the  judge  found  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of  his  determination  that  they  were  respective
    decisions for the husband that as an illegal entrant he be removed from
    the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section 82(2)(h) and  for
    the wife that she  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions as a person unlawfully there under Section 82(2)(g).   These
    are categories of decisions which under Section  92  do  not  confer  a
    right of appeal exercisable within the United Kingdom.

7.   Construing both decisions and forms IS151A I find  that  they  are  not
    decisions to vary leave to enter or remain in the UK.  Rather they  are
    removal directions under the respective removal provisions of the  1971
    and 1999 Acts.  I find that the judge was correct to categorise them as
    he did.

8.   Section 92 of the 2002 Act provides  that,  whereas  there  is  an  in-
    country right of appeal against decisions made under Section  82(2)(e),
    there is not such a right of appeal in relation  to  those  made  under
    Section 82(2)(g) or (h).

9.   At first impression the language of section 92 is substantive,  in  the
    sense that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to entertain such an
    appeal, rather than procedural, in the sense that  the  issue,  as  for
    example a statue of limitation, depends upon its being pleaded  by  one
    of the parties.  In the grounds of appeal the appellants submit that on
    the basis of case law it is procedural.   These  cases  have  not  been
    placed before the Tribunal.  Without sight of them, or  submissions  on
    the issues, I am not able to evaluate this submission.  Construing  the
    language of section 92, I find the bar on an in-country right of appeal
    to be substantive rather than procedural.

10.  Should that on the basis of authority be wrong, section 92(4)  provides
    that there is an in-country right of appeal where a person has made  an
    asylum or a human rights claim  while  in  the  UK.   Considering  this
    provision in the light of authority, the  judge  found  as  a  fact  at
    paragraph 14 that the appellants had not made such a  claim.   On  that
    alternative basis also I find that he was correct.

11.  I conclude that the decision of Judge Hussain was correct in  law,  and
    accordingly uphold it.

Decision

12.  The original determination contains no error of law and is upheld.

Signed




Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        J        M        Lewis
               Dated: 3 June 2015
