
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/16816/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                              Nomsa Maria Nxele
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a female citizen of South Africa  born  15  May  1963.
    She entered the United Kingdom in December 2011 with entry clearance as
    a spouse valid until March 2013.  In March 2013  she  made  application
    for further leave to remain as the spouse of a British national.  On  1
    May 2013 a decision was made to refuse  to  vary  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom and to remove the appellant by way of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The
    appellant sought to appeal that decision.

2.   The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Beach on 19 August 2013.  The  appellant  had  not  requested  an  oral
    hearing  and  the  appeal  was  dealt  with  "on  the  papers".   In  a
    determination  dated  10  September  2013  Judge  Beach  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rule  and  found  that  the
    decision under Section 47 was "not in accordance with  the  law".   For
    reasons set out in the determination the judge declined  to  deal  with
    the appellant's human rights appeal.

3.   The respondent's original  decision,  and  the  judge's  determination,
    were based on a failure by the appellant to provide an original English
    language test certificate as required by the Immigration Rules.

4.   The appellant sought leave to appeal the decision and on  30  September
    2013 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers granted leave  upon  the
    basis that the judge was wrong in failing to consider  the  appellant's
    human rights.

5.   In a  response  lodged  under  Rule  24  of  the  Procedure  Rules  the
    respondent does not oppose the application as it  was  considered  that
    Judge Beach's decision not to consider Article 8 was an error of law.

6.   Hence the matter is now before me in the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Richards
    stood by the views expressed in the Rule 24 notice and I indicated that
    I agreed with that position.  Through no fault of her own  Judge  Beach
    did err in law in failing to consider the appellant's human rights.  It
    was not a matter  that  should  be  "postponed"  to  some  later  date.
    However Judge Beach's determination in respect of the appeal "under the
    Rules" and in respect of the Section  47  decision  should  hold  good.
    There is no direct challenge to those parts of the decision.  They  are
    preserved but I must now go on to make a decision  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's human rights appeal as I note such rights  figured  in  the
    appellant's original grounds of appeal.

7.   In deciding to make a decision in  respect  of  the  appellant's  human
    rights I see no reason not to preserve the findings of Judge  Beach  as
    they are clearly uncontroversial and not in dispute.   Equally  not  in
    dispute is the fact that the appellant had not  provided  the  required
    test certificate.  However subsequent to the decision  of  Judge  Beach
    the appellant has now obtained such a certificate.

8.   I note the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  married  her  husband,  a
    British citizen, in a ceremony in Bristol  in  April  2010.   The  only
    issue before Judge Beach had been  the  non-existence  of  the  English
    language certificate.  That clearly was not in existence at the date of
    the  decision  but  may  have  been  at  the  date  of  Judge   Beach's
    determination. It is dated "September 2013".

9.   I note the evidence given by the appellant, and  her  husband  (as  set
    out in the Record of Proceedings).

10.  There now exists the necessary certificate.  It is therefore  the  case
    that if fresh application were  now  made  such  application  would  be
    successful.  However it would be necessary for such an  application  to
    be made out of the United Kingdom.

11.  In considering an Article 8 claim I am assisted in  the  step  by  step
    approach identified in the case of R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] 2  AC  368.
    In working through those steps I reach the question as  to  whether  or
    not the  interference  with  this  appellant's  family  life  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end.  If the  appellant  had  to
    leave the United Kingdom to make an application that clearly  would  be
    an interference with the family life that she has  established  in  the
    United Kingdom with her husband.  I also note there  is  other  decided
    cases and in particular Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  I  WLR  1420  and  the
    Administrative Court decision in R (on the application of Zhang) v SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).

12.  In the circumstances of this  case  taking  particular  notice  of  the
    likely cost and the level of interference with the  appellant's  family
    life I consider it would be disproportionate to require  her  to  leave
    the United Kingdom to make an out of country application which  in  all
    likelihood would succeed.

13.  Accordingly I make a decision.  The appellant's appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR is allowed.

14.  No application was  made  for  anonymity  and  I  do  not  consider  it
    appropriate to make such a direction.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


