
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16137/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                            Upper Tribunal Finch


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brockleby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P. Solanki, instructed by Kiteleys, solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal  against
       the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Troup   who,   by   a
       determination promulgated  following  a  hearing  on  11  July  2014,
       allowed SO's appeal. Although, therefore, SO is  now  the  respondent
       before the Upper Tribunal, for convenience  of  expression  we  shall
       refer to him as "the claimant".

    2. It may be helpful to summarise  briefly  the  claimant's  immigration
       history and the history of proceedings that  now  brings  the  appeal
       before the Upper Tribunal. The claimant, who  was  born  on  25  July
       1982, is a citizen of Turkey. He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
       June 2008 and was admitted as a  visitor.  He  then  secured  further
       leave to remain, first as a  student  and  then  under  the  European
       Community Association Agreement for the  purpose  of  establishing  a
       business as a painter and decorator. While an application for further
       leave in that capacity was pending, the  claimant  was  found  to  be
       working impermissibly in paid employment with  the  result  that  his
       application was refused.

    3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The judge  rejected
       his claim so far as it related to the Association Agreement  but  the
       appeal was allowed on the basis that there would be an  impermissible
       infringement of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR if he  were
       not granted leave to remain.  The  Secretary  of  State  successfully
       appealed to the Upper Tribunal with the result that  the  appeal  was
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the Article  8  claim  to  be
       determined afresh.

    4. That brought the appeal before Judge Troup on  11  July  2014  before
       whom the claimant pursued an asylum claim on the basis that he  would
       be at risk on return to Turkey as a gay man.  The judge produced what
       is, in a number of  ways,  a  problematic  determination,  not  least
       because the judge has conflated his summary of  submissions  and  his
       findings so that it is not always easy to see which  are  which.  The
       Judge concluded, at paragraph 24 of his determination:

           "I find  from  the  evidence  that  the  circumstances  of  this
           Appellant are such that he would not be able to live  discretely
           in Turkey even if he wanted to do so. He has  a  civil  partner,
           that is to say the Sponsor who, perforce, would return to Turkey
           with him. It is highly unlikely that they  could  live  together
           discretely disguising their sexuality even if they wanted to  do
           so.

           I find from the evidence before me that the Appellant  would  be
           unable to exercise his right to live freely and openly as a  gay
           man without fear of persecution in Turkey and I grant the asylum
           appeal accordingly."

       The judge went on to allow the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  also,
       finding that to be the inevitable consequence of having  allowed  the
       appeal on asylum grounds:

           "I have found that the Appellant is at risk  of  persecution  in
           the event of return to Turkey. It follows that his removal would
           be unjustifiably harsh and thus Article 8 is engaged."

    5. The grounds pursued by the Secretary  of  State  in  challenging  the
       determination are to the effect that the judge erred  in  failing  to
       apply relevant country guidance  found  in  SD  (Military  Service  -
       sexual  identity)  Turkey  CG  [2013]  UKUT  (IAC)   and   that   the
       determination is wholly unreasoned and fails to explain what was  the
       evidential basis upon which the conclusions were reached.

    6. For the reasons that follow,  we  have  no  doubt  at  all  that  the
       determination discloses material legal error such that  the  decision
       to allow the appeal cannot stand.

    7. Although it is not in doubt that the country guidance provided by  SD
       was before the judge, he made no reference to  it,  at  all,  in  the
       determination and there is nothing to indicate that he had regard  to
       it. Ms Solanki, who said  everything  that  could  possibly  be  said
       properly in an attempt to defend the determination, submitted that it
       was permissible for the judge to have no regard  to  SD  because  the
       focus in that case was upon risks faced by gay men in the context  of
       military service obligations, so that observations made by the  panel
       about the position of gay men in society generally  were  obiter  and
       therefore not something that the judge had to take into account.  She
       pointed out that the Tribunal in SD itself distinguished between  the
       findings that were offered as country guidance, in the section of the
       determination that followed a heading at paragraph  111  of  "Country
       Guidance" and observations set out  prior  to  that  which  were  not
       replicated in the head note.  She submitted also  that  most  of  the
       expert and documentary evidence was concerned specifically  with  the
       issue of military service which was not relevant in this appeal.

    8. We are not persuaded by those submissions.  The  panel  in  SD  heard
       evidence over two days. The schedule of evidence considered  runs  to
       six pages. It is a carefully written judgment that  extends  to  more
       than 100 pages. Having observed at paragraph 104 that:

           "In the  light  of  the  evidence  about  how  homosexuality  is
           perceived in Turkey, it does not follow that all  homosexual  or
           bisexual men will face difficulties ..."

       The panel said at paragraph 110:

           "We are only concerned  with  the  specific  issue  of  military
           service. For the sake of completeness, on the evidence before us
           we find that the general conditions in Turkey for gay men do not
           give rise to a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to
           Article 3. As identified in the background evidence there are  a
           number of gay rights organisations and NGOs offering advice  and
           assistance, and Kaos GL not  only  provides  shelter  for  those
           suffering  from  ill-treatment  but  also  provides  lawyers  to
           provide legal support for LGBT individuals and provides  printed
           material and a magazine distributed in 24 cities.  It  has  also
           noted a degree of openness in  being  gay  or  LGBT  among  more
           educated people and in urban areas, and there is evidence  of  a
           gay scene in  Turkey  particularly  in  urban  areas,  and  some
           coastal areas."

    9. Addressing Ms Solanki's submissions in this regard, we recognise that
       paragraph 110  of  SD  falls  outside  the  distillation  of  country
       guidance assembled at paragraph 111. But even if we proceed upon  the
       basis that paragraph 110 was not, specifically,  offered  as  country
       guidance, it still represented a clear finding of fact contained in a
       reported  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  its
       consideration of extensive evidence presented an a  country  guidance
       case.  That meant that, as those finding were put before  the  judge,
       he needed to explain why he took a different and irreconcilable view.
       This he simply failed to do.

   10. In fact, the judge failed to make any attempt to engage with  any  of
       the evidence before him or to offer any reasoned findings of fact. He
       simply set out his conclusions upon risk or return and a  reading  of
       the determination provides no indication  of  why  he  reached  those
       conclusions.

   11. The absence of any reasoned discussion or analysis  of  the  evidence
       constitutes an error of law. It is a material error because we simply
       cannot be sure that the judge would have reached the same  conclusion
       had he engaged with the evidence before him.

   12.  The  reasoning  in  respect  of  the  Article  8  claim  is  equally
       unsatisfactory. The novel application of  a  test  of  "unjustifiable
       harshness" does not inspire confidence that the correct approach  was
       taken to this assessment and, in any event, as it is plain  that  the
       decision on human rights grounds  was  predicated  upon  the  legally
       flawed decision in respect of the  claimant's  protection  claim,  it
       follows that the decision to allow the appeal on  Article  8  grounds
       cannot stand either.

   13. Having informed the parties of our decision we invited submissions as
       to the onward conduct of the appeal. Ms Solanki urged us to remit the
       appeal for  determination  afresh  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms
       Brockleby-Weller made no submission, being content to leave that  for
       the Upper Tribunal to decide. In our view Ms Solanki  is  correct  to
       say that the appeal should be  remitted  for  re-determination  by  a
       different judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That  is  because  the
       nature of the errors we have identified  in  this  determination  are
       such that there has, effectively, been no determination at all of the
       issues in dispute between the parties and the Tribunal  must  receive
       oral evidence from two witnesses.

   Summary of decision

   14. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the determination of
       Judge Troup, dated 21 July 2014, is set aside.

   16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh
       by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.






                               Signed   [pic]
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 16 July 2015


