
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA163112015
     IA163122015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 April 2017                          |On 8 May 2017                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                Mrs Anuradha
                              mr sarbjit kumar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr V Makol of Counsel instructed by Maalik & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on 8 January 1983.  The  main
    Appellant first entered the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant on 24 January 2010  with  leave  valid
    until November 2011 which she  subsequently  extended  until  4  August
    2014.  She entered the United Kingdom with her dependent partner on  23
    September 2013 and he was given leave in line with her.  The  Appellant
    made a further application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.   ,
    On 26 January 2015, whilst the applications  were  pending,  the  first
    Appellant received a  notice  from  the  Respondent  that  the  Sponsor
    college had been removed from the register of licensed  Sponsors.   The
    Respondent  informed  the  first  Appellant  that  in  accordance  with
    published policy she would be given  discretionary  leave  of  60  days
    within which to secure a new Sponsor  and  to  amend  or  resubmit  her
    application.  The first Appellant  failed  to  secure  a  new  Sponsor,
    consequently the applications were refused on  15  April  2015  on  the
    basis that the first Appellant had no valid CAS and that her  dependent
    partner was to be refused in line with her.

 2. The Appellants appealed and their appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal M J Gillespie for hearing on  25  February  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 4 March 2016, the judge dismissed the  appeals.
    The Appellants were represented at the hearing.   The  judge  made  the
    following findings of fact at [10]:

         "10. I am prepared to assume the reliability of the  generality  of
             the allegations for the Appellant.  In particular that she did
             attempt to win a place and sponsorship within  the  period  of
             grace  but  for  various  reasons,  not  shown  to  have  been
             connected with any assumed lack of qualification or  means  on
             her part, was unsuccessful in so doing.

         11.  I reject the suggestion that the decision was not  lawful,  in
             particular that it was not in accordance with  the  policy  of
             the Respondent.  The actions of the Respondent were foursquare
             in line with the rules and with its published policy as to the
             application of the rules.  I  further  reject  any  suggestion
             that the decision was not in accordance with  a  principle  of
             common  law  fairness.   The  policy  of  the  Respondent   is
             expressly devised  to  take  into  account  the  principle  of
             fairness and, in fairness, to give a person who  has,  without
             fault, suffered from the de-registration of the Sponsor,  fair
             opportunity to regularise his position.  It might well be, for
             whatever reason, that not all students will be able so  to  do
             within a period of 60 days.  In such an event, however,  there
             is  no  necessary  principle  of  fairness  that  they  should
             nevertheless be permitted an extended period of  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom, as a matter  of  discretion  and  outside  the
             rules."

    The judge proceeded to dismiss the appeals.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  basis
    essentially that the case was one concerned with fairness and that  the
    Appellant did not have a fair opportunity to obtain a  further  Sponsor
    and a CAS because the 60 days ran as a period of time where  there  was
    no  admission  for  courses  starting  in  September  of   that   year.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    in a decision dated 24 February 2017 on the basis:

         "3.  ... As  the  Judge  did  not  consider  the  case  of  Marghia
             (procedural  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  366  (IAC),  or   indeed
             expressly refer to any other case,  it  is  arguable  that  by
             omitting to consider this or any other  relevant  cases,  that
             there has been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  reaching  his
             decision."

 4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 8 March 2017 which  provides
    inter alia as follows:

         "4.  It is submitted that the grounds have no merit.

         5.   It is submitted that the 60 day policy has not been  found  to
             be ultra vires since its introduction.  As Judge Gillespie has
             found at his paragraph 11 of the determination the  policy  is
             expressly devised  to  take  into  account  the  principle  of
             fairness."

         6.   With the greatest of respect  of  Judge  Simpson  in  granting
             permission the Respondent fails to see that any of the  points
             raised in the grant of permission are even arguable let  alone
             material to the outcome of the appeal."

 5. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by Mr  V  Makol
    of Counsel instructed by Maalik & Co Solicitors.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Ms J Isherwood. I ascertained from Ms Isherwood that she
    sought to rely upon the Rule 24 response and then indicated to Mr Makol
    that I considered that  the  grant  of  permission  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been misconceived, in that the  Respondent  had  exercised
    discretion in accordance with her policy  and  provided  the  Appellant
    with a 60 day grace period.  There was thus no unlawfulness on the part
    of the Respondent and the judge was entitled to dismiss the appeal  and
    there was no error of law, material or otherwise, in his decision.   Mr
    Makol essentially accepted that but wished to  reiterate  that  the  60
    days' grace period was effectively redundant as the Appellant  had  not
    been able to make any use of it and it was unfair because  it  was  not
    possible to gain admission to university prior to July because all  the
    courses start in September and October. He submitted  that  ultimately,
    this has resulted in unfairness to the Appellant.

 6. Whilst it may be that the 60 day discretionary period did not avail the
    Appellant in this particular case due to the timing of when that period
    began and ended, this does not mean that there is any material error of
    law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Gillespie.  The fact of  the
    matter is that when the Respondent made her decision on 15 April  2015,
    the first Appellant had  no  valid  CAS  and  thus  did  not  meet  the
    requirements for a grant of further leave under the Immigration  Rules.
    The Judge was, therefore, bound to dismiss her appeal.  Any  issues  in
    respect of the Respondent's discretionary policy are matters  that  can
    be raised via different channels but as  to  this  particular  decision
    there is no material error of law and I uphold the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in  the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Gillespie dismissing the appeal, with the effect that the  decision  of  the
First tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 4.5.17

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
