
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16715/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25th November 2014                |On 15th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 arslan aziz
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by Brys Immigration
Consultants


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Rose promulgated on 30th June 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born  23rd  April  1979  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom having been granted  entry  clearance  as
    the spouse of a British citizen.  The Claimant's  marriage  broke  down
    and in February 2014 he made an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the victim of domestic violence.

 4. His application was refused on 17th  March  2014  and  his  appeal  was
    subsequently heard by Judge Rose (the judge) on 25th June 2014.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Claimant and two witnesses,  and  was
    satisfied that he had been the victim of domestic violence and that the
    Claimant's relationship with his wife was caused to  permanently  break
    down as a result of that domestic violence.   The  appeal  was  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules with reference to paragraph  289A,  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relying upon two grounds which are summarised below.

 7.  Firstly  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  a   material
    misdirection of law  in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  by  not
    indicating what elements of the evidence given by and on behalf of  the
    Appellant were sufficient to  amount  to  domestic  violence.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had not engaged with  whether  the  Claimant's
    wife's conduct amounted to domestic violence.

 8.  Secondly  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  a  material
    misdirection of law in relation to  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950  Convention).   It  was  contended
    that the judge's findings in relation to Article 8 were inadequate  and
    largely guided by findings made under the Immigration Rules on domestic
    violence, therefore were  flawed.   It  was  also  contended  that  the
    Claimant's circumstances did not disclose compelling reasons outside of
    the Immigration Rules for granting leave, and the judge had erred in so
    finding.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J
    M Holmes who found both grounds to be arguable.

10. Following the grant of permission the  Claimant  submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In brief summary it was contended that the judge  had  correctly
    applied the Immigration Rules and correctly directed himself as to  the
    burden and standard of proof and taken into account  all  the  evidence
    and not materially erred in law.

11. It was submitted that the judge properly considered the  relevant  case
    law that being LA (Pakistan) [2009] UKAIT 00019,  and  had  taken  into
    account the Respondent's case, and had not acted  perversely,  and  had
    given adequate reasons for his findings.

12. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  whether   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.



The Secretary of State's Submissions

13. Mr Mills relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  He pointed out that there  was  no  evidence  of
    domestic violence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  other  than  oral
    evidence.  Mr Mills submitted that the Claimant's evidence as contained
    in paragraphs 3 and 4 of his witness statement was that  his  wife  had
    mostly ignored him,  and  otherwise  constantly  shouted  at  him,  and
    submitted that the judge had erred in finding that the behaviour of the
    Claimant's wife amounted to domestic violence, and had "set the bar too
    low".

14. Mr Mills accepted that violence  did  not  have  to  be  physical,  and
    referred to the guidance on domestic violence which had been issued  by
    the Home Office which is  contained  at  page  9  of  the  Home  Office
    Guidance - Victims of Domestic Violence valid from 28th  January  2014.
    This  guidance  referred  to  controlling,  coercive   or   threatening
    behaviour, and Mr Mills submitted the behaviour of the Claimant's  wife
    as described in the  determination,  did  not  meet  the  threshold  of
    domestic violence and the judge had erred in so finding.

15. Mr Mills observed that it was arguably  irrational  for  the  judge  to
    accept that  the  behaviour  amounted  to  domestic  violence,  and  in
    paragraph 20 of the determination the judge had not explained  how  the
    Claimant's wife shouting at him satisfied the  definition  of  domestic
    violence.  I was referred to paragraph  24  of  AN  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWCA Civ 757 which indicated  that  for  conduct  to  constitute
    domestic violence, it must reach some minimal level of seriousness.

16. In relation to Article 8, Mr Mills submitted that this either stood  or
    fell together with the challenge to the determination under the rules.

The Claimant's Submissions

17. Mr Vokes agreed with Mr Mills in relation to Article 8.

18.  Mr  Vokes  relied  upon  his  skeleton   argument   in   relation   to
    irrationality, and submitted that it was a bold submission  to  contend
    that no judge could have allowed the  appeal  on  the  evidence  placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Mr Vokes submitted that the judge had set out all  the  issues  in  the
    case, and set out the submissions of both  parties,  correctly  applied
    the burden and standard of proof, and referred to the appropriate  case
    law.

20. The judge had set out the Home Office definition of  domestic  violence
    and considered the evidence in the round, and had not merely found that
    the Claimant's wife  had  shouted  at  him,  but  had  found  that  her
    behaviour isolated the Claimant, humiliated him, and that she had  made
    threats to have the Appellant  deported  from  this  country,  and  the
    evidence in the round had reached the minimum level of seriousness  and
    amounted to domestic violence.

21. Mr Vokes submitted that the Upper Tribunal should not lightly interfere
    with credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who had
    had the benefit of hearing the evidence, and pointed out that there was
    a high threshold before irrationality could be found.

22. Mr Vokes concluded by commenting that while another judge may not  have
    made the same  findings,  this  did  not  amount  to  irrationality  or
    perversity, and this determination disclosed no error of law.

The Secretary of State's Response

23. Mr Mills submitted that the crux of the challenge to the  determination
    is whether the minimum level of seriousness has been met.  He clarified
    that the main  challenge  of  the  determination  is  insufficiency  of
    reasoning.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. I do not find that the judge erred in law for the following reasons.

26. The judge set  out  the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof  and
    correctly considered paragraph 289A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge specifically referred to LA (Pakistan), and the judge set out the
    case made by both parties.

27. It is clear that the judge was aware of the Home Office  definition  of
    domestic violence, as this is set out in part in paragraph  20  of  the
    determination.

28. I do not agree with the submission in the grounds that  the  judge  did
    not indicate what elements of the evidence was sufficient to amount  to
    domestic violence.  The judge summarised the evidence of  the  Claimant
    and his two witnesses and found them to be credible, and gave  adequate
    reasons for so finding.

29. The judge found the  behaviour  of  the  Claimant's  wife  went  beyond
    behaviour described  by  the  Presenting  Officer  as  "not  culturally
    respectful", but amounted to threatening behaviour,  and  psychological
    and emotional abuse.  It is clear from the Home  Office  guidance  that
    such behaviour is capable of constituting  domestic  violence  and  the
    judge correctly pointed this out in paragraph 20.

30. One aspect of coercive behaviour, according to the Home Office guidance
    is humiliation of the victim, and the judge specifically found that the
    Claimant's wife's behaviour in front of relatives, one of  whom  was  a
    witness at the hearing, was both humiliating and  hurtful.   The  judge
    found that the Claimant's wife's behaviour was controlling in  that  it
    isolated the Claimant from  sources  of  support,  and  again  this  is
    referred to in  the  Home  Office  guidance.   Although  there  was  no
    documentary evidence, the judge was entitled to accept oral evidence if
    he found that evidence to discharge the burden of proof.

31. One aspect of the Claimant's wife's behaviour which was accepted by the
    judge is that she would  threaten  to  call  the  police  to  have  him
    deported, particularly if he told anyone about the manner in which  she
    treated him.  There is reference to this in paragraphs 11, 14 and 21 of
    the determination.  The judge was entitled to find that  this  type  of
    behaviour  made  the  Appellant  feel  constantly  under   threat   and
    vulnerable.

32. The judge in paragraph 11 recorded that the Appellant felt that he  had
    become completely isolated because of his wife's behaviour, and that he
    felt under constant pressure to be quiet and  obedient  and  to  comply
    with his wife's pretence  of  marriage.   In  paragraph  19  the  judge
    recorded the witness Mrs Parveen explaining that  the  Claimant's  wife
    "wanted to control everything and everybody", and again such  behaviour
    is specifically referred to in the Home Office definition  of  domestic
    violence.

33. As Mr Mills clarified, the  main  challenge  to  the  determination  is
    inadequacy of reasoning, rather than a contention of  irrationality  or
    perversity.  I do not find any evidence to support the contention  that
    the conclusions in the determination were irrational or perverse.

34. In relation to reasoning I set out below the head  note  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

    It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.   This
    leads to judgments becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It  is,  however,  necessary
    for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they won or lost.

35. I conclude that the judge has made findings which were open to  him  on
    the evidence and given sustainable reasons  so  that  the  parties  can
    understand  why  they  won  or  lost.   I  conclude  that  the  grounds
    challenging the decision in relation to the Immigration Rules amount to
    a disagreement with the findings made, but do not disclose an error  of
    law.

36. In relation to Article 8, both representatives indicated there  was  no
    need to make separate submissions on this, because if the Secretary  of
    State's challenge succeeded under the Immigration Rules it  would  also
    succeed under Article 8, but if the  challenge  under  the  Immigration
    Rules failed, it would also fail in relation to  Article  8.   I  agree
    with those submissions, and I find no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.



Signed        Date: 1st December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date: 1st December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
