
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 23 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|              |Mohammad Abdur Razzaq                        |Appellant     |
|              |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                   |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |And                                          |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |The Secretary of State for the Home          |Respondent    |
|              |Department                                   |              |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, of Counsel, instructed by Uzma Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background facts:

 1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan born  on  30  November  1980  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 30 June 2007 with leave as a  student,
    has been granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Housego  (hereafter  the
    "judge") promulgated on 15 December 2015 dismissing his appeal  against
    the following decisions of the respondent:

    i)     a decision dated 15 April 2015 to curtail his  leave  so  as  to
         expire on 15 April 2015.

    ii)    a decision dated 20 April 2015 to refuse his application  of  13
         May 2014 for leave to remain ("LTR") in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

 2. Both decisions were taken on the same facts, which were stated to be as
    follows: that, as part of  his  application  dated  13  May  2014,  the
    appellant had submitted a Certificate of Sponsorship ("CoS") print  out
    purporting to have been issued by Acorn Lodge (Bournemouth)  Ltd  which
    displayed the  certificate  number:  C2G4Q7U8IHZ.  The  respondent  was
    satisfied  that  this  document  was  false  because  the  UK  Visas  &
    Immigration Sponsor Investigations Team had confirmed by email that the
    certificate number in question did not appear  when  cross  checked  on
    their  systems.  In  addition,  the  respondent  considered  that   the
    certificate number was clearly in the wrong format for  a  UK  Visas  &
    Immigration CoS reference number.

 3. However, whilst the facts upon which the curtailment decision  and  the
    decision to refuse leave to remain were the same:

    i)     the curtailment  decision  was  made  on  the  ground  that  the
         appellant  had  made  false  representations  for  the  purpose  of
         obtaining  leave  to  remain  by  submitting  a  false   CoS.   The
         appellant's leave was therefore curtailed under  para  323(i)  with
         reference to para  322(2)  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
         Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  (hereafter  referred  to
         individually as a "Rule" and collectively the "Rules"); and

    ii)    the decision to refuse LTR was made on the ground  that  he  had
         submitted a false document in relation to his application of 13 May
         2014. His application was therefore refused under para  322(1A)  of
         the Rules.

 4. The judge made the following findings:

    i)     The appellant had unambiguously withdrawn his application of  13
         May 2014 by a letter  dated  24  June  2014  sent  by  Lincoln  Law
         Chambers who had lodged his application of 13 May 2014.

    ii)    The respondent did not have a power not to permit a  withdrawal.
         It followed that the decision to refuse LTR was "otherwise  not  in
         accordance with the law" because there  was  no  application  which
         could be refused. The judge therefore allowed the appeal.  However,
         in the "Notice of decision" section of his decision, he  said  that
         his decision simply meant that  the  respondent's  decision  was  a
         nullity because the reason  the  appellant's  appeal  against  that
         decision succeeded was that there was no application to be refused.



    iii)   He  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  curtailment  decision,
         finding that the appellant had knowingly used false documents.

 5. It will be seen that, whilst the judge decided the appeal  against  the
    curtailment decision on the basis that the appellant had knowingly used
    false documents, the curtailment decision was made on the  ground  that
    the appellant had made  false  representations.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen raised this point in his decision to grant permission to appeal.

 6. The respondent filed two  responses  under  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (the  "UT   Rules"),   dated
    (respectively) 27 July 2016 and 1 August 2016. In the second  response,
    she raised an issue of jurisdiction, i.e. that, pursuant to the  coming
    into force of the amendments to s.82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the  "2002  Act")  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No. 3, Transitional and Savings  Provisions)  Order  2014
    (SI 2014/2771)  (hereafter  the  "No.  3  Order")  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional  and  Savings
    Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015/371) (hereafter the  "No.
    4 Order"), the appellant did not have a right of appeal against  either
    of the decisions.

 7. I heard submissions on the jurisdiction issue and having considered the
    parties' submissions carefully, I have decided that the  appellant  did
    not  have  a  right  of  appeal  against  either  of   the   decisions.
    Accordingly, the judge did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal. My
    reasons are given below.

 8. It  is  therefore  unnecessary  for  me  to  deal  with  the  remaining
    submissions as to whether the judge had  materially  erred  in  law  in
    assessing the issues that were argued before him although I do so to  a
    limited extent at paras  16-17  below.  However,  I  shall  record  the
    submissions made to me which were as follows:

    i)     The  curtailment  decision  was  made  under  para  323(i)  with
         reference to para 322(2) of the Rules. Mr Karim submitted  that  it
         is clear from these provisions that the power to curtail  leave  is
         available only in the circumstances set out in para 322(2).  Whilst
         these circumstances include the making  of  false  representations,
         they  do  not  include  the  submission  of  false  documents.  The
         submission of false documents  is  the  subject  of  para  322(1A).
         Accordingly, Mr Karim submitted, it was clear that para 322(1A) was
         not available to curtail leave.

         Mr Wilding accepted that Mr Karim may be right in saying that  para
         322(1A) was not available to curtail an individual's leave.

    ii)    Mr Karim submitted that para 322(2) was not available to curtail
         leave due to the fact that, as  the  appellant  had  withdrawn  his
         application, it could  not  be  said  that  he  had  made  a  false
         representation "for the purpose of obtaining leave to  enter  or  a
         previous variation of leave  ...".  This  is  because  a  withdrawn
         application should be treated as one that had never been  made,  in
         his submission.

         In response, Mr Wilding submitted that the fact that an  individual
         has withdrawn an application does not mean that  the  Secretary  of
         State cannot proceed under para 322(2). He  submitted  that  it  is
         simply wrong to say that an application  that  has  been  withdrawn
         should be treated as never having been made.  He submitted that  it
         is simply wrong to  say  that  the  withdrawal  of  an  application
         precludes the Secretary of State  from  invoking  para  322(2).  Mr
         Wilding submitted that the phrase "for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
         leave to enter or a previous  variation  of  leave  ...".  in  para
         322(2) did not require leave to have been obtained by the making of
         false representations.

         I pause here  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  Mr  Karim's
         submissions as set out above were not advanced before the judge.

    iii)   Mr Karim also initially raised an issue as to service of the two
         decisions, whereupon he advanced  the  submission  (which  was  not
         argued before the judge) that the decisions have  to  be  taken  to
         have been served in a particular sequence. However, this point fell
         away when Mr Wilding pointed out that it was  the  appellant's  own
         evidence that the two  decisions  were  served  on  him  in  person
         simultaneously.

The savings and transitional provisions

 9. It is not in dispute that, if the decisions in  the  instant  case  had
    been made by the respondent before 6 April 2015,  the  appellant  would
    have had a right of appeal against each decision under s.82 of the 2002
    Act. With effect from 6 April 2015 and subject to  certain  saving  and
    transitional provisions as provided for in  article  9(1)  Commencement
    Order No. 3 as amended by Commencement Order No. 4, s.82 was amended so
    that a right of appeal only lies in respect of decisions to refuse,  or
    to revoke, an asylum claim or a claim for humanitarian  protection  and
    decisions to refuse a human rights claim. The jurisdiction issue in the
    instant case depends on whether the savings and transitional provisions
    apply.

10. Article 9(1) as amended sets out four categories of cases in respect of
    which the appeals provisions that were in force immediately before  the
    commencement date of the amendments (6 April 2015)  continue  to  apply
    and the provisions of the 2014 Act do not apply. Mr Karim  relied  upon
    the second and third categories, i.e. article 9(1)(b)  and  (c).  These
    provide (insofar as relevant):

         (b)      a decision made on or after 6th April 2015  to  refuse  an
             application to vary leave to enter or remain made  before  2nd
             March 2015 where the person was seeking leave to remain  as  a
             Tier 1 Migrant or (as the case may be, Tier 2 Migrant or  Tier
             5 Migrant or ... and where the result of that decision is that
             the applicant has no leave to enter or remain.

         (c)      a decision made on or after 6th April (...) to  refuse  an
             application made before 6 April 2015, where that decision is-

             (i) ...;

             (ii)      ...;

             (iii)     ...;

             (iv)      to refuse to vary  a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
             remain and where the result  of  that  decision  is  that  the
             person has no leave to enter or remain;

             unless  that  decision  is  also  a  refusal  of  an   asylum,
             protection or human rights claim.

Submissions on the jurisdiction issue

11. I shall set out the submissions in relation to the decision  to  refuse
    LTR  followed  by  the  submissions  in  relation  to  the  curtailment
    decision.

12. In relation to the decision to refuse LTR, Mr  Karim  initially  relied
    upon article 9(1)(b) but subsequently referred to article  9(1)(c)(iv).
    For the purposes of the instant case, there is no  material  difference
    between the two, given that the appellant's application was made on  13
    May 2014.

13. Mr Karim submitted that the savings provision in article 9(1) (that  is
    to say in article 9(1)(b) or 9(1)(c)(iv)) applied  to  the  appellant's
    case notwithstanding that he withdrew his application by  letter  dated
    24 June 2014 for the following reasons. The savings provisions  do  not
    refer to withdrawn applications. He submitted that it follows that  the
    appellant's withdrawal on 24 June 2014 of his application dated 13  May
    2014 was of no consequence. There was a dispute between the parties  as
    to whether the appellant had withdrawn  the  application.  Accordingly,
    the judge had jurisdiction to decide  that  dispute.  Furthermore,  the
    respondent had proceeded to decide the application notwithstanding that
    it had been withdrawn.

14. In relation to the decision to curtail leave, Mr Wilding submitted that
    the  savings  provisions  relied  upon  could  not  apply  because  the
    curtailment decision was not made on an  application  and  the  reasons
    given for the curtailment did not refer to any application.

15. In response, Mr Karim acknowledged that the curtailment  decision  does
    not refer to any application having been made and therefore he accepted
    that it was not a decision on an  application.  However,  he  submitted
    that, as the decision to refuse LTR and the curtailment  decision  were
    served simultaneously, they could not be  segregated.  Accordingly,  as
    one of the decisions (i.e. the decision to refuse LTR) was  a  decision
    on an application, the curtailment decision had  to  be  seen  in  that
    light. In his submission,  the  fact  that  the  application  had  been
    withdrawn  was  irrelevant  because,  he  submitted,   even   withdrawn
    applications can benefit from the savings provision in article 9(1)(c).



Assessment

16. It is telling that, whilst Mr Karim submitted on the jurisdiction issue
    that a withdrawn application can benefit from the savings provisions in
    Commencement Order No. 3, he submitted, in relation to para  322(2)  of
    the Rules, that a withdrawn application should be treated as  one  that
    had never been made. He cannot have it both ways.

17. There is no rule of interpretation that requires the Secretary of State
    or the Tribunal to turn a blind eye to the fact that an individual  has
    made an application and  has  done  so  using  false  documents  simply
    because he or she withdraws his or her application. The fact  that  the
    application has been made cannot be  undone.  That  fact  continues  to
    exist. Thus, the appellant's withdrawal by letter dated 24 June 2014 of
    his application of 13 May 2014 operated  to  withdraw  his  application
    with effect from 24 June 2014 but it did not have  the  effect,  as  Mr
    Karim submitted in relation to para 322(2), that the application should
    be treated as one that had never been made.

18. In my judgement, Mr Karim's submissions on the jurisdiction  issue  are
    also misconceived. It is simply nonsense to  say  that  an  application
    that has been withdrawn  can  nevertheless  benefit  from  the  savings
    provision if the Secretary of State proceeded to make a decision on it.
    This simply cannot have been intended by Parliament. The correct answer
    is that, once the appellant withdrew his application by the letter from
    his representatives  dated  24  June  2014,  there  was  no  longer  an
    application  that  required  a  decision.  The  Secretary  of   State's
    purported "decision" dated 20 April 2015 to refuse LTR was  a  nullity.
    The savings provisions in article 9(1) do not apply to a decision  that
    is a nullity on an application  that  had  been  withdrawn  before  the
    decision was made.

19. For the above reasons, the appellant did not have  a  right  of  appeal
    against the "decision" to refuse LTR. That decision was a nullity.  The
    judge therefore did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  an  appeal
    against the purported decision to refuse LTR. I therefore set aside his
    decision and proceed to re-make the decision on  the  "appeal"  against
    the "decision" to refuse LTR by dismissing it for want of jurisdiction.



20. I turn to the decision to curtail leave.

21. Mr Karim accepted that the decision to curtail leave was not a decision
    on  an  application  but  he  submitted  that  the  savings  provisions
    nevertheless applied because the fact that the curtailment decision was
    served with the decision to refuse LTR means  that  the  two  decisions
    cannot be segregated. There is no authority for this proposition which,
    in my judgement, is misconceived.

22. Since  the  decision  to  curtail  leave  was  not  a  decision  on  an
    application, the savings provisions did not apply, in my view.

23. Accordingly, the appellant did not have a right of appeal  against  the
    curtailment decision. The judge therefore did not have jurisdiction  to
    entertain an appeal against the curtailment decision. I  therefore  set
    aside his decision and proceed to re-make the decision on the  "appeal"
    against  the  curtailment  decision  by  dismissing  it  for  want   of
    jurisdiction.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  appeal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the appeal.

    I re-make the decision on the  appeal  by  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decisions.


[pic]

Signed      Date: 19 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
