
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2015                             |On 19th June 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                      Mrs Pulani Udara Wijesiriwardana
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Hill, Counsel instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  13th  January  1985.
    She appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated  24th
    November 2014 dismissing her appeal, against the refusal  of  leave  to
    remain and the decision to remove her,  under  Appendix  FM,  paragraph
    276ADE and on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the UK on 9th September 2006 and  was  granted
    leave to enter as a student.  She was granted further leave  to  remain
    until 28th October 2013.  On 9th September 2013 she applied  for  leave
    to remain as the partner of Dushantha  Tharanath  Muthuthanthrige,  the
    Sponsor.  The Sponsor is a Sri Lankan national who came to  the  UK  in
    2003 as a student and was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  on  23rd  January  2014.  The
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 21st March 2014 on
    the basis that the Appellant and Sponsor could  live  together  in  Sri
    Lanka and there were no insurmountable obstacles preventing  them  from
    doing so.  The Appellant was unable to  satisfy  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

3.   At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell  the  Appellant
    submitted evidence that she had a daughter born in May of 2012 who  had
    been naturalised as a British citizen.  There was  no  mention  of  the
    Appellant's daughter in the application for leave  to  remain  made  in
    September 2013.  The judge therefore went on to consider whether it was
    reasonable to expect the child to return to Sri Lanka with her parents.

4.   The judge cited relevant case law in  directing  himself  on  the  best
    interests of the child. He found that given  her  age  the  Appellant's
    daughter would be focused on her parents and despite being  at  nursery
    school she had not formed attachments outside  the  family  unit.   The
    judge accepted that removing the Appellant to Sri Lanka would involve a
    degree of disruption.  However, he found that there was  no  suggestion
    that the family would be separated.  They were Sri Lankan citizens  who
    spoke English and Sinhalese at home.  They had family ties in Sri Lanka
    and their social and cultural links remained substantially Sri  Lankan.
    The judge did not accept that relocation of the family would  represent
    a significant disruption. He did not accept that, given their education
    and experience in the UK, the Appellant and Sponsor could not find work
    in Sri Lanka or that they had nowhere to live.

5.   The judge concluded that it was in the best interests of the  child  to
    remain with her parents and there was  no  evidence  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect her to go to Sri Lanka.  The judge found that  the
    removal of the Appellant was not serious enough to engage the operation
    of Article 8 in light of the lack of evidence about the impact  on  the
    family other than disruption to their lives.

6.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the ground  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  in  tacitly  following  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640(IAC) because
    this case had been overruled by the Court of Appeal in MM  (Lebanon)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

7.   Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on the grounds that  the  judge  found,  for  reasons  which  were  not
    challenged, that the Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He did not adopt the approach advocated in Gulshan.



8.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the  judge  erred  in  law  for  a  different
    reason, which was Robinson obvious, in that the judge  entirely  failed
    to determine the Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  to  vary  her
    leave to remain as a partner, but rather focused on whether or  not  it
    would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's daughter to leave the UK.

9.   The judge did not make any findings as to whether or not the  Secretary
    of State's decision in respect of the Appellant herself was sustainable
    or whether or not the Appellant met the requirements of the  Rules  and
    whether there were exceptional circumstances meriting consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

Submissions

10.  At the hearing, Mr Hill submitted an  opening  note,  a  chronology,  a
    copy of the relevant Immigration Rules at the date of decision and  the
    case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Mr  Hill  submitted  that  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 21 only focused on whether it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's child to return to  Sri  Lanka.   There  was  no
    consideration of the Appellant's case as a partner of a person  settled
    in the UK.

11.  Paragraph 11 of the judge's decision was insufficient in that  it  made
    no specific reference to paragraph  EX.1(b).   The  judge  should  have
    stated the test to be applied therein, namely insurmountable obstacles,
    and demonstrated whether or not the Appellant was able to satisfy  that
    test.  The judge's  findings  were  in  the  wrong  order  in  that  he
    concluded at paragraph 11 that the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules but  made  findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  that
    conclusion at paragraphs 18  to  21.   The  failure  of  the  judge  to
    demonstrate that he had applied the correct test under the  Immigration
    Rules amounted to an error of law.

12.  The error was material because there were insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Sri Lanka.  For example, the  Appellants  had
    both spent considerable time in the UK and had studied here.  They  had
    become accustomed to life in the UK and had excellent jobs.  In  effect
    they had put down strong roots such  that  their  integration  into  UK
    society meant that there were insurmountable obstacles to their return.
     There were no family members in Sri Lanka save for maternal parents.

11.  In relation to paragraph 276ADE the judge again failed to make  express
    reference to the test which was whether there were no ties remaining in
    Sri Lanka. The judge  could  therefore  not  demonstrate  that  he  had
    applied his mind to this test.

12.  Further, there was no reference to exceptional  circumstances  and  the
    matters referred to above, in relation to the  Appellant's  integration
    into  the  UK,  would  have  amounted  to   exceptional   circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.   Each  test
    should have been  separately  considered  and  the  judge  should  have
    demonstrated that he had applied it appropriately to the facts.

13.  In relation to Article 8  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  22  was
    exceptionally brief.  He made no mention of the case of Razgar and  did
    not follow the five step process set out therein.  There was a lack  of
    clarity as to why the Appellant could not succeed under Article 8.

14.  The Appellant was entitled to  receive  a  judgment  in  which  it  was
    clearly demonstrated why her appeal had been dismissed.  Each  part  of
    the appeal should  be  separately  identified  and  the  relevant  test
    considered.  The judge should state the facts he accepted  and  applied
    to the test, and which were determinative.  The decision in  this  case
    failed to do that.

15.  If  the  judge  had  adopted  the  correct  approach  then  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Sri Lanka.  There
    were no ties to Sri Lanka and  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.
    Accordingly, the decisions to refuse leave to  remain  and  remove  the
    Appellant from the UK were disproportionate.

16.  Mr Clarke submitted that permission was not granted in relation  to  an
    error of law under Article 8. There was no threshold test to be applied
    but the Rules must constitute  a  disproportionate  interference.   The
    judge's findings at paragraph 22 were sufficient.  The Appellant  could
    not succeed under the Immigration Rules and it was open to the judge to
    find therefore that he could not succeed under Article 8.   There  were
    no circumstances not covered by the Immigration  Rules  to  render  the
    application of those Rules disproportionate.

17.  The findings at paragraph  22  followed  substantial  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's circumstances and those of her child.  In paragraph  11  it
    was clear that the judge was mindful of the Immigration Rules  and  his
    findings at paragraphs 19 to 21 demonstrated that he has considered the
    Appellant's  application  as  a  partner.   The   test   is   that   of
    insurmountable obstacles and given the judge's finding at paragraph  20
    that "I do not accept that the relocation of the family will  represent
    a significant  disruption  and  I  do  not  accept  that,  given  their
    education and experience in the UK, they cannot find work in Sri  Lanka
    or have nowhere to live there" could not be interpreted  in  any  other
    way.  It was clear from this paragraph that the judge  had  found  that
    there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK.

18.  The list of insurmountable obstacles referred to  by  Mr  Hill  in  his
    submissions by and  large  amounted  to  private  life  considerations.
    Paragraph  276ADE  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal   for
    permission.  In any event, the judge found that there were  substantial
    ties to Sri Lanka and there was no evidence that  such  ties  had  been
    lost  and,  following  the  decision  in  Bossadi  (paragraph   276ADE;
    suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC), even if they were lost they
    could be resurrected.  There  was  no  error  of  law  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE and the judge had expressly dealt with it.  The  judge
    also found that married life could continue back in Sri Lanka.

19.  Accordingly, there was nothing to warrant a consideration  outside  the
    Rules.  The judge was entitled to say, as he did at paragraph 22,  that
    the Article 8 claim stands and falls with the Immigration Rules.

20.  I asked Mr Clarke whether the judge had erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    demonstrate that he had applied the relevant test under the Immigration
    Rules.  He submitted that the judge's finding that their return did not
    represent a significant disruption in conjunction with paragraph 11 was
    sufficient to show that the judge was mindful of paragraph  EX.1(b)  of
    the Immigration Rules. The judge had  identified  specific  aspects  of
    family life which he had considered and therefore, even though  he  had
    not specifically mentioned  'insurmountable  obstacles',  his  findings
    were sufficient to enable such a conclusion to be drawn.  If there  was
    an error it was not material to the decision.

21.  In response, Mr Hill sought to submit further evidence.  This  amounted
    to submissions by the Appellant relating to length of residence in  the
    UK; lack of family ties; the fact that her daughter was due to start at
    kindergarten; reliance on her husband's employment; and the  fact  that
    he clearly earned sufficient funds in order to be able to  support  her
    under the Immigration Rules.  These submissions  were  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and therefore, in relation to my decision  on
    whether there was an error of law, I  disregard  the  further  evidence
    contained therein. The judge, however, was well aware of the fact  that
    the Appellant and her husband had resided in the UK since 2006 and 2003
    respectively, and of the fact that they had made very few visits to Sri
    Lanka over the last ten years.

Discussion and Conclusion

22.  The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that  there
    were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the   Appellant   from
    continuing her relationship with the Sponsor in Sri Lanka.   The  issue
    on appeal was therefore paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

23.  The judge made specific reference to the refusal  letter  at  paragraph
    11 of his decision stating that: "I agree with the Respondent that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM at the  date  of
    decision on the basis of the evidence provided."  Accordingly,  I  find
    that the judge did determine the Appellant's appeal under  Appendix  FM
    and found that the Respondent's decision was sustainable.

24.  At paragraph 20, the judge made the following findings:

         "They are a Sri Lankan family who speak English  and  Sinhalese  at
         home and the parents are citizens of Sri Lanka.  They  have  family
         ties there.  In summary their  social  and  cultural  links  remain
         substantially Sri Lankan.  I do not accept that the  relocation  of
         the family will represent a significant disruption  and  I  do  not
         accept that, given their education and experience, in the  UK  they
         cannot find work in Sri Lanka or have nowhere to live there."

25.  Although the judge did not  set  out  the  relevant  paragraph  of  the
    Immigration Rules, his findings at paragraph 20 support the  conclusion
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    outside the UK.

26.  Mr Hill submitted that not only had the judge erred in law  in  failing
    to demonstrate he had applied the test of insurmountable obstacles  but
    that the particular  facts  of  the  Appellant's  case  did  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles.  He referred me to  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement and that of her husband which were before the judge.  I  have
    read those with care.

27.  In summary, the Appellant and her husband have a  strong  and  profound
    quality of life in the UK.  They have completed their studies here  and
    have worked in the UK for a significant  length  of  time.   They  have
    social, educational and  economic  connections  in  the  UK  which  are
    profound and substantial.  They  also  have  a  substantial  number  of
    friends.  Both the Appellant and her  husband  were  deeply  integrated
    into this country.  The Appellant's husband runs and  manages  his  own
    business and has done so for the past two  years.   Prior  to  that  he
    worked at United Parcel Services and for  Marriott  International.   He
    also worked as a website designer  and  systems  developer.   He  is  a
    computer engineer.

28.  The Appellant and her husband have lost or substantially lost all  ties
    to Sri Lanka.  The Appellant's husband had no relatives there  and  did
    not have contacts with any friends.  The Appellant's  parents  were  in
    Sri Lanka.  Her father was 69 years old and her mother  was  62.   They
    would be unable to provide for the Appellant and her  husband  and  she
    was an only child.  It was submitted that the Appellant and her husband
    would not be able to get jobs in Sri Lanka because of  the  significant
    length of time they had spent in  the  UK,  which  meant  they  had  no
    domestic based work experience.  Getting a job in Sri Lanka was  highly
    competitive and they would suffer real and substantial challenges.

29.  In essence the conclusion of the judge at paragraph 20  is  that,  even
    taking  the  Appellant's  case  at  its  highest,  there  would  be  no
    significant disruption to continuing their family life in Sri Lanka.  I
    find  that,  although  the  judge  has  failed   to   use   the   words
    'insurmountable  obstacles'  his  finding  at  paragraph  20  and   the
    particular facts of the  Appellant's  case  outlined  in  both  of  the
    statements  and  summarised  above  do  not  amount  to  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing the  Appellant,  her  husband  and  daughter  from
    continuing family life outside the UK.

30.  I appreciate that the Appellant and her husband have lived  in  the  UK
    for a significant amount of time. They are financially independent  and
    they  have  employment  here.   Unfortunately,  looking  at   all   the
    circumstances of the Appellant's case, their integration  into  the  UK
    does not amount to insurmountable obstacles to them  continuing  family
    life in Sri Lanka given that they are  Sri  Lankan  citizens  and  they
    still maintain social, cultural and family links with Sri Lanka.

31.  In relation to the judge's findings on whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect the child to be returned with her parents, that  finding  was
    not challenged in the grounds of appeal. Looking at  the  determination
    as a whole this finding was open to the judge on  the  evidence  before
    him and he gave cogent reasons for his conclusion.

32.  In relation to Article 8 the judge states at paragraph 22:

         "The claim under Article 8 stands and falls with  the  claim  under
         the Immigration Rules.  For the sake of completeness I add that the
         removal of the Appellant  is  not  serious  enough  to  engage  the
         operation of Article 8 in light of the lack of evidence noted above
         about the impact on the family other than  a  disruption  to  their
         lives."

33.  I find that the judge did not adopt the approach set  out  in  Gulshan.
    He separately  considered  Article  8  but  found  that  an  Article  8
    consideration would not give a  different  result  to  that  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  He found that the removal of the Appellant did  not
    amount to an interference whose consequence was of such gravity  so  as
    to engage the operation of Article 8.  The judge found that family life
    could continue in Sri Lanka as it had done in  the  UK  although  there
    would be some degree of disruption to private life.

34.  The judge's failure to adopt the five step approach in Razgar  did  not
    amount to an error of law.  In any event, even if I am persuaded by  Mr
    Hill's submission that the judge's failure to specifically refer to the
    tests under the Immigration Rules and demonstrate how they were applied
    and to specifically deal with all five steps of Razgar, I find that  on
    the particular facts of the Appellant's case this did not amount  to  a
    material error of law. The decision to refuse leave to  remain  and  to
    remove  the  Appellant  from  the  UK  was  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances.

35.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Appellant's  appeal   is
    dismissed and the decision dated 24th November 2014 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 15th June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 15th June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
