
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/16222/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 26 November 2013                           |on 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                NEVEN CRLJENAK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Slovenia, born on 2 August 1981.

2) Maja Tomse is a citizen of Croatia, born on  20  December  1975.   On  27
   September 2012 she applied for a registration certificate as confirmation
   of her right of residence in the UK as a job seeker,  and  the  appellant
   applied as her family member.

3) On 13 May 2013 the respondent refused the applications  because  she  was
   not satisfied that the first appellant was a job seeker in terms  of  the
   regulations.  The present appellant's application  was  refused  in  line
   with that refusal.

4) First-tier Tribunal Judge Atkinson considered the appellant's appeal  and
   an appeal by Ms Tomse (case IA/16214/2013) "on the papers"  and  disposed
   of them in a determination promulgated on 23 August 2013.  The FtT  Judge
   found that Ms Tomse was a job seeker, and allowed her  appeal.   The  FtT
   judge found insufficient evidence to show that the  appellant  was  in  a
   durable relationship with her, and dismissed his appeal.

5) On 6 September 2013  FtT  Judge  Kamara  granted  permission  to  appeal,
   noting that the appellant enclosed 10 documents which had not been before
   Judge Atkinson, which appeared to support the claim to  have  been  in  a
   durable relationship with his partner for over  5  years,  and  that  the
   respondent had not based her decision on lack of evidence  of  a  durable
   relationship.  Arguably, then, the appellant had been  "disadvantaged  by
   an additional matter being raised by the judge, without him  being  given
   the opportunity to address it."

6) At the hearing on 26 November Mr Matthews fairly and  correctly  conceded
   that there was procedural unfairness amounting to material error of  law,
   the judge having decided the case on a point not  put  in  issue  by  the
   respondent, and which the appellant had no proper opportunity to  answer.
   Mr Matthews accepted that the evidence showed a relationship  going  back
   some five years.  He further pointed out that  the  respondent  had  been
   satisfied with the nature of the  relationship  in  relation  to  earlier
   applications.

7) (There might have been a question whether the appellant was  entitled  to
   a registration certificate in his own right, but that is now  incidental.
   I also note in passing that by the time of the FtT hearing, Ms Tomse  was
   in employment, and that the appellant is now also in employment.)

8) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  appeal,
   as originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed.

9) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                26 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
