
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/16235/2014
                                                               IA/16446/2014
                                                               IA/16458/2014
                                                               IA/16466/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th December 2015                |On 3rd February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

               MRS DIPALBEN BIRENBHAI PATEL (FIRST appellant)
               MR BIRENBHAI RAMANLAL PATEL (SECOND appellant)
                            A P (THIRD appellant)
                           R P (FOURTH appellant)
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Waheed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The first  Appellant  was  born  on  12th  December  1975,  the  second
    Appellant on 17th August 1968, the third on 12th December 2005 and  the
    fourth on 29th December 2002.  They are all citizens of India  and  are
    related  as  husband  and  wife  and  children  and  the  latter  three
    Appellants are all dependent upon the first Appellant.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom in 2009  as
    a Tier 4 Migrant and thereafter had leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-
    Study) Migrant until 9th February 2014.  She made application for leave
    to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant and that was refused by the Respondent on
    21st March 2014.

 3. The Appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mace sitting at Hatton Cross on 13th February 2015.
     The judge dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant made application to appeal that  decision  and  leave  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth  on  20th
    July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable the judge failed  to  refer
    to the standard  of  proof.   Directions  were  issued  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to firstly decide whether or not an error of law had been made
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Mr Waheed submitted in terms  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  within  the
    application.  He  noted  that  the  burden  of  proof  shifted  to  the
    Respondent because of assertions of forgery and said that the judge had
    failed to explain what standard of proof was applicable.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. Ms Isherwood said no error of law had been made.  It was submitted that
    a false document had been placed in and accordingly  such  document  is
    more than likely to  demonstrate  dishonesty  and  it  did  not  matter
    whether that was on the part of the Appellant or someone else.

 7. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. This case was granted permission on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge while stating the burden of  proof  had  not  identified  the
    standard of proof required.

 9. The Respondent's refusal of the  Appellant's  application  had  firstly
    been pursuant to  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   At
    paragraph 7 the judge had properly  identified  that  it  was  for  the
    Respondent to establish that that ground was made out and that if  that
    was done, then a mandatory Ground  for  Refusal  under  the  Rules  was
    established.  The basis of the  evidence  in  respect  of  this  matter
    concerned  false  documentation.   The   judge   had   considered   the
    documentation before him and the oral evidence that had been  provided.
    The judge had noted that the first Appellant, who was the key Appellant
    in this matter, did not attend the hearing nor had filed a Statement of
    Evidence despite directions from the Tribunal.

10. In terms of the evidential standard of proof  the  judge  had  reminded
    himself of the case of AA Nigeria [2010] EWCA  Civ  773  in  which  the
    meaning of the word dishonesty was used in  connection  with  mandatory
    refusals and noted that the term false required dishonesty although not
    necessarily  that  of  the  applicant  himself.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 9 that dishonesty or deception was needed to render  a  false
    representation a ground for mandatory refusal.  In examination  of  the
    evidence at paragraph 10 the judge had found clearly  on  the  evidence
    before him factors noted within paragraph 10 in respect of the document
    presented.  It is clear  when  looking  at  the  judge's  findings  and
    reasons that he was aware the burden of proof lay with  the  Respondent
    and that in terms of  mandatory  refusal  it  was  necessary  to  prove
    dishonesty or deception although it was  not  necessary  to  prove  the
    Appellant  had  been  dishonest  or  had  practised  deception.   I  am
    satisfied that when reading the decision as a whole the judge was aware
    and implemented the appropriate burden and standard of  proof  and  was
    aware that the concept of  "false"  required  proof  of  dishonesty  or
    deception  on  the  part  of  someone,  even  if  not  necessarily  the
    Appellant.  I am  satisfied  therefore  that  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant fell for refusal under paragraph 322(1A) of  the  Immigration
    Rules there was no material error of law made by the judge.

11. Thereafter the judge had considered the appeal  under  the  substantive
    Rule and at paragraphs 12 to 26 had looked at  matters  properly  under
    both the Immigration Rules and  for  the  sake  of  completeness  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  It is not  submitted  that  that  consideration
    discloses any error nor was  permission  granted  in  respect  of  that
    consideration.

12. Accordingly it could be said that even if the judge had  erred  in  his
    conclusions under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules,  he  had
    nevertheless considered the matter properly and appropriately under the
    substantive Immigration Rules and under Article 8.  That  consideration
    discloses no material error of law.

13. In conclusion therefore, in respect of all the considerations  made  by
    the judge under the Immigration Rules including the mandatory  refusal,
    I do not find that the decision discloses any  material  error  of  law
    made by the judge.



Notice of Decision

14. I find no material error of law  made  by  the  judge  and  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

