

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/17515/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 16th October 2017                    |    On: 17th October 2017         |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 DOGAN DEMIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Qureshi, Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Turkey date of birth 1st February  1972.
      He seeks leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds.


 2. The Appellant's case, put first to the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department and then to the First-tier Tribunal, was that he  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  British  partner  Terri
    Headley, that they live together with their two British  children,  and
    the Appellant's British step-son.

 3. Both Respondent  and  Tribunal  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  the
    biological father of the two children concerned, but rejected his claim
    to be living with them and their mother.   In  granting  permission  to
    appeal Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  specifically  refused  to  grant
    permission to challenge this finding on co-habitation,  or  rather  the
    lack of it.

 4. The remaining ground, upon which permission was granted,  concerns  the
    approach taken by the Tribunal to the questions posed  by  s117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):

          (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.



 5. The central plank of this appeal is a submission that the determination
    fails to adequately address either limb of this test.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The starting point of the Tribunal was to make a general  finding  that
    the Appellant is not a reliable witness [at  10].  The  Tribunal  notes
    that he had lived and worked in the UK without permission to do so, and
    that on at least one occasion had exercised deception in an application
    for entry clearance: in 2010 he claimed to be visiting a friend when in
    fact the true purpose of the trip was to attend the birth of his second
    child [10]. The Tribunal rejected with reasons his  claim  to  have  no
    family members left in Northern Cyprus [11]. It rejected  the  evidence
    that he had been living with the mother of the children [15].   Turning
    to the position of the children the Tribunal found as follows:


         "18. I find that the best interests of the children are  to  remain
         in their current family unit which I  find  is  living  with  their
         mother and half-sibling. There is very little  evidence  before  me
         regarding the quality of the relationship that  the  appellant  has
         with the boys or the frequency of contact. I place  weight  on  the
         fact  that  although  Ms  Headley  provided  a  letter   with   the
         appellant's  application  stating  that  the  appellant  takes  and
         collects the children from school  this  was  not  supported  by  a
         letter from the school, and it is not wholly credible given that Mr
         Demir works whereas Ms Headley does not. In assessing the nature of
         his relationship with his sons I also place weight on the fact that
         there were no supporting witness statements or  witnesses,  despite
         the appellant's oral evidence that he  knew  Ms  Headley's  parents
         before he met her, or her evidence in her  witness  statement  that
         they are a close family. In addition, quite unusually,  I  was  not
         provided with any photographs of the appellant with his sons.


         19. Taking the evidence as whole I am satisfied that on the balance
         of probabilities, the appellant provides financial support for  his
         sons and that he has some contact  with  them.  The  fact  that  Ms
         Headley took them to Cyprus to meet their grandfather and aunts  is
         evidence in my  mind  of  some  relationship  with  the  appellant,
         although the level of this is not clear to  me  because  I  am  not
         persuaded that the family live together.  I  am  however  satisfied
         that the appellant's removal would  interfere  with  his  right  to
         respect for family life with his children".


 7. The findings are then interposed by some directions as to the  approach
    to be taken in Article 8 appeals before  the  following  conclusion  is
    reached:


         "23. With regards to  s117B(6)(a)  I  am  not  persuaded,  for  the
         reasons set  out  above,  that  the  strength  of  the  appellant's
         relationship with his sons is such that the  public  interest  does
         not require his removal, particularly  when  balanced  against  his
         poor immigration history, my poor credibility findings and the fact
         that he does not meet the immigration rules. I do not find that the
         children's best interests require his continued  residence  in  the
         UK. Ms Headley can take the children to visit the appellant and  it
         is always open to him to apply for entry clearance in the UK in  an
         appropriate category".




    Error of Law


 8. This appeal came before me for a preliminary hearing on the 1st  August
    2017. The  Respondent  was  on  that  occasion  represented  by  Senior
    Presenting Officer Mr Avery. The Appellant was represented by Mr Mallan
    of Counsel.  Both made submissions on whether the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal contained errors such that it should be set aside.


 9. Mr Avery submitted that the determination had to be read  as  a  whole,
    and that it was implicit in the reasoning, particularly  at  [23]  (set
    out above) that the Tribunal did not accept that there  was  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship. If sub-section 117B(6)(a) was not
    met, it did not matter what the findings might be on s117B(6)(b).    As
    to those findings, Mr Avery submitted that  the  Tribunal  had  clearly
    drawn  adverse  conclusions  as  to  the  immigration  history  of  the
    Appellant such that it would be entitled to find that the  decision  to
    refuse leave would be proportionate.  Overall it was submitted  on  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department's behalf that  the  Tribunal
    had addressed all relevant factors.


10. In a written decision dated the 3rd August 2017 I  indicated  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside: I so found because I
    was  not  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  had  properly  addressed  the
    questions posed by s117B(6) NIAA 2002.

11. The determination had started at the correct  point.  Having  dismissed
    the appeal in respect of the rules  the  Tribunal  went  on  to  direct
    itself to the Razgar framework. It found there to be a family life, and
    an  interference.  Proceeding  to  the  questions  of   necessity   and
    proportionality the Tribunal properly directed itself  to  the  'public
    interest factors' set out in s117B.   The findings [at 22]  in  respect
    of ss(1)-(5) were open to it  on  the  evidence  before  it.  When  the
    determination turns to  address  s117B(6)  however,  the  determination
    appears to lose its way.

12. The question at sub-section (a), whether or not there is a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship, was one of pure fact. It could not be
    influenced by the public interest in the Appellant's  removal,  nor  by
    his poor  immigration  history.  The  language  used  by  the  Tribunal
    appeared to indicate that  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  there  was  a
    parental relationship, but that was a matter to be  balanced,  at  that
    stage, against the public  interest:  "I  am  not  persuaded,  for  the
    reasons  set  out  above,  that  the  strength   of   the   appellant's
    relationship with his sons is such that the public  interest  does  not
    require his removal".  Whilst the Tribunal was troubled by the  paucity
    of evidence (the bundles having been prepared to go  to  the  issue  of
    cohabitation) all of the evidence that there was pointed  one  way,  to
    there being a subsisting parental relationship.  The evidence as to the
    relationship was that he was  the  boys'  biological  father,  that  he
    supported them financially,  that he plays with  them  and  helps  them
    with school work, that they had been taken  to  Cyprus  to  meet  their
    paternal family and in the words of Ms Headley  that  he  brought  them
    "joy and happiness".     The Tribunal failed to address  that  evidence
    in answering a simple question of fact because it misdirected itself to
    the relevant factors at paragraph 23. That was a material error of law.



13. As to the second limb of section 117B(6) - reasonableness  -  the  fact
    that the children could visit their father in Northern Cyprus, or  that
    he could apply for entry  clearance,  went  nowhere  to  answering  the
    question posed at sub-section (b), namely whether it was reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the UK.      The grounds point to the Respondent's
    well-known policy on whether it would be reasonable to require  British
    children to leave the UK. That guidance, approved in  principle  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, was to the effect  that  where  removal
    would entail "a parent" travelling outside of the EU,  "the  case  must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with  that  parent".  It  would
    only be appropriate to refuse leave in cases involving criminality or a
    very poor immigration history. In his submissions  Mr  Avery  contended
    that the latter is precisely what the Appellant has, and that  on  that
    basis any error in reasoning should be found to be immaterial.   Whilst
    that is a submission that the Respondent would be entitled to  make  in
    the remaking, I am not satisfied that it  is  sufficient  to  save  the
    reasoning at paragraph 23 of the determination. The First-tier Tribunal
    cannot  be  said  to  have   properly   addressed   the   question   of
    reasonableness, not least because it has failed to have regard  to  the
    Respondent's published guidance on the matter.


14. I directed that the matter come  back  before  me  for  remaking.   The
    hearing resumed on the 16th October 2017.



    The Re-Made Decision

15. As I noted at the 'error of law' hearing, the bundles prepared for  the
    First-tier Tribunal had gone almost exclusively to the issue of whether
    Mr Demir lived with Ms Headley. Those representing him  had  apparently
    proceeded on the basis that cohabitation of  the  parents  would  prima
    facie  establish  a  parental  relationship.  Since  Judge  Kebede  had
    expressly refused permission for that issue to be re-opened, I directed
    that further evidence be provided as to Mr  Demir's  relationship  with
    the children.




    The Evidence

16. The evidence came in a bundle dated the 10th October 2017.

17. The Appellant's witness statement is dated the  4th  October  2017.  He
    avers that he is close to  Ms  Headley's  family  and  that  he  cannot
    imagine life without his children, his stepson B who is 9, and his sons
    O and J who are 7 and 5 respectively.  He claims to be involved in  all
    aspects of their lives.  The Appellant told me that he and his  partner
    are now expecting their third child, due on the  27th  March  2018.  In
    respect of the family's finances Mr Demir  told  me  that  his  partner
    works part time and that her mother also helps. She works part time but
    is usually home after school.  The youngest child J is five years  old.
    They are all attending school.  When Terri  is  working  he  takes  the
    children to school.  Other days she takes them. They start at 8.55  and
    finish at 3.30pm. Asked about his stepson, the Appellant said  that  he
    has a good relationship with B.  He  thinks  of  him  as  his  son  but
    recognises that B does also have his own father. He confirmed that  B's
    biological father sees him on  Sundays,  and  afterschool  on  Mondays.
    He described the boy's father as a "good guy".    His stepson  normally
    comes home straight after school, or goes to his  grandmothers  in  the
    same estate. Sometimes he will play out with his cousin, or go  on  his
    iPad.   The two little ones play at home. Mr  Demir  makes  them  food.
    They also go to their grandmother's house - she lives in the next block
    - and they also go to the park.   If the children  are  ill  their  Mum
    takes them to the doctor - Mr Demir explained that  he  does  not  feel
    that his English is good enough to deal with things like that. For  the
    same reason he does not go to parents evenings, although he does attend
    assembly.   In response to Ms Pal's questions Mr Demir  said  that  his
    youngest son goes to bed at 7pm. He is usually put to bed  by  his  Mum
    because he sleeps easier with her.   Mr Demir said  that  his  youngest
    eats everything - he loves sugar and last  week  he  was  told  by  the
    dentist that his teeth have gone bad do now Mr Demir says that he  must
    eat an apple every day instead. The middle child  loves  cereal.   They
    don't tend to eat Cypriot food because he does not cook  -  the  family
    tend to eat food prepared by Terri or her mother.   Mr Demir takes them
    out to park - they play football, takes them out on their bikes.    The
    children play with their friends on the estate  where  they  live.   Mr
    Demir confirmed that he and Ms Headley are  planning  to  get  married.
    They have just received the permission of the Home Office to do so  and
    are planning a wedding for next year.


18. Ms Terri Headley's statement, also the 4th October 2017, is the  effect
    that she and the Appellant have been in a  relationship  since  January
    2010.  She adopted that statement and gave further oral  evidence.  She
    says that he gave her support at that time because  she  was  a  single
    parent, and that her eldest son,  from  an  earlier  relationship,  now
    calls the Appellant "Daddy".  He plays with the children and helps them
    with their homework. He takes them to and from school  at  times.    Ms
    Headley explains that even if she were willing to relocate to  Northern
    Cyprus she would not be able to do so because  she  would  require  the
    consent of her eldest child's father, which would not  be  forthcoming.
    B  sees  his  biological  father  every  week.   B  has  mild  learning
    difficulties and also suffers from hypoglycaemia so you have to keep an
    eye on him - if he doesn't eat or his blood sugar  drops  he  can  have
    seizures.  He sees his dad on a Sunday and Monday and in holidays.   In
    her oral evidence Terri Headley said that she is working  in  a  coffee
    shop as a waitress. She works 24  hours  per  week.  Sometimes  in  the
    morning, sometimes in the afternoon. Lately she has  done  a  bit  less
    because of being pregnant - she has not been well. If Terri is  working
    the Appellant takes/collects them from school.   She describes Mr Demir
    has being a "hands on dad". The children  really  love  him.    In  the
    morning he does the breakfast. He has taken them on  school  trips.  He
    helps them with their homework - even though his  English  is  limited.
    They know it is a bit harder for him to read the English  books.  Asked
    by Ms Pal to give an example of the kind of things that  he  does  with
    them she said that he will take them to the park, to the softplay area,
    down the river. He baths them in the evening. If they want him to  take
    them upstairs to bed they will say so.     Ms  Headley  said  that  the
    Appellant does all the normal things that you would expect a father  to
    do.   She agreed that she does  lie  down  with  the  children  in  the
    evening but that she is trying to get them to stop depending on her for
    that.   Ms Headley said that they have  always  lived  together.  Their
    previous house they lived in from February/March  2011.  Their  current
    house they moved into in 2013.   The council  moved  them  after  their
    other son was born.


19. I was provided with a statement by Mrs Jeanette Mary  Headley,  who  is
    Terri Headley's mother. Mrs Headley confirms that  she  has  known  the
    Appellant for over 10 years. When  he  started  going  out  with  their
    daughter she and her husband embraced him as part of their family.  She
    describes him as a "very good man" who takes care of his  children  and
    takes an active role in their lives.  Mrs Headley attended the hearing.
    She adopted the statement that she had signed.  In response to Ms Pal's
    questions she confirmed that she lives about 2 minutes  away  from  the
    Appellant, her daughter and the  children  -  they  live  on  the  same
    estate.  They all live as a family.  He is a "hands on dad".  He  takes
    them to the park and takes the children to school (although  not  every
    day).   The children come and see her most days, as  do  their  cousins
    who also live on the same estate or nearby.  Mrs Headley stressed  that
    the children are very close to their cousins, and that  they  all  feel
    very comfortable running in and out of her house  and  playing  nearby.
    She has ten grandchildren and three more on the  way.    Terri's  three
    children currently have cousins aged 13, 12 (x2), 9  (x2),   7  and  4.
    They all play together and are very close to her and her husband.  They
    also regularly see her mother-in-law (their  Great-Grandma)  who  lives
    down the road. Mrs Headley's own mother lives in Kent and they also see
    her but not as much because she has not been well.    In response to my
    questions Mrs Headley confirmed that to her knowledge the  children  do
    not speak any Turkish apart from the odd word. She agreed that they  do
    understand some of what their Dad says if he speaks to them in  Turkish
    but would not be able to respond. They would be  like  aliens  if  they
    went to Cyprus.  Mrs Headley confirmed that  the  Appellant  and  Terri
    have been planning a wedding. They have been to see the  Registrar  and
    have taken all the forms they need.

20. I was provided with a statement by Ms Victoria Swan, dated 4th  October
    2017. She has known the Appellant and Ms Headley since 2011. They  were
    neighbours and their children attend the same school. She describes the
    Appellant and Ms Headley as "very good parents". She  would  often  see
    them in the park with the children and had the  opportunity  of  seeing
    them at home when she visited, and  when  their  children  visited  her
    home.  She believes that the  Appellant  is  "very  committed"  to  the
    welfare of his children.  Ms Swan did not attend the  hearing  to  give
    oral evidence. She had a medical appointment:  a letter from her doctor
    was provided as confirmation of this.

21. Ms Kelly Murton provided a statement dated the 4th October 2017. She is
    another neighbour, who has known the Appellant  and  his  family  since
    2010.  Her children attend the same school as the Appellant's. She  has
    often seen him taking them to, and collecting them  from,  school.  She
    has seen him attending school  assemblies,  other  children's  birthday
    parties and taking his children on "play dates".  In her oral  evidence
    Ms Murton said  that  she  lives  about  one  minutes'  walk  from  the
    Appellant and his family. She has a son aged 6, and  both  he  and  she
    have visited the family, because her son is in the same class as  their
    middle child O.   As far as Ms Murton is concerned Mr  Demir  lives  in
    the home and is a father to the children.   She sees him probably  once
    per  week,  maybe  twice,  taking  the  children  to  school.   Also  -
    particularly in the summer  -  she  has  seen  the  Appellant  and  the
    children at picnics in the park.

22. In  terms  of  documentary  evidence  I  was  shown  a  letter  from  [
    School], which confirms that the school records show the  Appellant  to
    be a registered point of contact  ('father')  in  respect  of  his  two
    biological  children.   Numerous  photographs  were  provided  of   the
    Appellant and his family.



    The Legal Framework

23. My starting point must be  the  Immigration  Rules.  If  the  Appellant
    cannot qualify for leave to remain under  the  Rules  I  will  consider
    whether it would nevertheless  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 ECHR  to  remove  him  from  the  UK.  This
    requires me to consider first  whether  he  has  established  a  family
    and/or private life in this  country  such  that  Article  8  would  be
    engaged  by  an  interference  with  it;  the  extent   of   any   such
    interference; whether the interference would be lawful (ie  within  the
    legal powers of the Secretary of State for the Home Department) and  in
    pursuit of a  legitimate  aim;  and  ultimately  whether  it  would  be
    proportionate to the aim sought to be achieved.


24. In my assessment of proportionality I must have regard to  the  'public
    interest'  factors  set  out  at  section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases:


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.




         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.




         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.




         (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.




         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.




         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-




          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

          (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


25. In Treebhowan [2015] UKUT 674 the then President of  this  Tribunal  Mr
    Justice McCloskey held that s117B(6) was of a different nature from the
    public interest factors set  out  in  ss(1)-(5).  It  is  expressed  in
    mandatory terms so that if both limbs (a) and (b)  are  satisfied,  the
    result is that it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant  in
    question.  The decision  on  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  a
    qualifying  child  to  leave  the  country  therefore   assumed   great
    significance in such claims.  In MA  (Pakistan)  the  Court  of  Appeal
    agreed  that  s117B(6)  was  capable  of  being  determinative  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.  It  did  not  however  agree  with
    McCloskey J about what factors  might  be  relevant  in  that  enquiry.
    McCloskey J had suggested that that question was to be answered  solely
    with reference to the child. Drawing an analogy with the approach taken
    in deportation appeals to the test of "undue harshness", Elias LJ   was
    satisfied - albeit reluctantly  -  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    correct in her contention that the test in  fact  required  the  public
    interest to be weighed in to the balance.  This would include  all  the
    pertinent  matters set out  at  s117B(1)-(5),  as  well  as  any  other
    'suitability' issues,  such  as  criminality.  Against  that  would  be
    weighed any number of factors relating to the 'best interests'  of  the
    child, for instance: education, healthcare, ties to the  country  where
    he would live if he had to leave the UK, the location and  strength  of
    ties with other family members.


26. Another important factor would be the child's nationality: ZH  Tanzania
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC  4.   In  her
    published policy on the application of Article 8  'outside  the  rules'
    the Secretary of State acknowledges that nationality has  an  important
    role to play, albeit applying a different legal ratio from the  Supreme
    Court in ZH. Recognising the consequences that flow from  the  decision
    in  the  CJEU  case  of  Zambrano  [2011]  (C-34/0)   the   Immigration
    Directorate's Instructions[1] read as follows:

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.
         The decision maker must consult the following guidance when
         assessing cases involving criminality:


             . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)
             . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         (emphasis added)



    Discussion and Findings


27. For the Appellant Ms Qureshi conceded that he could not meet any of the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of Appendix FM as they relate to partners,  since  on  the
    undisturbed findings of the First-tier Tribunal he had not demonstrated
    that he and Ms Headley live together in a permanent relationship. I  am
    bound to say that having heard  the  evidence  of  the  four  witnesses
    before me today I have no doubt  at  all  that  the  Appellant  and  Ms
    Headley are a couple and that they have been living together for years,
    but given the terms in which Judge Kebede granted leave, that is not  a
    matter that I am able to revisit. Nor, conceded  Ms  Qureshi,  can  the
    Appellant meet the requirements of Appendix FM relating  to  'parents'.
    That is because these provisions relate only  to  single  parents.  Any
    arguments relating to  the  Appellant's  private  life,  arising  under
    paragraph 276ADE, were lost  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Ms
    Qureshi did not seek to resurrect them.


28. That then is my starting point. The Appellant  is  an  illegal  entrant
    with no hope  of  successfully  regularising  his  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  I am nevertheless mindful that he does prima  facie
    have a family in this country including three young children and  I  am
    therefore satisfied that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  consider  his
    Article 8 rights outwith the Rules.

29. I am satisfied that the Appellant Mr Demir enjoys a family life in this
    country with his partner Terri Headley, his stepson B and with his sons
    O and J. The evidence of the witnesses was consistent and compelling. I
    have no reason at all to doubt their stated position  that  he  and  Ms
    Headley have been in a relationship for a number of years,  have  lived
    together at a number of different addresses and that he is a "hands  on
    dad" to his biological sons and his stepson. Were any further  evidence
    needed to support the proposition that there is a currently  subsisting
    family life, I note that Ms Headley is  currently  pregnant  with  what
    will be the family's fourth child.

30. I am satisfied that the decision to refuse  Mr  Demir  leave,  and  the
    attendant expectation that he leaves the UK  and  returns  to  Northern
    Cyprus would have a substantial and immediate impact on the family.   I
    am satisfied that there is no prospect at all of  Ms  Headley  and  the
    children going to live in Cyprus with him, given their  roots  in  this
    country and the fact that they have extended family networks  here.   I
    am satisfied that the decision is one capable of engaging Article 8.

31. The decision to remove a non-British national with no leave  to  remain
    is plainly one that is lawfully open to the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department to take. I am satisfied that the aim of  the  decision,
    the maintenance of immigration control is  a  legitimate  aim  engaging
    factors in Article  8(2)  including  the  economic  well-being  of  the
    country and the rights and freedoms of others.  I am satisfied that the
    decision is rationally connected to the legitimate aim pursued.

32. The question is whether, taking all relevant factors into  account,  it
    is proportionate. By way of s19 of the Immigration Act 2014  parliament
    introduced significant amendments to the 2002 Act, so that it now  sets
    out mandatory considerations that must be weighed in the balance in all
    Article 8 cases.  I deal with those 'public interest factors' first.

33.  I remind myself that the Appellant Mr Demir does not have  any  lawful
    right to remain in this country, and that the First-tier Tribunal found
    him to have deliberately evaded immigration control by,  for  instance,
    lying about his purpose of entry in 2010 when  he  came  back  to  this
    country to attend the birth of his son.  The maintenance of immigration
    control is in the public interest  and  that  is  a  matter  that  must
    attract significant weight in my assessment.

34. I cannot be satisfied that this family could properly be  described  as
    financially independent. Although I accept that Mr Demir has from  time
    to time worked to support  his  family,  and  that  he  facilitates  Ms
    Headley doing so now, by their own  admission  their  household  income
    falls well short of the minimum income requirements set out in Appendix
    FM.   I accept that he wishes to work and if given the  opportunity  to
    do so lawfully he will in the future  achieve  financial  independence,
    but that is not the position at the date of this hearing and so that is
    a factor that must weigh against him in the balance.

35. Notwithstanding his own self-deprecation in  respect  of  his  language
    ability I find that Mr Demir is able to speak  English  to  the  extent
    that he has been able to integrate into life in the UK. In  giving  his
    evidence he at times found it difficult to make himself understood, but
    I accept that this is because he was in a strange and perhaps stressful
    environment, and that he was being asked to comment on matters that  he
    might not otherwise be discussing. He and  Ms  Headley  have  evidently
    managed to communicate sufficiently to raise  a  family  together;  his
    mother-in-law  Mrs  Headley  did  not  indicate  that   she   has   any
    difficulties in understanding  him;  as  Ms  Murton  testified  he  has
    managed to make friends in the community and she gave no indication  of
    any language barrier.   In the absence of evidence that  any  of  these
    witnesses speak Turkish I accept that they all speak to  the  Appellant
    in English.

36. I can attach only a little weight to the Appellant's relationship  with
    Ms Headley, since it was  established  when  he  was  in  this  country
    unlawfully. So too I can only attach a little  weight  to  the  private
    life that he has established here. This would include his relationships
    with his neighbours and Ms Headley's extended family.

37. I turn then to the questions at the heart of this appeal,  those  posed
    by s117B(6) NIAA 2002.  Having extensively cross-examined  all  of  the
    witnesses Ms Pal made the very realistic concession that the  Appellant
    does enjoy a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his sons
    and with B. She quite properly recognised  that  she  could  do  little
    else, given the overwhelming evidence to that effect and  the  lack  of
    any countervailing material.  I  accept  and  find  as  fact  that  the
    Appellant does enjoy a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his sons, who as British nationals are 'qualifying', as defined by
    s117D of the NIAA 2002.

38. The final question is whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  those
    children to leave the UK.  I have given consideration  to  the  matters
    arising from my analysis of (1)-(5) of s117B. I have borne in mind  the
    adverse  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of   the
    Appellant's attitude towards immigration control, and at the  forefront
    of my mind has been the fact that Article 8 is not a general dispensing
    power. It does not confer upon couples the right to choose  where  they
    live.   I am however satisfied that in the particular circumstances  of
    this case it would not be 'reasonable' to expect any of these  boys  to
    leave the UK.  That being the question  that  parliament  found  to  be
    determinative, it follows that the appeal must be allowed.  My  reasons
    are as follows.

39. I start with B. B cannot leave the UK because he continues  to  have  a
    relationship with his  father.  There  is  every  indication  that  the
    relationships in the family as a whole continue  to  be  amicable.  Mrs
    Headley explained the frequency with which B  sees  his  Dad,  and  the
    Appellant himself describes him as a "good guy". I have every reason to
    believe that this is therefore a relationship which will subsist in the
    future.  I am satisfied that it would  not  be  at  all  reasonable  to
    expect this child, already perhaps particularly vulnerable  because  of
    his health concerns and learning difficulties, to leave the UK and  his
    father  behind.   I  have  no  hesitation  in  accepting  Ms  Headley's
    (unchallenged) evidence that B's father would not permit him  to  leave
    the country.

40. In respect of O and J I accept and find as fact that they enjoy a close
    relationship  with  their  older  brother.   The  three  boys  are  the
    indivisible core at the centre of this family  unit  and  it  would  be
    wholly contrary to the best interests of all three if they were  to  be
    split  up.  The  adverse  impact  upon  them  would  in  my   view   be
    disproportionate to the aim pursued.   I note that  as  well  as  their
    relationships with each other the boys also enjoy a close relationship-
    perhaps in this day and age exceptionally  so  -  with  their  cousins,
    aunts, uncles, grandparents and great-grandparents who all live  within
    a few minutes' walk of their home. Mrs Headley's portrayal of her open-
    door policy was particularly striking, with her grandchildren  treating
    her home in effect as an extension of their  own.  I  find  that  these
    children have grown up in a warm, supportive and loving extended family
    and it is everything that they have ever known. It  is  their  'normal'
    and I am satisfied that it would be very much contrary  to  their  best
    interests to interfere  with  that.     I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case those best interests must prevail
    over  the  public  interest  in  refusing  leave:  it  would   not   be
    'reasonable' to expect the boys to leave the UK.

41. Given the terms in which s117B(6) is drafted it is not necessary for me
    to consider the  possibility  of  Mr  Demir  returning  to  Cyprus  and
    applying for entry clearance to return as a partner under the terms  of
    Appendix FM, but I do so for the sake of completeness. There is another
    baby on the way. Ms Headley made it clear in her evidence how much  she
    already depends on Mr Demir to look after the  children.   She  is,  if
    left as a single mother with a very young baby, extremely  unlikely  to
    meet the minimum income requirements even under  the  recently  amended
    provisions.  Mr Demir is not, in  those  circumstances,  going  to  get
    entry clearance. The separation is very  likely  to  be  prolonged  and
    substantial. Mr Demir will miss out  on  the  crucial  early  years  of
    bonding with his new child, as well  as  the  opportunity  to  continue
    being a father to his sons.  Conversely  the  children  will  lose  the
    undeniable benefit of growing up in a stable home with two parents.   I
    do not regard that as an interference proportionate to the aim pursued,
    even weighing in the very substantial public interest.

42. It will be observed that I have reached my findings  without  reference
    to the boys' nationality and to the significant  weight  that  much  be
    attached to their right to enjoy the benefits that citizenship  of  the
    UK entails. Nor  have  I  considered  it  necessary  to  refer  to  the
    Respondent's policy cited above.  I simply note that  both  the  policy
    and the guidance in ZH (Tanzania) reinforce my decision.



    Decisions


43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside.


44. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           17th October 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a partner or
parent) Ten Year Routes, published August 2015

