
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 28 September 2016       |On Friday 30 September 2016          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MR BELAL AHMED SHOPON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Simret, Counsel instructed by Hamlet solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Widdup promulgated on 4 January 2016 ("the  Decision").    By
         the Decision, Judge Widdup dismissed the Appellant's appeal against
         the Respondent's decision dated 23 April 2015 refusing him  further
         leave to remain as a tier 4 student on the basis that he had failed
         to provide a CAS.

      2. The main point at issue before me and which led  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal is  whether  Judge  Widdup  erred  in  law  by
         accepting that the  Respondent  had  complied  with  the  rules  of
         service in relation to her letter  dated  17  February  2015  ("the
         February letter") which notified the Appellant that  he  had  sixty
         days to provide a further CAS in relation to  his  application  for
         leave to remain as  a  student  before  the  application  would  be
         decided.

      3. This matter came before me initially at a hearing on 12 July  2016.
         In my decision promulgated on 14 July 2016,  I  accepted  that  the
         Judge had erred in law in that respect.  My decision which explains
         the basis of that error of law is included as an appendix  to  this
         decision for ease of reference.  However, having found an error  of
         law, I indicated that I would only set aside the Decision if I were
         persuaded that the error of law was material.   If  the  Respondent
         were able to prove that the  February  letter  was  both  sent  and
         received by the Appellant then the error would not be material  and
         I would not set aside the Decision on that  account.   I  therefore
         gave directions for evidence to be produced as to service.

      4. The factual position following compliance with those directions  is
         as follows.  The Respondent has produced a note from her electronic
         database ("the CID note") which states that the February letter was
         sent on 16 February 2015 and provides a recorded  delivery  number.
         Both parties have checked that recorded  delivery  number.   It  is
         common ground that the Post Office track  and  trace  site  has  no
         information that an item with that  recorded  delivery  number  has
         been delivered or signed for. The Applicant says that  he  did  not
         receive it.

      5. The Appellant's solicitors say in their  written  submissions  that
         they have made a telephone enquiry of Royal Mail customer  services
         department. That department has apparently indicated that they have
         no record of that item having been provided to them  for  delivery.
         There is no witness statement confirming that and the letter  which
         it is said in the submissions would be forthcoming from Royal  Mail
         has not been provided.

      6. The Respondent asks that I accept the CID note as evidence that the
         letter was sent.  The Respondent also asserts that the  Appellant's
         bare denial of receipt of the February letter  is  insufficient  as
         evidence and asks me to infer from  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
         sought a "sixty days letter" after receipt of the decision dated 23
         April 2015 that the Appellant had in  fact  received  the  February
         letter and was using the  excuse  of  non-receipt  of  that  latter
         letter in order to engineer an extension of his  leave  because  he
         had been unable to find another sponsor.

Submissions

      7. Mr Simret relied on the case of R v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department and another ex parte Anufrijeva [2003] UKHL 36.  In that
         case, the House of Lords decided that a decision takes effect  only
         when it is communicated (see in particular [30] of the judgment  in
         the speech of Lord Steyn).  He submitted that  I  could  not  infer
         from the CID note that the item had been  posted  in  circumstances
         where there was no witness statement from the Respondent confirming
         postage and the Royal Mail had indicated that it had  not  received
         the item.  That was the more so since it was accepted on both sides
         that there was no independent evidence of delivery and the item had
         not apparently been returned undelivered.

      8. Mr Tarlow asked me to infer from the CID note  that  the  item  had
         been posted.  He accepted though that the Respondent  was  in  some
         difficulties in relation to proof of delivery.

Decision

      9. I do not accept Mr Simret's submission  that  I  should  find  that
         there is insufficient evidence that the February letter was posted.
          It is difficult to see what evidence the Respondent could  provide
         beyond the CID note other than perhaps a witness statement from the
         maker of that note who could confirm only that he/she had  put  the
         item in the post tray for posting.  In a large organisation such as
         the Home Office, posting is likely to be carried out by  collection
         by Royal Mail.  It is not likely that individual  items  are  taken
         physically to the post office and placed in  a  post  box  as  they
         would be by a firm of  solicitors.   It  would  place  an  enormous
         burden on the Respondent if she were required to prove  posting  of
         items in that fashion.   The CID note is sufficient  to  support  a
         prima facie case that the item was sent.

     10. However, in this case there is simply no evidence of delivery.  The
         Appellant has indicated that he did not receive  the  item.   Royal
         Mail has not been able to supply evidence that  it  was  delivered.
         Whether that is because it did not reach Royal Mail or  whether  it
         is because it was lost in the postal system is not something  which
         I need to decide.  There is simply no evidence of delivery.

     11. I do not accept what the Respondent says in  her  letter  dated  13
         July 2016 about the reason why the Appellant asked  for  the  sixty
         days letter following receipt of the 23 April 2015 decision.   That
         is equally consistent with his assertion that he had  not  received
         the February letter and was therefore simply  asking  for  that  to
         which he believed he was entitled.

     12. In those circumstances, I accept Mr Simret's  submission  that  the
         Respondent is unable to prove service of the  February  letter  or,
         put another way, that the decision to permit  the  Appellant  sixty
         days to find an alternative  sponsor  before  his  application  was
         considered has not been shown to be communicated to the  Appellant.



     13. For those reasons, I accept that the error of law which I  set  out
         in my decision of 14 July 2016 is material  and  I  set  aside  the
         Decision.  I go on to re-make the decision.

     14. Mr Tarlow accepted that, if I found that the  February  letter  had
         not been validly  served,  the  effect  is  that  the  Respondent's
         decision is not in accordance with the law and I should  allow  the
         appeal on that basis.  I accept that  submission  and  I  therefore
         allow the Appellant's appeal on the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
         decision was not in accordance with the law for failure  to  follow
         her policy.  The consequence is that the Respondent will be obliged
         to provide the Appellant with a further sixty days in which to find
         an alternative sponsor.

     15. Mr Simret raises a further point about the Decision.  He says  that
         the effect of my finding that the Respondent's decision is  not  in
         accordance with the law is that the  Appellant  continues  to  have
         leave because his application made in time on 22 September 2014 now
         remains outstanding.  He submits that,  taking  into  account  that
         leave, the Appellant has been in the UK  lawfully  for  ten  years.
         He points to [20] to [22] of the Decision  where  the  Judge  found
         that the Appellant could not succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR.   He
         submitted that those findings too amounted to an error of law given
         the length of the Appellant's residence.  However, he was unable to
         point me to any evidence as to the Appellant's private life  formed
         in the UK which was before the Judge.

     16. Judge Widdup properly directed himself in accordance  with  section
         117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when finding that
         little weight could  be  given  to  the  Appellant's  private  life
         because his status (as a student) was  precarious.   The  Appellant
         could not meet the Rules in relation to his private life.  There is
         no error in the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  could  not
         succeed on Article 8 grounds.

     17. Mr Simret submits that, since I have set aside the Decision and the
         Appellant has been in the UK lawfully for  ten  years,  he  is  now
         entitled to indefinite leave to remain.  I am unable  to  make  any
         finding in that regard.  There is no information before  me  as  to
         the Appellant's immigration history.   Paragraph 276B requires  the
         Appellant to provide evidence as to his  English  language  ability
         and to pass the knowledge of life test in  the  UK.  He  must  also
         satisfy the Respondent as to his suitability and that he has  spent
         a period of ten years continuously and lawfully in the UK.   If  he
         is  able  to  meet  those  requirements,  he  can  make  a  further
         application to the Respondent at the appropriate time.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated on 4 January 2016 involved  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside that decision.

The Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
decision is not in accordance with the law for failure to follow her  policy
of allowing the Appellant sixty days to find an alternative sponsor.





FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.

Signed   [pic]    Date 29 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                                  APPENDIX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 12 July 2016              |                                     |
|                                     |...............14 July 2016......... |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MR BELAL AHMED SHOPON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Simret, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This appeal was listed before me on Tuesday 12 July 2016  in  order
         to consider whether there is an error of law  in  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  promulgated  on  4  January  2016
         ("the Decision").  Judge Widdup accepted that  the  Respondent  had
         complied with the rules of service in relation to her letter  dated
         17 February 2015 which notified the Appellant  that  he  had  sixty
         days to provide a further CAS in relation to  his  application  for
         leave to remain as a student.  The Judge so found on the basis that
         paragraph 8ZA of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain)  Order
         2000 ("the 2000 Order") applies. Permission to appeal  was  granted
         to the Appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on 3 June 2016
         on the basis that it was arguable that the provisions  for  service
         in the 2000 Order do not apply.

      2. Mr Simret submitted that the 2000  Order  does  not  apply  because
         paragraph 8ZA of that order relates only  to  a  decision  refusing
         leave,  refusing  to  vary  leave  or  varying  leave   under   the
         Immigration Act 1971.  The 17 February 2015 letter which is at  the
         heart of the issue in this case is none of those things.  It  is  a
         letter indicating that the Home Office was suspending consideration
         of the Appellant's application for sixty days because  the  licence
         of the sponsor on whom  he  relied  in  his  application  had  been
         revoked.

      3. Mr Kotas did not contest this  submission  and,  having  considered
         paragraph 8ZA, it is clearly correct.  However, as Mr Kotas  noted,
         that is not the end of the matter as the Appellant still  needs  to
         show that the error of law  disclosed  by  [17]  and  [18]  of  the
         Decision is material.  In that context he produced a note from  the
         Respondent's electronic database  (CID)  showing  that  the  letter
         affording the Appellant sixty days was sent on 16 February 2015 and
         gave a date to submit a further CAS of 18 April 2015 (sixty  days).
         The CID note shows a recorded delivery number.  However,  no  check
         had been made of the Post Office Track and Trace system in order to
         verify delivery (although Mr Kotas did note that there was  nothing
         on file to show that the letter had been returned undelivered).

      4. Following further exchanges, both representatives  agreed  that  in
         fairness to the Appellant, the hearing should be adjourned for  the
         parties to check the position on delivery.  Thereafter, the parties
         will need the opportunity to make submissions in writing about  the
         impact of what the evidence shows on the materiality of the  error.
         Those submissions should also deal with the issue of who bears  the
         burden of proof and to what standard.  The parties  should  include
         in those submissions their proposals for the disposal of the  error
         of law issue in light of what the  evidence  shows  and  whether  a
         further hearing is  required  to  deal  with  that  issue  and  any
         remaking or whether it can be dealt with on the papers.

      5. For the above reasons, I granted an adjournment on the basis of the
         following directions:-

          1) By no later than 4pm on Tuesday 26 July 2016,  the  Respondent
             and the Appellant are to make enquiries  of  the  Post  Office
             Track and Trace system to ascertain how and when the letter of
             17 February 2015 (posted on  16  February:  recorded  delivery
             number KX025759675GB) was delivered and are to communicate the
             result of such enquiry to the  other  party  with  a  view  to
             agreeing the factual position.

          2) By no later than 4pm on Tuesday 9 August 2016, the parties are
             to file and serve on each other submissions in writing setting
             out their position following the result of  the  enquiries  at
             (1) above.  That document should  also  encompass  submissions
             relating to the relevant burden and  standard  of  proof,  the
             materiality of the error identified at [3] above and how it is
             proposed the appeal should proceed in relation to the error of
             law and any remaking of the Decision.  The parties should also
             notify the Tribunal at the same time whether a further hearing
             is required or whether the remaining issues can be dealt  with
             on the papers.  Depending on the content of those submissions,
             the appeal will either be relisted for a  further  hearing  or
             will be determined on the papers after 12 August 2016.

          3) Either party may apply to vary the above  directions  or  seek
             further directions in writing to me on  notice  to  the  other
             party.

Signed   [pic]    Date 12 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

