

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17113/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 14 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                Chaudhry Ali
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hans, Highfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  Mrs  Petterson,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,   acknowledged   the
   respondent had received a test certificate which, if authentic,  met  the
   requirements of the Rules for the relevant application and was admissible
   before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in that this was not a Points  Based
   System case.  She did not seek to support the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
   determination dismissing the appellant's appeal.

2. Unfortunately, she had not had  an  opportunity  to  check  up  upon  the
   authenticity of the test certificate, the original of which she had.

3. As there is no reason to doubt that it is compliant, I have  decided  not
   to adjourn the hearing at additional costs to both sides.  On  the  other
   hand, were the certificate to be non-compliant, the respondent could  not
   properly be expected to grant the appellant further leave.

4. In these circumstances, I allow the appellant's appeal but  I  grant  the
   respondent liberty to apply no later than 6 weeks from 4 November 2014 to
   set aside this determination  but  only  upon  the  respondent  producing
   satisfactory evidence to establish the test certificate does  not  comply
   with the Rules.  If no application is made by the respondent within  this
   time, this decision will stand.

DECISION

      The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-
      make the decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.












                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                            13 November 2014





