
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17879/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2017                         |On 8 May 2017                     |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                            FOLUKE OYEKEMI FADEYI
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms U Dirie, instructed by MQ Hassan Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turquet promulgated 22.8.16, dismissing on  all  grounds
    her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    28.4.15, to refuse her application made on 17.3.15 for LTR on article 8
    grounds outside the Rules.

 2. At the appellant's request, the judge dealt  with  the  appeal  on  the
    papers, without an oral hearing.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    25.1.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliams granted permission to  appeal
    on 8.3.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 24.4.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. At the hearing I found no error of law in the making of the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal such that the decision of Judge Turquet  should
    be set aside. I reserved my reasons, which I now summarise.

 6. As Judge McWilliam noted in the grant  of  permission,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not assisted by the appellant and the  way  in  which  the
    appeal was presented was deficient. As this was a paper  case,  as  the
    appellant's request, the judge had only the  evidence  and  information
    then in the court file on which to decide the appeal.

 7. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  comprise  a   letter   from   the   appellant,   asking   for
    "reconsideration." The appellant states that on 17.5.16 she married  Mr
    Vincent Akin Williams, a British citizen, since which  time  they  have
    been living together with her own daughter, Favour. She had been living
    in the UK for over 10 years prior to marriage. "I am depending  on  the
    route of private and family life in the UK and also  I  am  my  husband
    personal carer as he suffered mobility problem. His disability requires
    constant care. I am appealing that my  case  be  consider  outside  the
    rules to enable me fully support him. Attached here are documents  that
    support my application."

 8. At [28] of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  noted
    that when the application was considered by the Secretary of State, the
    appellant was not married and there was no mention of her  being  in  a
    relationship, so  that  she  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM as a partner. Although the appellant had a child  with  her
    in the UK, she is not a British citizen and had not lived in the UK for
    at least 7 years preceding the application, so that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as a parent.

 9. At [36] the judge noted that the appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
    visitor and has had no LTR beyond 2006. She waited  until  2011  before
    attempting to regularise her status. She would be returning to Nigeria,
    the country of her birth and heritage, where she  spend  her  formative
    years. The judge considered that Mr Williams is a Nigerian citizen  and
    that the appellant's mother is in Nigeria.  It  would  be  open  to  Mr
    Williams to sponsor the appellant's application from Nigeria to  return
    to the UK as a spouse. The appellant's daughter had only been in the UK
    for two years and would be able to return to Nigeria and  continue  her
    education there, as she had done in the past.

10. In granting permission, Judge McWilliam  found  it  arguable  that  the
    judge "did not have sight of the evidence received by the Tribunal on 9
    August 2016 in relation to the appellant's daughter and adoption by  Mr
    Williams. It is arguable that there is no  assessment  of  the  child's
    best interests in this context or at all."

11. Judge McWilliam added that "It is expected that the solicitors  prepare
    full, detailed  and  focused  grounds  of  appeal  in  advance  of  the
    substantive hearing." Unfortunately, that did not happen, though  I  do
    have Ms Dirie's skeleton argument.

12. Ground 2 in the skeleton argument states: "The judge did not have sight
    of the evidence received by the Tribunal on 9 August 2016  in  relation
    to  the  appellant's  daughter  and  adoption  by  Mr   Williams   (the
    appellant's husband and a British citizen)." It is submitted that there
    was a "wholesale failure" to consider this  evidence,  amounting  to  a
    material error of law.

13. However, it is not clear and neither of the representatives could  tell
    me to what evidence  Judge  McWilliam  was  referring  as  having  been
    received by the Tribunal on 9.8.16. More significantly, contrary to her
    skeleton argument, Ms Dirie conceded that the appellant's daughter  had
    not been adopted by Mr Williams. Thus far, only enquiries had been made
    about such an adoption. To  that  extent  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    skeleton argument are somewhat misleading.

14. It remains the case that the daughter,  born  12.7.03,  is  a  Nigerian
    citizen and Mr Williams is not her father. The  appellant  claims  that
    the father of the child died in a road accident and when the child  was
    22 months only, the appellant decided to come to the UK  and  left  the
    child with her mother in Nigeria. The child came with  her  grandmother
    on visa visits to the UK in 2011 and again in 2014, but did  not  leave
    on that latter occasion. The appellant claims that her  mother  had  no
    strength to look after the child anymore, so the appellant  decided  to
    keep her with her in the UK.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted at [15]  that  there  was  evidence
    that Mr Williams was seeking to adopt  the  appellant's  daughter.  The
    judge noted that  in  the  refusal  decision  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the appellant had sole responsibility for her child,  who
    only entered the UK on 18.3.14, and thus had only been in the UK for  1
    year at the date of the application. At [21] the judge referred to  the
    duty to safeguard and promote the best  interests  of  the  welfare  of
    children in the UK, in accordance  with  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.  Further  considerations   in
    relation to the child were made, briefly, at [36] of the decision.  The
    judge concluded that the daughter could return with the  appellant  and
    continue her studies and life with her mother in Nigeria.

16. I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have the advantage of
    any significant evidence about the child's integration in the  UK.  The
    typed grounds and additional statement of  additional  grounds  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal make absolutely no reference to the daughter. There
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  of  any  adoption,  and
    that remains  the  case.  The  school  records  now  presented  by  the
    appellant were not put before the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did all that  could
    reasonably have been expected to address  the  best  interests  of  the
    child. Even if further time or attention had been  dedicated  to  those
    best interests, I can see no  basis  upon  which,  on  the  very  scant
    evidence presented and absence of reference to the child in the grounds
    of appeal, the judge could have reached any other conclusion  that  the
    best interests of this child were to return to Nigeria with her mother,
    to the country of her birth and background, to continue her former life
    there and pursue her education there. The child has no  entitlement  to
    remain in the UK, her immigration status was initially  precarious  and
    then unlawful, so that  pursuant  to  s117B  little  weight  should  be
    accorded to such. Her family life is with her mother.  If  Mr  Williams
    wishes to join the appellant and the child in Nigeria, it  is  open  to
    him to do so. The appellant has not shown she can meet the requirements
    of the Rules and even if she reached EX1 could not show that there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to continuing such family life as she has with
    Mr Williams  in  Nigeria.  Frankly,  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  was
    inevitable on the limited evidence of the appellant's circumstances.

18. The adoption issue that appears to have persuaded Judge  McWilliams  to
    grant permission to appeal has proven to be entirely  a  'red-herring.'
    If and when there is any such adoption, the appellant may make a  fresh
    application on that basis, but as things stand there is no  reason  why
    mother and child should not return to the UK. Judge Turquet gave proper
    consideration to the appellant's  circumstances,  including  the  claim
    that she had to remain to look after Mr Williams  who  had  broken  his
    ankle, and such sparse information as was placed before the Tribunal in
    relation to the appellant's child, and  gave  cogent  reasons  for  the
    findings made and conclusions reached. I thus find that  there  was  no
    material error  in  the  making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusions:

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

