

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17721/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 5th April 2016                     |On 12th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                    Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                            nasser mussa abdallah
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION: APPEAL WITHDRAWN

 1. On 22 October 2015 I found there was an error on a point of law in  the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler that
    was sent out on 31 October 2014 and I set that decision aside.

 2. Because it had not been possible to remake the decision at  that  time,
    the Tribunal arrange a further hearing.   Shortly  before  the  resumed
    hearing, the Tribunal was informed by Mr D Mills (a  Senior  Presenting
    Officer) that the Home Office was withdrawing the  decision  originally
    appealed against because the  appellant  had  provided  a  current  and
    satisfactory English language certificate.  On the  basis  of  the  new
    evidence, the Home Office would grant the appellant leave  as  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules  were  met.   In
    such circumstances, the Tribunal was invited to  treat  the  appeal  as
    withdrawn.

 3. Mr McVeety confirmed these facts and had nothing to add.

 4. The appellant represented himself at the hearing.  I explained that  as
    the Home Office had conceded their opposition to the case it  was  open
    to me to treat the appeal as withdrawn as per rule 17 of the 2008 Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules.  The appellant consented  to  this  approach,
    recognising that there was no need to pursue the appeal because he  had
    been notified that he would be granted leave.

 5. In such circumstances, given the  agreement  of  the  parties  and  the
    reasons for that agreement, I consent to the appeal being withdrawn.

Decision

Appeal withdrawn by consent.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
