
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 14th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                              Miss XIAOWEI YANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Aihe, of Wisestep, Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr C Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Stokes promulgated on 11 February 2015  which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  of  7  April  2014  to
refuse the appellant leave to enter the UK and to cancel existing leave.

Background

3.    The appellant is a citizen of China and was born on 8 May 1985.

4.    On 7 April 2014, the appellant arrived at London Heathrow Airport  but
was refused leave to enter. When she attempted to enter the UK,  she  had  a
visit visa valid from 24 March 2014 to 24  September  2014.  The  respondent
cancelled the leave to enter confirmed by that visit visa.

The Judge's Decision

5.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Stokes ("the Judge") dismissed the appellant's  appeal  under
the Immigration Rules and dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
ECHR grounds.

6.    Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  14  April  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

    "However, it is arguable that when  discussing  Article  8  issues  the
    judge failed to consider the most recent relevant  decisions  ...  even
    more surprisingly  the  only  reference  to  Ruiz  Zambrano  in  [54.2]
    suggests that it does not  apply  "since  Mario  is  an  adult  British
    citizen" but the appellant's daughter is not an adult and as the  child
    is a British "citizen" Zambrano does apply. It is  also  arguable  that
    the judge has not given adequate consideration to whether  there  would
    be unjustifiably harsh consequences for the sponsor or  their  daughter
    if the appellant were to be removed."

The Hearing

7.    For the appellant, Mr Aihe adopted the terms of the grounds of  appeal
and told me that the decision contains material errors in law and  that  the
judge carried out  an  inadequate  balancing  exercise  when  assessing  the
proportionality of the respondent's decision in terms of Article 8 ECHR.

8.    Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24
response dated 23 April 2015 and argued that the decision does  not  contain
a material error of law and that between [38] and [58], the judge  carefully
considered the circumstances of the child and discussed Article 8  case  law
before coming to a conclusion that he was entitled to reach. He argued  that
the appeal should be dismissed and the decision should stand.

Analysis

9.    In granting permission to appeal, First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
notes that the  judge  "...failed  to  consider  the  most  recent  relevant
decisions" when considering Article 8. No appeal lies against  the  decision
to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration rules.  Even  though  the  judge
does not rehearse the cases of MM(Lebanon) and others 2014 EWCA Civ  985   &
R (on the application of  Ganesabalan  [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin)  he  does
mention R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC).  It is clear that the process that he  followed  in
reaching his decision took account of whether or  not  there  were  adequate
grounds for considering the Article 8 ECHR rights of the appellant  and  her
family out-with the Immigration Rules. He  then  goes  on  to  carry  out  a
detailed analysis of the proportionality of the decision,  weighing  factors
for and against the appellant.

10.   It is, when considering those factors that the judge  makes  an  error
in law, which I find to be material.

11.   At [54.2], the judge refers to the case of Ruis Zambrano but  only  in
relation to the appellant's partner (who is a British citizen)  and  not  to
the appellant's daughter. The judge found that the appellant's  daughter  is
a British citizen (at [39]) but did not go on to consider the impact of  the
respondent's decision on a British citizen child.

12.   The failure of the First  Tier  Tribunal  to  adequately  address  the
impact of the respondent's decision on a British citizen  child  constitutes
a clear error of law. I consider this error to be material because  had  the
Tribunal conducted this exercise, the outcome  could  have  been  different.
That, in my view, is the correct test to apply. I therefore  find  that  the
judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside.

13.   Although I set aside the decision promulgated on 11 February  2015,  I
preserve the judge's findings in fact and proceed  to  remake  the  decision
myself on the basis of those findings in fact.

14.   In ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department  (Respondent)  [2011]  UKSC  4  Lady  Hale  said  that  "Although
nationality is not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular  importance  in
assessing the best interests of any child".

15.   In AA v Upper Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration  Chamber)  [2013]  CSIH
88 it was held that there was no error where  significant  weight  had  been
accorded to the Claimant child's  British  nationality  because  nationality
was not a trump card.  It  was  necessary  to  take  account  of  the  whole
circumstances which included the availability to the child  of  family  life
with parents in one of their countries of origin, and the  extent  to  which
the Claimant's immigration history involved dishonesty. In AF  v  SSHD  2013
CSIH 88 it was re-iterated that nationality is not  a  trump  card  and  the
tribunal is required to take into account the full circumstances.

16.   The impact of the respondent's decision would tear this family  apart.
Either the appellant will be separated from her young daughter  or  partner,
or the appellant will take her daughter with her to China and  be  separated
from her partner. In either alternative, some degree of separation  will  be
forced on this family.

17.   The third alternative is that the appellant goes  to  China  and  that
her daughter &  her  partner,  Mario  (the  appellant's  daughter's  father)
follow her to China. I  have  to  consider  whether  it  is  in  the  public
interest for two British citizens to be forced to leave the UK in  order  to
continue established family life.

18.   The respondent's own guidance states (numbered paragraph 13) "save  in
cases involving criminality, it will not be possible to take a  decision  in
relation to the parent of a British citizen child where the effect  of  that
decision would be to force the British citizen child to leave the EU -  This
is consistent with the ECJ judgement in Zambrano".

19.   In Sanade and others (British children -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]
UKUT 00048 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that  Case  C-34/09  Ruiz  Zambrano  ,
BAILII: [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 "now makes it clear that  where  the  child  or
indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a citizen  of
the European Union, as a matter of EU law it is not possible to require  the
family as a unit to relocate outside  of  the  European  Union  or  for  the
Secretary of State to submit that it would be  reasonable  for  them  to  do
so".

20.    I  remind  myself  of  the  terms  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  the  dicta  in  the  cases  of
Zambrano, Sanade and ZH (Tanzania). The  effect  of  implementation  of  the
respondent's decision would be to remove the appellant from family, both  of
whom are British Citizens.

21.   The appellant might be able to make an application to re-enter the  UK
from abroad.  There is no guarantee that  the  appellant  would  be  granted
entry clearance when he applies to re-enter the  country  from  abroad.  The
respondent's decision would separate the appellant from  her  daughter,  who
is only 15 months old. The respondent's decision will  force  separation  on
the appellant & her partner.

22.   In EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 41 the House of  Lords  said  the
Tribunal should "recognise that it will rarely be  proportionate  to  uphold
an order for removal of a spouse if there is a close and genuine  bond  with
the other spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  follow
the removed spouse to the country of removal or if the effect of  the  order
is to sever  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  parent  and
child".

23.    In Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40 the House of  Lords  said  that
in deciding whether the general policy  of  requiring  people  such  as  the
Appellant to return to apply for entry in accordance with the rules of  this
country was legitimate and  proportionate  in  a  particular  case,  it  was
necessary to  consider  what  the  benefits  of  the  policy  were.   Whilst
acknowledging the deterrent effect of the policy the House of Lords  queried
the underlying basis of the policy in other respects and made it clear  that
the policy should not be applied in a rigid, Kafka-esque manner.  The  House
of Lords went on to say that it would be  "comparatively  rarely,  certainly
in family cases involving  children"  that  an  Article  8  case  should  be
dismissed on the basis that it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate
for the Appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

24.   In Beoku-Betts (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 38 the House  of  Lords  accepted
that the Tribunal is concerned with  the  effect  of  the  decision  on  all
members of the family. I consider not just the interests of  the  appellant,
but the interests of the appellant's partner and  their  daughter.  I  weigh
those interests against the need for the respondent  to  preserve  fair  and
effective immigration control and to keep a  watchful  eye  on  the  fragile
economy of this country. When I consider the interests of an infant and  the
appellant's partner, and when I  find  that  there  is  no  reason  why  two
British citizens should be forced out of the UK, I  can  only  come  to  the
conclusion  that   the   respondent's   decision   is   a   disproportionate
interference with the right to respect for family life,  not  just  for  the
appellant, but for his partner and their son.

25.   I therefore  find  that  Article  8  is  engaged.  The  right  of  the
appellant and her young family for respect to their family life in terms  of
Article  8  would  be  breached  in  a  disproportionate   manner   by   the
implementation of the respondent's decision.

Decision

26.   The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  a
material error on a point of law in relation to Article 8.

27.   I set aside the decision. I substitute the following decision.

28.   I dismiss the appeal under the Rules; the decision of  the  First-tier
tribunal in that regard stands.

29.   I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

