
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17497/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2017                       |On 9 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Gajjar, Counsel instructed by PN Legal Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  Appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Respondent was the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  shall
    refer to the Appellant as the Secretary of State and to the  Respondent
    as the Claimant throughout this decision.  The Claimant is  a  national
    of Jamaica who was born on 25 September 1972.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor on 31 October 2001  and  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully after his visa expired.  He  applied  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on 5 July 2014 on the basis of his family  and
    private life but was refused without a right of appeal.   The  decision
    under appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 23 April 2015 refusing him leave to remain  on
    the basis of his family and private life.  The Secretary  of  State  in
    that decision concluded that he could not meet the requirements of  the
    partner route because he did not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph
    S-LTR.1.6 as he had been  convicted  and  imprisoned  for  obtaining  a
    passport by deception on 31 October 2013 at Woolwich Crown  Court.   He
    was convicted on three counts and sentenced to six months' imprisonment
    to run concurrently.  On the basis of his conviction the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that because of his conduct and character his  presence
    in the UK was  not  conducive  to  the  public  good  and  it  was  not
    considered desirable to allow him to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further he had failed to declare on his application form an offence  of
    resisting or obstructing a constable for which he was fined.

2.   As he had failed to meet the mandatory requirements of  the  Rules  the
    Secretary of State concluded in the refusal letter that paragraph  EX.1
    did not apply in his  case  even  though  it  was  accepted  he  had  a
    relationship  that  was  subsisting  with  his  British  spouse.    His
    application was also considered under the  partner  route  and  it  was
    acknowledged that he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with two children, S and N. However, neither of them lived with him and
    his spouse and each had different mothers,  neither  of  whom  was  his
    spouse, and the application fell  for  refusal  under  the  eligibility
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  set  out  earlier.   The
    application was also refused under the private life route as set out in
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State also
    considered whether exceptional circumstances were to be  found  in  his
    application  but  having  considered  Section  55   of   the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and his arguments  in  respect  of
    his two sons, the Secretary of State concluded that any contact with  S
    had developed recently and there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  his
    contact with N had been on a long term basis  or  that  the  court  had
    granted access rights.  The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  the
    prison sentence demonstrated that his sons were not  dependent  on  him
    for support and any contact was incidental and that it was not in S  or
    N's best interests that he be allowed to remain in the UK.

3.   His appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  8
    August 2016.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley concluded  that  there
    were exceptional circumstances such  as  to  justify  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and that  family  life  existed
    between the Claimant, his wife and his two sons.  He found that it  was
    in the best interests of the  Claimant's  children  that  the  Claimant
    remain in the United Kingdom, and he concluded that the balance on  the
    issue of proportionality weighed in favour of the Claimant and  removal
    would be unlawful.

4.   The Secretary of State sought to challenge the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Permission was refused in the  first  instance  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and granted on  renewal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith on 5 January 2017.  Judge Smith found that it was  arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred  in  his  application  of  the
    public interest to the Claimant's case stating that even if  the  Judge
    was arguably  entitled  to  take  into  account  as  a  matter  in  the
    Claimant's favour that  the  Claimant  spoke  English  and  was  not  a
    financial burden on the state, which in itself was arguably  an  error,
    that it was further arguable that the Judge had failed to apply section
    117B(1) and take account of the Claimant's criminal  offending.  Whilst
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith in granting permission was less persuaded by
    the grounds concerning the consideration of the best interests  of  the
    children,  the  grant  of  permission  was  not  limited.   The  appeal
    therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to determine  whether
    or not there was an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

5.   In a decision promulgated on 24 March 2017 I determined that there  was
    a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    I set it aside.  My core reasons were recorded in paragraphs 11 and  12
    and I set them out here:

         "11. I find that there is a material error of law  in  relation  to
         the  assessment  of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   It  is  not
         challenged by the Secretary of  State  that  the  Claimant  enjoyed
         family life with  his  spouse  and  the  Judge  gave  reasoned  and
         adequate conclusions for finding that the  Claimant  had  a  strong
         relationship  with  his  son  S,  a  British   Citizen.    However,
         notwithstanding the fact that the Judge refers to section  117B  in
         paragraph 48 of the decision and addresses himself in  relation  to
         some of the factors that are required to  be  taken  into  account,
         looking at  the  substantive  reasoning  within  the  body  of  the
         decision the approach fails to take into account  material  factors
         in relation to those statutorily required considerations.  Firstly,
         despite reference in paragraph 48  to  section  117,  there  is  no
         consideration of the fact that the Claimant's relationship  with  a
         qualifying partner was established whilst he was here unlawfully as
         required by section  117B  (4)(b)  nor  does  the  Judge  make  any
         specific self-direction in relation to the little weight  provision
         regarding the Claimant's private life as required by  section  117B
         (4) (a).  Further, there is a clear misdirection of  law  regarding
         the Claimant's ability to speak English and  the  fact  he  is  not
         financially a burden on the UK taxpayer.  In the case of Rhuppiah v
         the Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 803 the Court of Appeal held
         that section 117B(2) proficiency in  English  and  section  117B(3)
         financial  independence  were  neutral  factors.   The   First-tier
         Tribunal in paragraph 49 stated that the  factors  weighed  in  his
         favour  in  the  balancing   exercise.   That   therefore   was   a
         misdirection.   Further,  although  the  best  interests   of   the
         Claimant's  children  are  addressed,  section  117B  (6)  is   not
         addressed in relation to the qualifying child  in  this  case.  The
         First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in respect of the best interests of
         the child is that the best interests are  determinative.   That  is
         not the approach which has been held to be the correct approach  in
         the case of MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and  it  fails
         to  address  the  second  limb  of  the   test   in   relation   to
         reasonableness (section 117 B (6) (b)).

         12.  I find therefore that the decision as a whole fails adequately
         to deal with the section 117B  considerations  and  fails  to  give
         adequate consideration to the  fact  that  the  Claimant  was  here
         unlawfully since 2001. The First-tier Tribunal  therefore  did  not
         demonstrate that the relevant statutory provisions had  been  taken
         into account and had been applied to the facts of this appeal.  The
         balancing  exercise  therefore  failed   to   take   into   account
         statutorily  mandated  factors  and  contrary  to   the   statutory
         requirement placed weight in the Claimant's favour on factors which
         should have been neutral in the balancing exercise."


6.   I adjourned for rehearing with directions.

The Re-making of the decision in the appeal

7.   At the hearing the parties agreed that as the  error  of  law  in  this
    case related to the treatment of  public  interest  considerations  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 41 to 45
    stand.

8.   The Claimant produced a bundle of 39 pages for the hearing pursuant  to
    directions. He adopted his witness statement at page 8 of  that  bundle
    and his previous statement  at  page  of  the  Claimant's  bundle.  His
    partner S L also adopted her statement at  page  9  of  the  Claimant's
    bundle and at page of the previous bundle. Neither were cross-examined.
    I heard from both representatives. Mr Tufan submitted that  since  this
    matter was heard there had been clarification in R (on the  application
    of MM  (Lebanon))  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 10 in  which  the  Supreme  Court  concluded  at
    paragraph 92 that the Rules and instructions were unlawful.  The  issue
    was proportionality and whether best interest of children  trumped  his
    precarious leave and history of criminality. He had been sentenced to 6
    months' imprisonment and had committed other  minor  offences.  He  had
    relationships with two children which were  sporadic  relationship  and
    saw them periodically. There was no substantive evidence  showing  that
    he was making financial contributions. They  spent  time  together  and
    would be in their best interest that contact continued. However,  there
    had been criminal activity and he did not  come  under  the  rubric  of
    financial independence. Public interest required removal.

8.   Mr Gaffar relied on his skeleton argument.  He  said  that  the  social
    work report before the First-tier Tribunal had been out  of  date.  The
    updated report was written by a different author and reached  the  same
    conclusions. The author spoke to both of the  Claimant's  children  and
    they spoke about having a father around and the  author  had  concluded
    that the absence of a father figure was relevant. There was  a  contact
    order which was a starting point. The increased contact was responsible
    for a change in S's behaviour. It was the Respondent's  policy  not  to
    remove British children.   There  had  been  a  significant  period  of
    overstaying. His crime was in the past and he was  given  a  relatively
    short sentence of 6 months and released on licence at 3 months. He  was
    trying to regularise his status. He  did  not  pose  any  risk  to  the
    public. The children's interest and reasonableness  consideration  when
    viewed against s117 (4) did fall in his favour.

9.   The Claimant did not seek to argue before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    does not  seek  to  argue  before  this  Tribunal  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the partner  or  parent  route  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. His application was refused under the  suitability  requirements
    because he was convicted and imprisoned for  obtaining  a  passport  by
    deception on 31 October 2013 at Woolwich Crown Court and sentenced to 6
    month  imprisonment.  The  Respondent  therefore  concluded  that   his
    presence in the UK was not conducive to public good. The  Claimant  has
    not sought to argue that he  meets  the  suitability  requirements  but
    rather puts his case outside the Rules on the basis of his relationship
    with his two children and his British national wife.

10.  The Claimant has two children, S born on 31 July 2003  and  N  born  on
    September 2008. Their mothers are BR and CM respectively. The Appellant
    is no longer in a relationship with either  of  the  mothers.  S  is  a
    British citizen and was born on 31 July 2003. A copy of his passport is
    at page 8 of the Claimant's bundle. N was born on  14  September  2008.
    According to the Claimant's  witness  statement  dated  July  2016  his
    mother and he have an application pending for the resolution  of  their
    status. I have not been updated in relation to this application.

11.  The relevant preserved findings from the First-tier Tribunal  are  that
    the Claimant has established a bond with  S  over  several  years.  The
    First-tier Tribunal accepted that S's mother made significant  attempts
    to thwart contact. It was accepted  that  her  behaviour  had  been  so
    unreasonable that the East London family  court  had  to  make  defined
    contract provisions. He accepted that contact took place in  accordance
    with that order. He also accepted that S's behavioural issues had  been
    as a result of forced separation from the Claimant. He found  that  the
    removal of the Claimant would not be in S's best interests and  if  the
    Claimant were to be removed, this would be likely to cause  him  trauma
    due to the separation and it was unlikely that he  would  recover  from
    such an event leading possibly to further and lasting emotional damage.
    He also accepted that the Claimant was as committed to N as he  was  to
    S.

12.  The Claimant can only succeed by showing  that,  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, his Article 8 rights would be breached as  his  appeal  is  on
    human  rights  grounds  only  under  section  84  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I am required to consider the evidence
    at the date of  the  hearing.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  in
    relation to appeals on Article 8 grounds only was considered in respect
    of visit visa cases. In Kaur (visit appeals;  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
    00487 the Upper Tribunal held that the Article 8 decision on an  appeal
    cannot be made in a vacuum.  Whilst judges only  have  jurisdiction  to
    decide whether the decision is unlawful under s.6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 the starting-point for deciding that must be the state of  the
    evidence about the appellant's ability to meet the requirements of  the
    immigration rules. In view of the fact that the Claimant's appeal is on
    human rights grounds only, the approach should be analogous.

13.  In addressing the questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 I accept that  the
    Claimant enjoys family life with his two  sons.   The  history  of  his
    relationship is set out in his  witness  statements,  the  social  work
    report of Robert Simpson dated November 2014 and the social work report
    of Jasmine Smith dated 1 June 2017. There is supporting  evidence  from
    his solicitors and  S's  school  that  the  Claimant  made  significant
    efforts to enjoy contact with his son. The contact order is at pages 10
    and 11 of the Claimant's  bundle.  It  states  that  the  Claimant  has
    contact with S on alternate Fridays from 5pm until Sunday  at  6pm.  He
    also has contact every Thursday from  5pm  to  8pm  during  term  time.
    During the holidays he spends  50%  of  the  holiday  period  with  the
    Claimant. The Claimant confirms in his witness statement dated 13  June
    2017 that contact continues in accordance with the contact  order.  The
    Claimant was not challenged in cross-examination on the  current  level
    of contact that he is having with either child.

14.  The Independent Social Work Report of Jasmine Smith was compiled  after
    interviewing the Claimant, his wife and both of  his  sons.  She  is  a
    qualified social worker and her ability to comment on the matters in on
    which she gives her opinion in the report has not been challenged.  She
    concludes that S has a secure attachment with  the  Claimant  which  is
    vital for his growth  and  development.  She  also  concludes  that  an
    attachment exists in with N.

15.  The Claimant also states that he has a strong, genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with N who resides with his mother. As he has  an
    amicable relationship with her he is able to see him on a weekly  basis
    both during the week and at weekends.

16.  I am satisfied given the level and nature of the contact enjoyed  which
    is confirmed by Ms Smith that the relationships  between  the  Claimant
    and his two children  constitutes  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

17.  It is not in dispute that the Claimant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his British citizen wife,  SD,  and  that  they  live
    together and that this relationship constitutes  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 ECHR.

18.  Addressing the  remaining  questions  posed  in  Razgar,  the  proposed
    interference is of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8, the interference is in accordance with the law and necessary
    in a democratic society. The remaining question  is  therefore  whether
    the interference is proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
    to be achieved.

19.  My starting point in terms of proportionality is whether  the  Claimant
    can satisfy the Immigration Rules. The Claimant argues that his removal
    would not be in  the  best  interests  of  his  children  and  that  he
    satisfies the requirements of 117 (B) (6) of the 2002 Act. The test  of
    'reasonableness' is the same under the Rules and under section 117  (B)
    (6) and the later test must, according to paragraph 13 of MA (Pakistan)
    and Ors v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705  be  applied  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

20.  Sections 117A and 117B are found in part 5A of the 2002  Act  which  is
    headed "Article 8 ECHR: Public Interest Considerations". They apply  in
    all cases where a court or tribunal is required to determine whether  a
    decision made under the Immigration Acts  breaches  a  person's  rights
    under Article 8. Section 117B (6) is as follows:



           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


          The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;


21. Lord Justice Elias concluded at paragraph 19 of  MA (Pakistan) and  Ors
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that the only  questions  which  courts  and
    tribunals need to ask when applying section 117B(6) are the following:


         "(1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section 117B is
         inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually be found in
         section 117C.


         (2) Does the applicant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with the child?


         (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?


         (4) Is it unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom?


         If the answer to the first question is no, and to the other  three
         questions is  yes,  the  conclusion  must  be  that  article  8  is
         infringed."

22. The Claimant is not liable to deportation. I  accept  on  the  evidence
    discussed above that the Claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with both his sons. It is clear from  both  the  preserved
    findings of fact and from the evidence both of the Claimant,  his  wife
    and Ms Smith that he enjoys regular contact with both  his  sons  on  a
    weekly basis and has S with him for half  of  his  school  holidays.  I
    accept that this amounts to a subsisting parental relationship. S is  a
    qualifying child because he is a British Citizen.  N  is  a  qualifying
    child because he is 8 years old and has lived in the UK since birth.

23. In MA (Pakistan) the Court of Appeal gave the following guidance on the
    reasonableness test under section 117 (B), EX.1 and paragraph 276 ADE:

24. " Applying the reasonableness test

         46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
         a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which  it
         is  expressly  stated  that  once  the   seven   years'   residence
         requirement is satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for
         refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force
         when the cases now subject to appeal were  determined,  but  in  my
         view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a  policy  of
         this nature. After such a period of time the child  will  have  put
         down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in
         the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child
         is required to leave the UK. That may be less so when the  children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will  be  on  their
         families, but the disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get
         older.  Moreover, in these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         47.  Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where
         the focus is on the child alone, it would not  in  my  view  follow
         that leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests  are
         in favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's submission that the best
         interests  assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness
         question. If Parliament had wanted the child's  best  interests  to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
         so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
         one. Even where the child's best interests  are  to  stay,  it  may
         still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
         depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents.


         48.  In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  explained
         how a tribunal should apply the proportionality  test  where  wider
         public interest considerations are in play, in circumstances  where
         the best interests of the child dictate that he  should  remain  in
         the UK (paras. 34-37):


             "34. In determining whether or not, in  a  case  such  as  the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.


             35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.


             36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.


             37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
             into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to
             maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-
             being of the country and the  fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
             applicants have no  entitlement  to  remain.  The  immigration
             history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if  they  are
             overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."


         49. Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."


25. I have considered the best interests of the Claimant's  children  as  a
    primary consideration. In Zoumbas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 74; [2013] 1 WLR Lord Hodge, with whose judgment
    Lady Hale and  Lords  Kerr,  Reed  and  Toulson  agreed,  approved  the
    following seven  principles  which  need  to  be  borne  in  mind  when
    considering the interests of the child in the context of an  Article  8
    evaluation (para.10):

           (1) The best interests of a child are an integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           (2) In making that assessment, the best  interests  of  a  child
           must be a primary consideration, although not  always  the  only
           primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not  of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

           (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed  by
           the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,   no   other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4) While different judges might approach the  question  of  the
           best interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to
           ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

           (5)  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
           circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests  before
           one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed  by  the
           force of other considerations;

           (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination
           of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a  child  are
           involved in an article 8 assessment; and

           (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she
           is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."


26. The length of residence here is a clear pointer as to  where  the  best
    interests of the children lie. According to  established  case  law,  7
    years from the age of four is likely to be more significant to a  child
    than the first seven years of life. Both children have lived in the  UK
    since birth. Both live with their mothers and have contact  with  their
    father. They also both have contact with each  other  during  overnight
    stays at the Claimant's home. According to the social work interview, S
    explained how he was sad and unhappy when he could not see  his  father
    during the  period  contact  was  thwarted  by  his  mother.  Ms  Smith
    concludes that the Claimant is someone S  can  identify  with  and  can
    listen to, with the assurance he can achieve because he has his  father
    by his side. She concludes that  the  level  of  bonding  is  not  only
    significant but vital for S's growth and development.

27. During the social work interview with N he cried inconsolably and  said
    he did not like to be asked questions. According to his mother this was
    because he was upset because of the fear that his father  would  return
    to Jamaica. The interview was not continued. Ms  Smith  concludes  that
    were the Claimant to return to Jamaica and communicate  via  electronic
    means, the children would experience deprivation as  well  as  possible
    and mental anguish due to the physical separation. She  concludes  that
    the children deserve to be raised by both parents in  order  to  obtain
    optimum life chances and to ensure they make  a  good  contribution  to
    society. S has  already  in  her  opinion  experienced  the  impact  of
    inconsistent contact that could have severely  affected  his  behaviour
    and mental health and educational attainment through to adulthood.  The
    behavioural problems that were identified by CAMHS  which  led  to  his
    exclusion from school are now virtually non-existent since he  obtained
    the contact with his father which he wanted.  She  concludes  that  the
    Claimant's removal would be damaging to the lives of the boys.

28. I accept that the Claimant has had a relationship with  N  since  birth
    and has consistently striven to maintain his relationship  with  S  and
    adheres to the terms of the contact order. In view of the record of the
    boys' feelings towards their father in the social  work  interview  and
    the letters from them in the Claimant's bundle I accept that  it  would
    be in their best interests that their father remain in the UK and  that
    contact remain as it is now. They currently live with their mothers and
    there is no evidence to suggest that they would permit them  to  travel
    with their father to  Jamaica  or  that  it  would  be  in  their  best
    interests to be separated from  their  mothers.  Neither  boy  has  any
    connection to Jamaica.

29. I have therefore considered whether it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the Claimant's sons to go the Jamaica, taking into  account  the  wider
    public interest considerations. Lord Justice Elias  said  at  paragraph
    103 of MA (Pakistan):


         "103.    In my judgment, the observation of the judge to the effect
         that people who come on a temporary basis can be expected to  leave
         cannot be true of the child. The purpose underlying the seven  year
         rule is that this kind of reasoning ought  not  to  be  adopted  in
         their case. They are not to be  blamed  for  the  fact  that  their
         parents overstayed illegally, and the starting point is that  their
         status should be legitimized unless there is good reason not to  do
         so. I accept that the position might have  been  otherwise  without
         the seven years' residence, but that is a factor which  must  weigh
         heavily in this case. The fact that the parents are overstayers and
         have no right to remain  in  their  own  right  can  thereafter  be
         weighed in the proportionality balance against allowing  the  child
         to remain, but that is after a recognition that the  child's  seven
         years of residence is a significant factor pointing the other way."

30. The Court held at paragraphs 41 and 42 that the conduct of the  parents
    is relevant to their own situation which bears upon  the  wider  public
    interest and does not amount to blaming the children even if  they  may
    be prejudiced as a result. I have therefore considered  the  Claimant's
    immigration history. The Claimant entered the UK on 31 October 2001 and
    has been here for 16 years. He says in his witness  statement  that  he
    was granted a visit visa for  21  days  and  overstayed.  This  is  not
    acknowledged by the Respondent in the RFRL. According  to  his  witness
    statement he paid an immigration adviser in 2003 to apply for leave  to
    remain. He says he subsequently discovered this was not  submitted  and
    the person had been convicted of immigration offences.  He  obtained  a
    passport by deception and was convicted as a result. In January 2011 he
    made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  family  life
    which was refused without a right of appeal. It is clear therefore that
    the Claimant has been here unlawfully since 2001 and  his  family  life
    with his qualifying partner and his private life must be  given  little
    weight.

31. The maintenance of immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest.
    Whilst the Claimant speaks English he can gain no positive rights  from
    this and he is not financially independent. He is an overstayer and has
    never had the right to remain in his own right. In addition he has been
    convicted of deception and sentenced to 6 months imprisonment,  serving
    three. It follows that when viewing this factors cumulatively there  is
    a strong public interest in his removal.

32. However, the issue to be determined in relation to section 117 B (6) is
    how his adverse immigration  history  weighs  in  the  balance  against
    allowing the children to remain.  In view of the fact that the children
    live with their mothers and therefore cannot leave the UK without their
    mothers' agreement which is not forthcoming it must  be  overwhelmingly
    in their best interests to remain in the UK. The need  for  immigration
    control cannot therefore tip the balance and it  cannot  be  reasonable
    for them to leave the UK. The Claimant therefore meets the requirements
    of section 117B (6) and it follows that the public  interest  does  not
    require his removal.

 Decision

I remake the decision in this appeal by allowing it under Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Given that this case concerns children, I make an  anonymity  order.  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 AUGUST 2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

