
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17819/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2014                             |On 3 September 2014          |
|Prepared 22 August 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms Rhoda Badu Awuah
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Liam Loughlin, Counsel instructed by Charles
                    Allotey & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Secretary of State, who is the Appellant,  is
    referred to as the Secretary of State and Ms Awuah is  referred  to  as
    the Claimant rather than Respondent.

2.   The Appellant, the Secretary of State,  determined  on  25  April  2013
    that the Claimant's application for a residence card should be  refused
    with reference to the absence of evidence to show the  Claimant  was  a
    relevant  person  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  7  of  the   2006
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  (the  Regulations
    2006).

3.   The basis of that refusal was that the Claimant had failed  to  produce
    appropriate documentary evidence  to  confirm  the  registration  of  a
    customary marriage as required under Ghanaian legislation in that under
    the requirements of paragraph 3(1) of part 1 of the Ghanaian  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law  1985  three  requirements  for
    registration were set out.  First, the names  of  the  parties  to  the
    marriage were contained within the statutory declaration, secondly  the
    places of residence of the parties at the time of the  marriage  should
    be set out; and thirdly, that conditions essential to the  validity  of
    the marriage in accordance  with  applicable  customary  law  had  been
    complied with.  It was said that the  statutory  declaration  dated  23
    March 2012 was defective in that it  did  not  contain  the  places  of
    residence of the parties to the marriage.  Accordingly it was said that
    the UK Border Agency did not accept the registration of the marriage or
    statutory declaration submitted as being  valid,  lawfully  issued  and
    evidence of the  relationship.   Although  it  is  poorly  worded  that
    reasoning does not exclude there being a valid customary marriage under
    Ghanaian marriage laws but rather simply the UK would not recognise  it
    as a registered marriage.

4.   The appeal by the Claimant against that  decision  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blackford who, on 15 May 2014, allowed  the  appeal
    on the basis that the documentation provided showed that  the  marriage
    had  been  registered  by  the  Ghanaian   authorities   and   in   the
    circumstances that was sufficient.

5.   It is unfortunate that the judge  in  reaching  that  conclusion  makes
    reference to a letter from the High Commission, dated  17  March  2014,
    which in fact does no more than  confirm  the  signatures  on  relevant
    documentation recited in the letter.  Also provided  seemingly  to  the
    judge was a  letter  dated  27  March  2012  from  Sayuti  Yahaya-Iddi,
    Director II, Legal and Consular Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
    Regional Integration of the Republic of Ghana, who certifies  that  the
    signature of a person being the First Deputy Judicial Secretary of  the
    Ministry's signature covering the signature  of  Alexander  Kofi  Baah,
    Notary Public, appearing on the joint statutory  declaration  by  Kwame
    Akoto-Kankam and Kwame Badu Awuah dated 23 March 2012 was the true  and
    certified signature of John Bosco Nabarese.

6.   Unfortunately the relevant statutory declaration having been  carefully
    examined with the parties does not contain any covering signature  from
    Mr Nabarese.  On the  contrary,  there  is  nothing  from  him  on  the
    document supplied either it seems to the Respondent or to the judge  or
    indeed to me.  It is thus unexplained how in March 2014  Mr  Nabarese's
    signature could  be  confirmed.   Further,  there  is  the  copy  of  a
    registration form for the marriage which is photocopied and  incomplete
    but nevertheless the signatures and the witness to  the  wedding  on  3
    January 2012 at Kumasi was signed in the register by the  registrar  of
    marriages at Kumasi.  There is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  stamp
    and/or the signature was that of Mr Nabarese.

7.   The judge also had, although no particular reference is made to  it,  a
    letter from the High Commission dated 28 March 2014 and comes under the
    hand of Mr  Bennet  G  Yeboah,  a  Counsellor  for  the  Ghanaian  High
    Commission dealing with consular affairs.  The letter is written on the
    Republic of Ghana headed  notepaper  for  the  consular  section.   The
    letter  gives  no  particulars  of  Mr  Yeboah's  legal  experience  or
    expertise on the issue of  legality  of  marriage  and  the  letter  is
    ultimately somewhat  unfortunately  lacking  in  clarity.   The  letter
    asserted as follows:


         "Concerning the statutory declaration accompanying the registration
         of the marriage the omission of  the  place  of  residence  of  the
         couple at  the  time  of  the  marriage  does  not  invalidate  the
         marriage."

    In this respect it  may  well  be  right  that  a  marriage  where  the
    formalities are not  entered  into  still  remains  a  valid  customary
    marriage.  That is not the same thing as whether or not it is  for  the
    purposes  of  UK  considerations  a   valid   marriage,   meeting   the
    requirements of registration for entry clearance purposes.   Mr  Yeboah
    further cites  a  case  of  Owusu  Ameyaw  which  is  recited  for  the
    proposition that because the form of  register  of  customary  marriage
    that  accompanied  the  statutory  declaration  states  the  place   of
    residence of the couple and authenticated by the Ghana High  Commission
    that the marriage was properly registered in Ghana, and  the  Appellant
    has proved beyond doubt that the marriage is genuine.

8.   Why it is his place to make such assertions is unclear  but  again  the
    letter is ambiguous.   The  premise  is  that  there  was  a  statutory
    declaration which stated the place of residence and  was  appropriately
    authenticated.  That does not  seem  to  me  would  have  been  of  any
    assistance to the judge.

9.   Finally Mr Yeboah asserts:

         "The  competent  authorities  in  Ghana  have  confirmed  that  the
         marriage was properly registered in accordance with  the  Customary
         Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law  1985  and  Amendment  Law
         1991".


    I do not know how and  in  what  way  the  competent  authorities  have
    confirmed it was properly registered, nor would the judge in looking at
    this letter have been  able  to  conclude  that  there  was  a  validly
    registered marriage. However, the judge on the basis of the information
    provided decided of course that the appeal should be allowed.

10.  Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Saffer on 3 July 2014.

11.  The grounds of application essentially relied upon two  aspects,  first
    whether or not there was a valid marriage and whether the  certificates
    issued were reliable.  Secondly the issue that it  was  still  for  the
    Appellant to show that her marriage to an EEA national  was  recognised
    in that national's country by the member state and not simply an  issue
    of what the host country had to say about it.

12.  Reliance was therefore placed by the Secretary of State upon the  cases
    of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 and  thereafter  TA
    [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) 18 June 2014.  It is clear from paragraphs 16, 17
    and 18 of Kareem and paragraph 20 of TA that whatever other issues  may
    arise as to the validity of the marriage it will need to be shown  that
    there was a marriage recognised in the Netherlands bearing in mind this
    was a double proxy marriage relied upon.

13.  Both Kareem and TA and Others deal with marriages in  the  Netherlands.
    It is common ground by the parties that there was  no  evidence  before
    the judge nor is there any evidence before me to  go  to  show  that  a
    proxy marriage, let alone a double proxy  marriage,  is  recognised  in
    Netherlands law as a valid marriage.

14.  The documentation  provided  to  the  judge  did  not  support,  as  he
    thought,  the  conclusion  that  the  authenticity  of  the   statutory
    declaration of 23 March 2012 and the certification of the marriage  was
    necessarily a valid marriage.

15.  The judge does not address the issue  that  the  statutory  declaration
    before him was not  countersigned  by  the  covering  signature  of  Mr
    Nabarese.

16.  Similarly there is no evidence to show that as  a  matter  of  Ghanaian
    law the absence of the places of residence in the statutory declaration
    could be remedied by the contents of the registration document itself.

17.  Having heard the submissions made I am satisfied that  there  may  well
    have been a valid customary marriage for Ghanaian law purposes but  the
    evidence does not show to discharge on a balance of probabilities  that
    there was  compliance  with  the  registration  requirements.   I  have
    considerable concern that the letter of the High  Commission  dated  17
    March 2014 does not show anything other than that the  signatures  were
    genuine.  Even the reliability of that document is open to considerable
    doubt as it refers to a countersignature by Mr Nabarese which simply on
    the face of it is not in existence and no-one  has  sought  to  explain
    where such reference could have arisen from let alone how the  relevant
    ministry could have issued the letter on 27 March 2012 and/or failed to
    address why the copies do not have any countersignature upon them.

18.  Ultimately therefore it seems plain to me that it was as  a  matter  of
    fact and law an error of law was made by the  judge  in  assessing  the
    evidence and its reliability or the extent  to  which  it  demonstrated
    that the statutory declaration was an "authentic document" let alone as
    to the reliability of it or its contents.

19.  I accept that there was an error of law by the  original  Tribunal  and
    the original Tribunal's decision could not in the  ordinary  course  of
    events stand.  The further representations helpfully  presented  by  Mr
    Loughlin with reference to the text of a paper produced by a Mr Raymond
    Atuguba, Associate Executive Director of Legal Resources Centre,  Accra
    simply does  not  overcome  the  problem  faced  by  the  documentation
    actually provided.

20.  In  those  circumstances  I  also  find  therefore  that  the  original
    Tribunal's decision is set aside and the matter must be remade. I do so
    as agreed by the parties on the information before me.

21.   In  the  light  of  the  matters  set  out  above  I  find  that   the
    documentation at best shows a customary marriage was entered  into  but
    it does no more than that and does not meet the UK requirements of  the
    information to be provided to evidence the same.

22.  I further find that for the purposes of Kareem there is no evidence  to
    be provided confirming the validity of  the  marriage  so  far  as  the
    Netherlands authorities are concerned  and  therefore  the  application
    failed in any event.

23.  Whilst this latter point did form part of the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    had not been considered by the Respondent in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter that makes no difference.  Accordingly the appeal fails  in  any
    event.  If the Claimant wishes to pursue the matter again then  plainly
    they are going to have to produce evidence from an  appropriate  source
    confirming the validity of the marriage so far as the Dutch authorities
    are concerned.

DECISION
The Original Tribunal's decision is set aside.

The appeal of the Claimant is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is required in this case.

FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and no fee award is appropriate.






Signed                                  Date 22 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


