
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17852/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On the Papers                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                              |On 12th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     J J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision dated 18 May 2018 I found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law and gave directions for the disposal of the hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal.  My decision and reasons were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, JJ, is a citizen of  Guyana  who  was  born  in
         1989.  He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S  T  Fox)
         against the decision of the Respondent dated 30 April 2015 refusing
         him further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights
         grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  3
         March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Mr Duffy, who appeared for the respondent, helpfully  told  me
         at the hearing that he  did  not  seek  to  defend  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision against the challenge  in  the  first  ground  of
         appeal.  The appellant has a young son (R-J) with whom,  by  virtue
         of an order made in the Family Proceedings Court  in  Antrim  on  4
         June 2015, he enjoys regular contact.  The parties agree  that,  at
         the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer did not challenge the appellant's account of the
         extent of contact between the appellant and R-J or the terms of the
         contact  order  itself.   Notwithstanding  that  fact,  the   judge
         appeared to doubt that there  existed  a  family  life  capable  of
         protection under Article 8  ECHR  between  the  appellant  and  the
         child.  At [19], the judge considered that the contact order should
         attract less weight because the appellant  had  not  addressed  the
         question of  the  possible  difficulties  which  might  arise  with
         contact given his uncertain immigration status.  It does not appear
         that that issue was ever raised at the hearing  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.  Likewise, the judge stated that he had "concerns as
         to how much of the contact [the appellant] actually  enjoys"  [22].
         For reasons that are not clear, the  judge  also  appears  to  have
         asked the appellant whether he enjoyed contact "over and above  the
         contact order".  It is not clear to me why that question would have
         been relevant nor is it clear why the judge considered the  answers
         which the appellant gave to those questions "in turn cast doubt  as
         to whether he enjoys the contact that  the  contact  order  affords
         him." [23]. At [33], the judge observed that there was "a  lack  of
         evidence to show there was real and sustained relationship  between
         the appellant and the child he claims is his son ...".

         3.   Both parties accept that at the hearing before the  First-tier
         Tribunal, the judge was told that contact continued  in  accordance
         with the court order.  That evidence  was  not  challenged  by  the
         Presenting Officer.  The judge conducted his Article 8 analysis  on
         a false basis.  He failed properly to identify the strength of  the
         relationship between the appellant and his son, a finding which was
         of  crucial  importance  in  the  proportionality  assessment.   In
         consequence, I find that the judge's decision has  been  flawed  by
         legal error.

         4.   As regards disposal, Mr Duffy submitted that, given that there
         had been a procedural error on the part of the judge,  there  would
         need to be a re-hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.   I
         am not persuaded that that is necessary in this instance.  Time has
         elapsed since the First-tier Tribunal decision and  I  accept  that
         there  will  need  to  be   evidence   updating   the   appellant's
         circumstances.  I  understand  that  that  evidence  will  seek  to
         confirm that contact continues in accordance with the court  order.
         I accept also that, after that evidence has been filed and  served,
         the Secretary of State may wish to cross-examine the  appellant  as
         regards the new evidence.  It also seems likely to  me  that  there
         may well  be  no  cross-examination  rendering  a  resumed  hearing
         unnecessary.  With those observations in mind, I make the following
         directions.

             A.    The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
             promulgated on 3  March  2017  is  set  aside.   None  of  the
             findings of fact shall stand.

             B.   Within 21 days of service upon them of these  directions,
             the parties shall file at the Upper Tribunal,  serve  on  each
             other   and   send    to    Upper    Tribunal    Judge    Lane
             (uppertribunaljudge.lane@ejudiciary.net) written evidence  and
             submissions upon which they seek to rely in  the  remaking  of
             the decision.

             C.   Within 14 days after service upon her of the evidence  of
             the appellant,  the  Secretary  of  State  shall  indicate  in
             writing to the Upper Tribunal and by email to  Upper  Tribunal
             Judge Lane whether she requires there to be a resumed  hearing
             at which the appellant may be cross-examined.

             D.   If no such email is received in accordance with  B  above
             or if the Secretary of State indicates that a resumed  hearing
             is not necessary, then the  Upper  Tribunal  will  proceed  to
             remake the decision on the  basis  of  the  existing  evidence
             together with any updating evidence and submissions filed  and
             served in accordance with these directions.

 2. I have received two further witness  statements  and  an  extract  from
    social media conversation from the appellant's solicitors.  I have also
    received a skeleton argument prepared by Ms Connolly  of  Counsel.   No
    response has been received from the Secretary of  State  following  the
    issuing of the directions.

 3. Given that the Secretary of State, by deciding not to  respond  to  the
    fresh evidence adduced by the appellant, has forfeited the  opportunity
    to cross-examine either of the witnesses in respect of their additional
    statements, I accept the evidence contained in those statements  (which
    is prima facie plausible and uncontroversial)  as  true  and  accurate.
    Accordingly, I accept that, subject to the existing contact order  made
    in the Antrim Family Court in 2015, the appellant  continues  to  enjoy
    the level  of  contact  with  his  child  which  is  described  in  the
    additional witness statement.  I find as  a  fact  that  the  appellant
    continues to enjoy a genuine and subsisting relationship with his child
    (R-J).  Judge Fox, whose decision in the First-tier Tribunal  has  been
    set aside, noted that no evidence had been produced to  show  that  the
    child (R-J) is a qualifying child for the purposes of  Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act (as amended).  Surprisingly, the opportunity has not  been
    taken in the submission of the  most  recent  evidence  to  adduce  any
    evidence to show  that  the  child  R-J  is  a  British  citizen.   The
    Secretary of State in the  decision  letter  [27]  refused  to  accept,
    without further evidence, that the child was a British  citizen.   What
    is clear, however, is that as at the date of the determination of  this
    appeal on the papers the child has been living in  the  United  Kingdom
    for seven years (R-J was born on 24  December  2011).   It  seems  very
    likely, therefore, that the child  is  a  "qualifying  child"  for  the
    purposes of Section 117B(6) by reason of the length of his residence in
    the United Kingdom.  Section 117B(6) provides as follows:

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

 4. In determining the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds,
    therefore, it would now appear that there is no public interest in  the
    removal of the appellant at the present time.  The Secretary  of  State
    has not argued that it would be reasonable for R-J to leave the  United
    Kingdom and live in Guyana with the appellant.  R-J's primary carer  is
    his mother and, although the appellant and the mother and R-J appear to
    enjoy good relations, the appellant and  R-J's  mother  are  not  in  a
    relationship nor is there any suggestion that they will be  reconciled.
    I find that it would not be reasonable for R-J to live in  Guyana  with
    the appellant in those circumstances.  It follows  that  the  appellant
    should succeed in his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State dated 30 April 2015 on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

 5. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  30
    April 2015 is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



