
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17361/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2017                     |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                        Oluwadimimu Olalekan Adewale
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by A C Gilead
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This an appeal by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M R Oliver (the judge), promulgated on 30 November 2016,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds.
    That appeal had been against the  Respondent's  decision  of  22  April
    2015, refusing  his  human  rights  claim,  which  in  turn  was  based
    essentially  on  his  relationship  with  his  British  daughter.   The
    Appellant had previously been granted discretionary leave as  a  parent
    of his daughter on 2 August 2012. His latest claim, made on 26  January
    2015 was for an extension of that leave.




The judge's decision

 2. The judge found that the Appellant and his daughter's mother  were  not
    partners within the meaning of Appendix FM to the Rules.  At  paragraph
    13 the judge finds that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    partner route and that as a result  he  could  not  succeed  under  the
    parent route either.  He deemed the Appellant to be less than  reliable
    in respect of aspects of his evidence.  The judge  had  found  that  it
    would be in  the  best  interests  that  the  Appellant's  two  British
    children (a second child having been born in  September  2016)  lay  in
    remaining with their mother in the United Kingdom.  Having  found  that
    the Appellant could not succeed under Appendix FM, the judge went on to
    consider the Article 8 claim outside the  context  of  the  Rules.   He
    finds that the Appellant did not have a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with his children because, notwithstanding the  biological
    paternity, he was not, "able physically or practically  to  look  after
    them.  He cannot accommodate them and he does not have  a  relationship
    comparable with that of a 24 hour hands on parent".  In light  of  this
    the judge concluded that the Respondent's decision was proportionate.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The concise grounds assert that the judge has erred in his approach  to
    Appendix FM, having misdirected himself in material respects as to  the
    requirements of the Rules.  Permission to appeal was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 22 August 2017.  That judge notes that in
    addition to the contents of the grounds it was arguable that there were
    no clear findings in respect of relevant matters under Appendix FM,  in
    particular whether the Appellant had shown that he  would  continue  to
    have an active role in the upbringing of the children.




The hearing before me

 4. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to both  representatives  that
    there appeared to be material errors of law by  the  judge  in  respect
    both of Appendix FM and also Article 8 "at  large".   Ms  Ahmad  agreed
    with my initial assessment and accepted that there were material errors
    in the judge's decision.

 5. Both representatives agreed that this case should be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis not simply of errors  in  approach  to
    the Rules, but also a lack of findings on relevant  issues.   I  agreed
    with that course of action, having regard to the particular  issues  in
    this case, the lack of findings  and  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement.




Decision on error of law

 6. There are in my view a number of material errors of law in the  judge's
    decision and I now set them out.

 7. First, the inability of an applicant to satisfy the requirements of the
    partner route under Appendix FM does not necessarily lead to a  failure
    under the parent  route.  In  this  respect  the  judge  has  erred  in
    paragraph 13 when he certainly appears to conflate  the  two  different
    paths under the Appendix.

 8. Second, the judge has failed to have  regard  to  E-LTRPT.2.3  and  2.4
    under Appendix FM in respect of the parent  route.  If,  as  the  judge
    found, the Appellant was not the  partner  of  his  children's  mother,
    these two provisions fell to be assessed. The failure to do  so  is  an
    error.

 9. Third, in addressing the issue of  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship (which may to an extent incorporate  issues  of
    an active role in the children's upbringing), the judge has misdirected
    himself as to  the  correct  approach.   In  cases  involving  the  two
    biological parents of children where those parents  are  living  apart,
    the test cannot necessarily include a  requirement  that  accommodation
    and/or a relationship comparable with that  of  a  "24  hour  hands  on
    parent" be met.  The whole point about E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4 is that  one
    parent is not living with the children full-time.  The issue  under  E-
    LTRPT2.4(a)(ii) is whether the Appellant had direct access to the child
    or children and, under (b), whether he provided evidence  that  he  was
    taking and continued to take an active role in the child or  children's
    upbringing.  These issues have not been addressed by the judge.

10. Fourth, on the basis that the financial requirements under Appendix  FM
    had not been met, EX.1 then  became  relevant.   The  judge  failed  to
    address this issue.  If it had been addressed  the  outcome  would  not
    have been inevitably in the Respondent's favour. Aside from the judge's
    failure to address EX.1, and in  particular  the  correct  approach  to
    whether there was a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    the child or children, he had found that the children's best  interests
    lay  in  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst   that   is   not
    determinative of the reasonableness of them leaving  this  country,  it
    was clearly relevant. Overall, the failure to  approach  all  of  these
    issues correctly leaves me to conclude that the errors are material.



Disposal

11. As stated previously, I have decided to remit this appeal. I  have  not
    done so without hesitation. I  appreciate  that  cases  should  not  be
    remitted as a matter of routine. However, in this appeal  there  are  a
    number of fact-specific issues which were not addressed by  the  judge.
    There is an absence of findings on important matters. It is only  right
    that all relevant questions are dealt  with  fully  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material errors of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

         1) this appeal is  remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing,  with  no
            findings of fact preserved;

         2) there will need to be a careful assessment  of  the  Appellant's
            case within the context of the relevant Rules, in particular the
            parent route under Appendix FM and, if  these  requirements  are
            not met, in respect of Article 8 at large.




No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 23 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


