
`







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17103/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 15 January 2015                  |On: 29 January 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                               MR Talal Ahmad
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C G Talacchi, counsel (instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Obhi who dismissed his appeal against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 18 March  2013  refusing  his  application  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.


 2. Although the appellant provided a declaration from  a  third  party  in
    relation to access to  the  required  funds,  he  had  not  provided  a
    declaration from a legal representative that met the requirements.  Nor
    was the letter from NAFA Bank of Pakistan  acceptable  as  it  did  not
    match the requirements of the rules requiring each  letter  to  contain
    the information set out. The Bank did not state the  appellant's  name,
    the amount of funds available to him or any  contact  details  for  the
    third party. The bank statements from the third party's bank  were  not
    acceptable as bank statements are  only  acceptable  evidence  for  the
    appellant's personal funds.


 3. Nor did he  provide  any  of  the  documents  confirming  his  business
    activity and that he was training.


 4. He was thus not awarded points in accordance with Appendix  A  and  his
    application pursuant to paragraph 245DD of the  Immigration  Rules  was
    accordingly dismissed.


 5. Judge Obhi found that  the  appropriate  date  for  the  submission  of
    documents pursuant to paragraph 41-SD of the rules was the date of  the
    application.  The  appellant  claimed  that  when  he   submitted   his
    application he requested that it should not be considered until he  had
    provided further documents.  He  then  sought  to  provide  them  in  a
    piecemeal fashion, some as late as June 2014.  He claimed not  to  have
    received the respondent's decision dated 18 March 2013 and it was  only
    received once his  representatives  "chased  the  Home  Office"  for  a
    decision.


 6. In that regard Judge Obhi found that it seemed strange  that  important
    letters kept going  astray  on  the  one  hand,  whilst  the  appellant
    continued to receive other correspondence. Even if it was accepted that
    he did not receive the decision letter, that does not assist him as the
    rules require him to provide information at the  date  of  application.
    The documents were not there at the time  and  he  had  sent  a  letter
    stating that he would add additional documents.


 7. The appellant in fact accepted in his oral evidence that  some  of  the
    documents were sent not until two or three months after the application
    was submitted.  Mr Talacchi informed me that the bank letters  referred
    to  were  sent  on  7  June  2014.  The  declaration  from  the   legal
    representative was finally sent on 11 March 2014.


 8. Mr Talacchi dutifully informed me that the Upper Tribunal dismissed the
    appeals of Mr Rashid  Wasif  and  Mr  Muhammad  Waqas  (appeal  numbers
    IA/437001/2013 and IA/46681/2013). In fact the  appellant's  solicitors
    had requested that his,  Mr  Ahmad's  appeal,  be  grouped  with  their
    appeals. It was contended that all the appeals raise  the  same  common
    question of law and fact. All  the  appellants  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants. All had submitted evidence in
    support of their  application  before  the  decisions  were  taken  and
    accordingly questions of admissibility of  that  evidence  was  at  the
    forefront of the hearings.


 9. Mr Talacchi submitted that authorities such as Nasim and Others  (Raju;
    Reasons not to follow?) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 610  (IAC)  accepted  that
    evidence was capable of being submitted until the date of decision.


10. In addition, he relied on the second ground of appeal, namely that when
    considering  the  Article  8  claim,  the  Judge  did  not  follow  the
    established jurisprudence by making an explicit finding under the rules
    "or the appellant's free standing Article  8"  application.  The  Judge
    erred in law by not giving consideration to his Article 8 rights.


11. He pointed out that at paragraph 19 of the determination, Judge Obhi in
    fact noted that he was asked to allow the appeal under  Article  8.  He
    stated that the respondent had not issued removal directions.  However,
    the respondent had in fact issued s.47  removal  directions  under  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


12. When stating that the appellant could submit a fresh application if  he
    believed he met the requirements under the rules, Judge Obhi found [19]
    that the appellant had been in the UK for eight years. The purpose  for
    which he was given leave to enter was specific  and  time  limited.  He
    knew when he came to the UK that any private life he has built  up  was
    in that knowledge. He also applied the provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 (paragraph 117B) when considering the Human Rights  claim.  He
    noted that paragraph 117B(5) provided  that  little  weight  should  be
    placed on the private life established by a person at the time when his
    immigration status was precarious.


13. Mr Nath submitted that the Judge had  directed  himself  appropriately.
    There were no material errors of  law.  The  appellant  only  made  his
    application under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant route some ten days
    prior to the expiry of his Tier 1 (Post Study) Migrant leave.


    Assessment


14. The relevant rules in force at the date of the appellant's  application
    contained in Appendix A, Table 4, Part A, paragraph 41, provide that an
    applicant will only be considered to have had access to  funds  if  the
    specified documents in paragraph 41-SD are provided.


15. The specified documents in paragraph 41-SD are provided  to  show  that
    the applicant has permission to use the money to invest in the business
    in the UK. One of the specified documents to be provided was  a  letter
    from the financial institution holding the funds, confirming the amount
    of money available  to  the  applicant.  Each  letter  must  have  been
    produced within the three months immediately before  the  date  of  the
    application (paragraph 41-SD (a)(i)(4)). There is  no  suggestion  that
    the appellant  complied  with  that  requirement.   That  provision  is
    mandatory. In any event the respondent had decided the applications  at
    the time the bank letters were eventually submitted.


16. The appellant had been in the UK for a lengthy period of time.  He  has
    made successive applications for leave to remain since he  was  granted
    leave to enter on 30 March 2006 as a student. He made an application on
    15 February 2011 for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study)  Migrant,
    which was valid until 15 February 2013. He was  aware  that  the  rules
    provided strict conditions which had to be met.


17. The decision in Nasim,  supra,  does  not  assist  the  appellant.  The
    relevant immigration rules  and  the  associated  Appendices  had  been
    published in advance of the making of the appellant's application.  The
    prescribed documents in the correct form had to be  lodged  before  the
    expiry of  his  existing  leave  to  remain.  The  specific  conditions
    relating to the bank letter including the date by which it  had  to  be
    produced had not been complied with. Whether or not there may have been
    proper compliance within paragraph 41-SD after the date of decision did
    not avail the appellant. The appropriate evidence was simply not before
    the respondent at the relevant date.  Accordingly,  the  appellant  did
    not comply with the mandatory requirements under the rules.


18. It is also contended that the Judge wrongly found that  the  respondent
    had not issued removal directions. His decision regarding Article 8 was
    asserted to be flawed as he did not follow established jurisprudence by
    making an explicit finding under the  rules  or  the  appellant's  free
    standing Article 8 claim.


19. In that regard, the Judge in fact noted that  the  appellant  had  been
    here for eight years. He had known that his leave to enter was specific
    and time limited. Any  private  life  that  he  built  up  was  in  the
    knowledge that it was limited.


20. Judge Obhi properly applied section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, concluding
    that little weight should be placed on private life established by  the
    appellant at a time when his immigration status was precarious.


21. I have had regard to paragraph 8 of the appellant's  witness  statement
    before the First-tier Tribunal. His Article 8 claim was set out in  two
    short sentences: He had been resident here  for  eight  years.  He  had
    abided by all laws. Throughout his stay, he has adapted and  integrated
    into the British society gradually, and made  strong  connections  with
    the life and community here.


22. However, apart from those assertions, no evidence was adduced regarding
    any relationship, unique or otherwise, that he formed during the course
    of his stay in the UK. He has attained a Bachelors and  Masters  degree
    whilst here.


23. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier tribunal were  generic.  It
    is simply asserted that his removal from the UK  as  a  result  of  the
    decision would be "incompatible under ECHR." In a letter  sent  to  the
    Tribunal in April  2014,  it  was  submitted  that  the  appellant  had
    established private life here as he has been living here since 2006 and
    has an established business.  However,  no  further  evidence  in  that
    regard was produced.


24. Judge Obhi did consider the evidence produced as to private life. Apart
    from the appellant having been here and having obtained degrees,  there
    was no evidence of any business  activity.  He  stated  that  this  was
    because he was waiting for a decision from the respondent regarding his
    application [12]. The only submissions made on  his  behalf  [15]  were
    that he had been in the UK for eight years and  had  attained  academic
    qualifications which made him a valuable member of society. The  public
    interest was thus outweighed by the right to a private life.


25. In the circumstances, after taking into  account  the  public  interest
    provisions under s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, he dismissed the appeal.


26. Having regard to the available evidence before him,  there  is  nothing
    irrational in Judge Obhi's finding that the legitimate  aim  of  proper
    immigration control outweighed the right of the  appellant  to  respect
    for his private life in the UK.


    Notice of Decision


    The making of the decision by the First-tier tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall
    accordingly stand.


    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Dated 27/1/2015


    Judge C R Mailer


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

