

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17567/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2014                               |On 25 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                            ASHANK PRADEEP BIDRI
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
 For the Appellant:        Mr M Ilahi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:        Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  11  January  1987.  He
      appeals with the permission  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ruth  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against a decision of the  respondent,  made  on  3  May  2013,
      refusing to vary his leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
      Migrant and to remove him under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006.  The  appellant's  application  was  refused
      solely because the advertising and marketing material he enclosed with
      his application did not state his name. It did not therefore meet  the
      requirements  of  paragraph  41-SD(c)(iii)  of  Appendix  A   of   the
      Immigration Rules, HC395. This provision stated as follows:
         "41-SD. The specified documents in Table 4 and paragraph 41 are as
         follows:

         ...

         (c) If the applicant is applying under the provisions in (d) in
         Table 4, he must provide:

         ...
         (iii) one or more of the following specified documents:

         (1) Advertising or marketing material, including printouts of
         online advertising, that has been published locally or nationally,
         showing the applicant's name (and the name of the business if
         applicable) together with the business activity,"


   2.   It is clear that the advertising materials are 'specified documents'
      for the purposes of the rules. The grounds of appeal lodged on  behalf
      of the appellant acknowledged that the advertising  material  did  not
      state the appellant's name but argued this was an error which, if  the
      respondent had queried, could have been easily remedied.


   3.   At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal submissions were  made  to
      the effect that the respondent should have contacted the appellant and
      operated the evidential flexibility policy now contained in  paragraph
      245AA of the rules. It was also argued that the decision to remove the
      appellant would interfere with the private life he had established  in
      the UK. The respondent argued that paragraph 245AA did not assist  the
      appellant because, had the appellant been contacted in  this  way,  he
      would have had to change his advertisement.


   4.   Judge Ruth found the rules were  not  met  because  the  advertising
      material did not state the appellant's name. He continued:


         "28. The question becomes whether the appellant  should  have  been
         contacted by the respondent as set out in paragraph  245AA  of  the
         immigration rules.  These  paragraphs  incorporate  the  evidential
         flexibility policy referred to in Rodriguez into the rules.


         29. In  my  view,  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  submit  an
         advertisement  containing  his  name  is  a  failure  to  submit  a
         specified document. It is not the submission of a document  in  the
         wrong format (such as a letter not on letterhead paper) since  even
         if the respondent had contacted  the  appellant  and  requested  an
         advertisement with his name on its face, the  appellant  would  not
         have been in a position to submit  such  an  advertisement  because
         there was no such advertisement at that time. Such an advertisement
         now exists because the appellant has changed his position  and  re-
         advertised.


         30. The  result  is  that  although  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
         entrepreneur, has set up a genuine business, invested funds and  is
         making an economic contribution to the United Kingdom,  his  appeal
         must fail under the immigration rules."


   5.    The judge went on to find removing the appellant  would  not  be  a
      breach of article 8. He relied on Nasim and others (Article 8)  [2014]
      UKUT 00024 (IAC).


   6.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued the  appellant  fell
      within paragraph 245AA(b)(ii)  of  the  rules.  In  other  words,  the
      grounds argued the advertising material was a document  in  the  wrong
      format. The judge had misdirected himself in finding the appellant had
      failed to submit a specified  document  as  opposed  to  submitting  a
      document in the wrong format.  The  minor  omission  could  have  been
      corrected. The grounds also challenged the judge's assessment  of  the
      article 8 ground.


   7.   In granting permission to appeal, Designated Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal French noted the grounds argued the appellant had submitted a
      specified document which contained  an  omission  rather  than  having
      failed to submit a specified document. He went on to say:


         "The point may be arguable and potentially  relevant,  particularly
         as paragraph 245AA(d) refers to submission of a specified  document
         which does not contain all the specified information; this  implies
         that an incomplete document  may  nevertheless  be  regarded  as  a
         'specified document'. That may have brought into play  whether  the
         missing information was readily ascertainable from other  documents
         and whether the respondent should  have  exercised  her  discretion
         under paragraph 245AA."


   8.   The respondent has submitted a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.
      This states the judge directed himself correctly. Discretion had  been
      exercised correctly because, even if the respondent had contacted  the
      appellant, the appellant would not  have  been  able  to  provide  the
      required information. The fact the advertising material did not  state
      the appellant's name was not a fact which could be changed.


   9.   I would observe at this point that  there  is  no  evidence  in  the
      reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the   respondent   did   exercise
      discretion. The letter containing the reasons  for  refusal  makes  no
      reference at all to paragraph 245AA or evidential flexibility.  Having
      noted the omission  of  the  appellant's  name  from  the  advertising
      material, the letter moves straight to rejection of the application.


  10.  Mr  Ilahi  confirmed  the   issue   revolved   around   the   correct
      interpretation of paragraph 245AA. No further reliance was  placed  on
      the so-called evidential flexibility policy. This  would  seem  to  be
      right in view of the guidance provided by the  Presidential  panel  in
      Durrani (Entrepreneurs: bank letters; evidential  flexibility)  [2014]
      UKUT 00295 (IAC) that, absent evidence to the contrary, the policy has
      not been shown to have survived the introduction  of  paragraph  245AA
      into the rules on 6 September 2012,  which  was  before  the  date  of
      decision in this case.


  11. Mr Ilahi made three concise submissions: (1) it was incorrect for  the
      respondent to argue that paragraph 245AA does not  apply  because  the
      required document was not already in existence. The  rule  encompasses
      situations in which a document is  in  the  wrong  format  so  plainly
      replacement documents which were  not  already  in  existence  can  be
      produced  in  response  to  a  request  by  the  respondent.  (2)  The
      respondent should have exercised discretion  to  request  the  missing
      information  and  the  judge  erred  by  not  recognising  that.   (3)
      Information could readily be obtained from other documents to show the
      appellant was the sole director of the company and his mistake  was  a
      small one. Given the judge's finding that the appellant is  a  genuine
      entrepreneur, the decision was "disproportionate".


  12. Mr Melvin argued there was no material  error  in  the  decision.  The
      requirement was to meet the rules in their entirety.  The  application
      was bound to fail. He relied on SSHD v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2  in
      which the Court of Appeal held that the 'PBS Process Instruction'  did
      not require case  workers  to  speculate  and  there  must  have  been
      sufficient reason to believe  that  any  evidence  requested  existed.
      However, he accepted the judge erred by failing to find the section 47
      removal decision was not in accordance with  the  law  (see  generally
      Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section   47   removal   decisions:   Tribunal
      Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC)). Of course, that error  does  not
      have any impact on the separate consideration of the refusal  to  vary
      leave.


  13. Paragraph 245AA states as follows:

         245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

         (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in  Part  6A  state
         that specified documents must be provided,  the  UK  Border  Agency
         will only consider documents that  have  been  submitted  with  the
         application, and will only consider documents submitted  after  the
         application  where  they   are   submitted   in   accordance   with
         subparagraph (b).

         (b) If the applicant has submitted:

         (i) A sequence of documents  and  some  of  the  documents  in  the
         sequence have been omitted (for example, if one bank statement from
         a series is missing);

         (ii) A document in the wrong format; or

         (iii) A document that is a copy and not an original  document,  the
         UK Border Agency may contact the applicant or his representative in
         writing, and request the correct documents. The requested documents
         must be received by the UK Border Agency at the  address  specified
         in the request within 7 working days of the date of the request.

         (c) The UK  Border  Agency  will  not  request  documents  where  a
         specified document has not been submitted (for example  an  English
         language certificate is missing), or where  the  UK  Border  Agency
         does not anticipate that addressing the omission or error  referred
         to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because the application
         will be refused for other reasons.

         (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

         (i) in the wrong format, or

         (ii) that is a copy and not an original document,

         the application may be  granted  exceptionally,  providing  the  UK
         Border Agency is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
         and the applicant meets all the other requirements. The  UK  Border
         Agency  reserves  the  right  to  request  the  specified  original
         documents in the correct format in all cases where (b) applies, and
         to refuse applications if these documents are not provided  as  set
         out in (b).

  14. As said, the advertising material is a specified  document.  Does  the
      fact it omitted to mention the appellant by name mean it  was  in  the
      wrong format, as the appellant argues? The answer is found in  another
      recent decision of the same Presidential  panel:  Akhter  and  another
      (paragraph 245AA: wrong format) [2014] UKUT 00297 (IAC). In that case,
      the would-be entrepreneurs had produced bank  letters  which  did  not
      contain all the required information. The  Upper  Tribunal  held  that
      paragraph 245AA could not avail them because the bank letters were not
      documents in the wrong format (see paragraph 18). The same applies  in
      this appeal. Properly understood, the advertising material  which  the
      appellant submitted was not in the wrong format.  None  of  the  three
      possibilities set out in subparagraph 245AA(b) apply.


  15. However, the appellant's contention is that the respondent  failed  to
      exercise discretion  under  subparagraph  (c).  This  argument  cannot
      succeed. Both subparagraphs (c) and (d) are linked expressly by  their
      language to the preceding paragraph. As seen from the Akhter case,  if
      subparagraph (b) does not apply, the  claim  falls  outside  paragraph
      245AA and subparagraphs (c) and (d) are not engaged. Put another  way,
      having failed to show the advertising material was not  in  the  wrong
      format, the issue of whether addressing  the  issue  would  have  been
      pointless does not arise.


  16. It follows I find no error in Judge Ruth's determination  which  could
      be classed as material. He was right to say the  appellant  failed  to
      submit a document which was a specified  document.  He  was  right  to
      distinguish the omission from a document in the wrong format.  He  did
      not need to go further and the distinction flagged  up  in  the  order
      granting permission did not arise. The  respondent  did  not  have  to
      exercise discretion.


  17. That deals with  Mr  Ilahi's  first  two  submissions.  If  his  third
      submission was intended to argue  the  judge  erred  in  reaching  the
      decision he reached on proportionality, then this is bound to fail  as
      well. The fact the  judge  recognised  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
      entrepreneur and that he had failed to meet  the  rules  by  a  narrow
      margin did not mean he had to find the decision  disproportionate.  He
      correctly applied Nasim. This is a "fuzzy  penumbra"  case.  Mr  Ilahi
      came very close to suggesting the judge  ought  to  have  allowed  the
      appeal under article 8 because the appellant failed under the rules as
      a result of a near-miss. Following Patel and  others  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, there  is  no  room  for
      "near-miss" arguments.


  18. There is no material error in  the  judge's  approach  to  the  rules,
      issues of evidential flexibility or article 8. His decision  on  these
      matters stand. The judge erred by failing  to  find  the  decision  to
      remove was not in accordance with the  law  and  a  decision  to  that
      effect is substituted.


DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law in his decision on the appeal against the refusal to vary leave and
    his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

    The Judge should have found the decision to remove  the  appellant  was
    not in accordance with the  law  and  a  decision  to  that  effect  is
    substituted.

     No anonymity direction made.

                                    Signed                Date 21 July 2014




                               Neil Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal




    Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it to the extent the decision to remove was not in  accordance
    with the law, I have considered whether to make a fee award  (rule  23A
    (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007).


    I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards
    in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


    I make no fee award.


    Reasons:      The  appeal  has  been  dismissed  with  respect  to  the
         substantive decision taken under the Immigration Rules and also  on
         human rights grounds.

                               Signed                 Date 21 July 2014




                               Neil Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal






