
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17077/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th July 2016                             |On 28th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    s s u
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  2006.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  7th  April  2015
    refusing to grant her further leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights  grounds.   The  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morris  on  13th  October
    2015.  The appeal was dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29th
    October 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth  on  17th  May
    2016.  The  permission  states  that  the  judge  has  not  set  out  a
    sufficient analysis relating to her findings that the  Appellant  could
    not fulfil the terms of the Immigration Rules.  What she did was  refer
    to the reasons for refusal letter at paragraph 14 of her  decision  and
    she stated that she had considered the reasons and  other  matters  set
    out in the remainder  of  the  refusal,  appertaining  to  the  Refugee
    Convention 1950 generally,  and  the  question  of  proportionality  in
    particular.    The   permission   states   that   the   reference    to
    proportionality in particular, attaches excessive weight to one  factor
    in  her  consideration  of  whether  the   Rules   are   fulfilled   in
    contradistinction to the other factors put forward in  the  case.   The
    permission also states that in  analysing  whether  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8, the judge has not adequately considered the policy
    and rationale reflected in  the  provisions  of  Section  117,  in  the
    context of a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child in circumstances where it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  The Appellant has been in the United
    Kingdom for more than seven years.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent which states that  with
    regard to the issue of reasonableness, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not simply defer to the Respondent's basis for refusal but  arrived
    at the same conclusions as the  Respondent,  endorsing  the  reasoning,
    which is in itself not an error.  In  addition  she  also  supplemented
    additional reasons, which were strong.  The response states that  ample
    reasons are given in the decision for finding that the decision of  the
    Respondent is proportionate and that the judge correctly relied on  the
    case of EV Philippines and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

 4. The Appellant did not appear for the hearing of this appeal  either  in
    person or  by  representative.   My  clerk  tried  to  telephone  Kalam
    Solicitors in London,  the  Appellant's  representatives,  but  no  one
    answered the phone.  I discussed this with the Presenting  Officer  and
    it was decided to go ahead with submissions from the Presenting Officer
    and consider the Appellant's claim based on these submissions  and  the
    evidence on file.  No additional evidence  has  been  supplied  by  the
    Appellant since the date of the First-tier hearing.

 5. The Appellant is a qualifying child.

 6. The Presenting Officer made her submissions  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response and submitting that strong reasons are required in a case like
    this when both of the Appellant's parents are  in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.   She  submitted  that  the  reasons  in  this   claim   are
    sufficiently strong  and  I  was  referred  to  the  said  case  of  EV
    Philippines and also the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge not only made reference
    to the Respondent's findings in the refusal letter but also put in  her
    own reasons for refusing the appeal.  I was referred in  particular  to
    paragraph 14 of the decision  "Suffice  it  to  say  that  for  similar
    reasons as those set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter  and  also
    having regard to the  reasons  and  other  matters  set  out  below  in
    relation to my findings regarding the 1950 Convention generally and the
    question of proportionality in particular I have found that it would be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to leave the UK".  I was referred to
    the other reasons and the proportionality assessment.  At paragraph  30
    of the decision the judge relies on the said case of EV Philippines  in
    particular at paragraph 35 and the Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    the judge has considered everything before her and has  put  everything
    into her decision.  She submitted that when all the material which  was
    before the judge is considered the  judge's  reasoning  might  well  be
    identical to that in the refusal letter and the judge was  entitled  to
    come to the same conclusion as the Respondent in  her  refusal  letter.
    She submitted that the judge did everything she required  to  do.   Her
    decision is well reasoned and there is no error of law therein.

 8. I was referred to paragraph 30 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    refers to the Appellant's and her family's private  life  being  mainly
    with other members of the Bengali community in the United Kingdom.  The
    judge found that the Appellant understands Bengali and is  very  young.
    Because of this and because of her family mix within the United Kingdom
    the change on her return to Bangladesh, will not be drastic.

 9. I was referred to paragraphs 58 to 60 of the said case of  EV  and  the
    best interests of children.  This states that if neither parent has the
    right to remain in the United  Kingdom  then  that  is  the  background
    against which  the  child's  assessment  is  conducted.   The  ultimate
    question will be, is it reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the
    parent with  no  right  to  remain  to  the  country  of  origin?   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that in this case none of the family is  a
    British citizen and the Appellant's parents and sibling have  no  right
    to be in the United Kingdom.  I was then referred to  paragraph  37  of
    the said case of EV which refers to the strong weight to  be  given  to
    the need to maintain immigration control in  pursuit  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country and she submitted that that is the case  here.
    The Appellant's family have no right to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    The immigration history of her parents is relevant.  She submitted that
    as in the case of EV  Philippines  the  need  for  immigration  control
    outweighs the best interests of the children.  At paragraph 35 there is
    a list of matters which have to be considered when the  best  interests
    of children are decided and this paragraph must indicate that in a case
    like this, the case of EV should be followed.

10. I was then referred to the said case of Zoumbas at paragraph  24  which
    clearly states that it is in  a  child's  best  interests  to  be  with
    his/her parents and if the parents are not British citizens  the  child
    has no right to future free education  and  healthcare  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  has  given  proper
    reasons for her findings, has referred to the relevant case law and has
    made no material error of law in her decision.

12. I have carefully  considered  the  terms  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.  I find that there is  no  merit  in  the  ground  of
    application which states that  the  judge  has  merely  reiterated  the
    reasons given in the refusal letter when making the decision on whether
    it would be reasonable for the Appellant to be expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge has referred to the refusal letter  but  has
    also given many  other  reasons  for  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable and has referred to the relevant case law.

13. With regard to the proportionality issue, again this has been  properly
    considered by the judge.  The judge knows how long  the  Appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom and knows the history of this  family.   The
    judge refers to the duty  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
    children in the United Kingdom in accordance with  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  has  weighed  this
    against the Respondent's interests in maintaining immigration  control.
    She has considered the Appellant's protected rights under Article 8 but
    has also examined the immigration status  of  her  wider  family.   The
    judge at paragraph 20 states that it is difficult to  see  how,  absent
    any compelling and/or exceptional circumstances the family will not  be
    removed from the United Kingdom.  The judge finds that the Appellant is
    not responsible for her family's unsatisfactory immigration status, but
    her best interests are to remain with her parents.  The judge then sets
    out the reasons why she finds there to be no compelling  reasons  which
    take the Appellant out of the ambit of the Immigration Rules per se.

14. The relevant case law has been taken into account by the judge and when
    the terms of the said cases of EV Philippines  and  Zoumbas  have  been
    considered and relied on it is clear that there are no material  errors
    in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  The judge has found  that
    to remove the Appellant to Bangladesh is a proportionate  interference,
    given that she would not be removed without her parents and sister  and
    so the family would all relocate as a family unit.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision  promulgated  on
29th October 2015 and  the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  must
stand.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 28th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

