
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 17 November 2016                           |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mohammed saleh
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Shah, Counsel, instructed by Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant him leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on long residence grounds pursuant to Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended), with  reference  to
    paragraph S-LTR 2.2, on the basis that the claimant failed to  disclose
    an alias used by him in previous applications.

 2. The suitability reasoning in the refusal letter is as follows:

         "In refusing your application consideration has been given to  your
         private life under Article 8 which from 9  July  2012  falls  under
         paragraph 276ADE(i) of the Rules. The  requirements  of  the  Rules
         state that the applicant at the date of application -

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
         SLTR.1.2 - SLTR.2.3  and  SLTR3.1  in  Appendix  FM.  ...   SLTR2.2
         whether or not, to the applicant's knowledge:

             (a)  false information, representations or documents have been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application): or
             (b)  there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application as decided.

         You have not disclosed an alias under  which  you  have  previously
         claimed asylum in the UK.  As such it is considered that  you  have
         failed to disclose material facts in relation to  your  application
         and it is not accepted  that  you  can  meet  the  requirements  of
         SLTR2.2.  Consequently,  you  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph    276ADE(1)(i)    of     the     Immigration     Rules."
         [Emphasis added]

 3. The 'alias' relied upon by the Secretary of State  was  Mohammed  Randa
    Miah Saleh, as opposed to Mohammed Saleh. That is a shorter form of the
    same name.  I am told by  Mr  Tufan  that  a  different  birthdate  was
    recorded in the application using that longer version of the claimant's
    name.

 4. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Home Office Presenting  Officer
    made no submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, relying on the
    refusal letter. Furthermore, it does not appear that the  Secretary  of
    State produced the two previous determinations relied upon.  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Taylor House hearing centre) allowed the appeal  because
    the Judge was satisfied that the claimant had been living in the United
    Kingdom continuously since January 1995.  He made no express finding on
    the alias issue or whether it was relevant to suitability  under  S-LTR
    2.2.

 5. The Secretary of  State  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,
    arguing that the Tribunal  had  made  no  findings  on  the  S-LTR  2.2
    suitability element in the refusal letter. That is  correct.   However,
    the longer version of Mr Saleh's name  is  not,  on  the  face  of  it,
    properly capable of description as an alias.  The  Secretary  of  State
    does not dispute that in  the  two  previous  decisions,  there  was  a
    finding of fact that the claimant had been in the  United  Kingdom  for
    what was then 18 years and is now well over  20  years.  Mr  Tufan  was
    unable to explain to me  how  the  use  of  a  longer  version  of  the
    claimant's name, even with a different birth date, was material to  the
    present application.

 6. If, which I do not accept, there is any error of law in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision it is not  a  material  error  and  I  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.



Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson       Date:        2 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

