
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17487/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th March 2015                     |On 28th May 2015                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             mr lyes baba-aissa
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 2nd August 1974.  On 26th
    January 2014 the Appellant's  instructing  solicitors  applied  on  his
    behalf for a permanent residence card as a confirmation of a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had been  issued  on  22nd
    April 2002 with a residence card on the basis that he  was  the  family
    member of an EEA national, an  Irish  national  named  Alison  Margaret
    Sewell who was exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    worker.  Making the further application on 26th January 2014 in support
    of the application the Appellant submitted a decree absolute dated 25th
    May 2011 confirming his divorce from Alison  Margaret  Sewell  on  26th
    January 2011.

 2. The Appellant's application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 7th April 2014.  The Secretary of  State  noted
    that in order to qualify for  retained  right  of  residence  following
    divorce  from  an  EEA  national  the  Appellant  needed  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  The Appellant needed to provide:-

       . Evidence that the Appellant's EEA former spouse was exercising free
         movement rights in the United Kingdom at the time of divorce.

       . Evidence that the Appellant's marriage  had  lasted  for  at  least
         three years and that he and his former spouse resided in the United
         Kingdom for at least one year during their marriage.

       . Evidence that the Appellant  was  currently  in  employment,  self-
         employment or economically self-sufficient as if  he  were  an  EEA
         national himself.

 3. In addition as the Appellant's application was for permanent  residence
    it was necessary  for  him  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  resided  in
    accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous  five  year  period,
    which would mean that  his  EEA  national  former  spouse  continuously
    exercised free movement rights up to the point of divorce and  that  he
    had been employed, self-employed or self-sufficient since his  divorce.
    In order to meet the requirement of  Regulation  15(1)(f)  collectively
    that evidence must cover a continuous five year period.

 4. Refusing the application the Secretary of State noted in the Notice  of
    Refusal that the Appellant had failed to provide the evidence  required
    to meet Regulation 10(5) and/or 10(6) and therefore  had  not  retained
    the right of residence following divorce or he had  resided  under  the
    Regulations  for  five  continuous  years  to  qualify  for   permanent
    residence.

 5. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Miller sitting at Taylor House on 13th November 2014.  In
    a determination promulgated on 1st December 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was allowed.

 6. On 4th December 2014 the Secretary of State submitted Grounds of Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, those grounds noted that  at  the  time  of  the
    Appellant's application he was serving a prison sentence  and  as  such
    could not be classed as exercising treaty  rights.   The  Secretary  of
    State relied on the authority of Onuekwere v The Secretary of State for
    the Home Department (C-378/12); [2014] WLR (D) 7 being  authority  that
    periods of imprisonment cannot be taken into account for the purpose of
    calculating residence  and  that  imprisonment  in  addition  to  being
    considered  non-legal  residence  would  also   break   continuity   of
    residence.  The Secretary of State consequently submitted that a person
    cannot use residence before and during imprisonment  to  count  towards
    qualifying  periods  of  residence  and  any  qualifying  period  would
    effectively restart at the point they were  released  from  prison  and
    become a qualified person again.

 7.  On  22nd  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes   granted
    permission to appeal.  On 19th March 2015 submissions  in  response  to
    the grounds for permission to appeal pursuant to Rule 24 were served by
    the solicitors on behalf of the Appellant.  Those submissions which run
    to fourteen paragraphs are drafted by Counsel.  It  is  on  that  basis
    that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  However, for the purpose
    of continuity throughout the legal process Mr Baba-Aissa is referred to
    herein as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as  the  Respondent.
    The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel  Mr  Lam.   Mr  Lam  is
    familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and is the author of the Rule 24 reply.  The Secretary of State appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submission/Discussion

 8. Mr Lam starts by relying on his Rule 24 response pointing out that  the
    ground for permission to appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
    address the narrow ground of namely whether the  period  the  Appellant
    was in prison can or cannot be taken into account for  the  purpose  of
    calculating residence.  He further points out (and this is  clear  from
    the determination) that  the  issue  that  is  now  raised  before  the
    Tribunal was not raised at all at the hearing and it is the  submission
    of Mr Lam that the grounds for permission to appeal seek to solely rely
    on the refusal letter in that the Appellant was in prison at  the  time
    of application and as a result it is  contended  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant was not able to exercise any freedom  movement
    right under  Regulation  10(6).   He  submits  that  that  argument  is
    misconceived.

 9. At paragraph 6 to 9 he sets out both the marital history and the  issue
    of a residence card to the Appellant.  Mr Lam points out that a  First-
    tier Tribunal had found that the Appellant had a retained  right  under
    Regulation 10(5) and hence he met the requirement for a permanent right
    of residence under Regulation 15(1)(f)  namely  as  a  person  who  had
    resided in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous
    period of five years and was, at the  end  of  that  period,  a  family
    member who had retained the right of residence.  He points out that the
    Appellant had been married to his EEA wife for  almost  ten  years  and
    that he was not sentenced until 14th June 2013 when he received  a  six
    month prison sentence and that this was therefore more than two  and  a
    half years since he was a qualified person under Regulation 10(5).

10. He notes that the main argument of the ground for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was  that  the  Appellant  was  not  economically
    active as he was sentenced to six months in  prison  in  June  2013  as
    required by Regulation 10(6).   He  submits  that  following  HS  (EEA:
    revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT  00165  (IAC)  it  is
    clear that on divorce a person ceases to be a family member  by  reason
    of marriage but that does not cause the right of residence to cease  as
    Regulation 10(5)(a) explains.  He further contends as Section 15(2)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  makes  clear
    the right of permanent residence under this Regulation  shall  be  lost
    only through absence from the UK for a period exceeding two consecutive
    years and that this is not applicable to the Appellant,  therefore  the
    First-tier Tribunal has not made an error of law.

11. Mr Jarvis acknowledges that in  Amos  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  552  different
    procedures were followed and he further acknowledges that no  questions
    were asked in this case and that the judge had therefore  assumed  that
    nothing in the witness statement was in dispute.  All he can submit  is
    that Regulation 10(5) does differ from  Regulation  15(1).   The  judge
    under Regulation 15 has to look at the period in question but what  the
    judge has not said is what that period was and he speculates that as we
    do not know it is possible that that period could include the period of
    imprisonment which would of course stop the clock running.   Mr  Jarvis
    considers HS is supportive to the Secretary of State's claim bearing in
    mind that the references therein are to paragraph 10(5) rather than  to
    Regulation 15.   He  submits  that  paragraph  10(5)  only  relates  to
    retained rights of residence not permanent ones and that for  permanent
    rights it is necessary to show residency lawfully within the scheme  of
    the Regulations.  He submits that all the judge has done is look at the
    date the marriage ended but that it is necessary for the judge to  have
    gone on to explain which five year period he is looking at and  he  has
    not done so and that consequently there is a material error of law.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.





Findings on Material Error of Law

14. It is clear that the Secretary of State's basis of  appeal  stems  from
    the reference that as the Appellant could not meet the  requirement  of
    Regulation 10(6) at the time of application due to his prison  sentence
    he cannot succeed.  This issue does not get aired  at  all  before  the
    judge on appeal.  The Appellant gave evidence and  gave  due  and  full
    consideration to the authority in HS (sometimes referred to as  Samsam)
    (EEA: revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011]  UKUT  00165  (IAC).
    The representative of the Home Office relied on  the  contents  of  the
    refusal letter and accepted that the Appellant  and  his  EEA  national
    wife were divorced.  There was no evidence as to whether the  Appellant
    was exercising treaty rights before the court.

15. The judge noted the evidence and on due consideration of that  evidence
    accepted that his ex-wife was employed by Virgin and accepted  evidence
    that the Appellant remained in employment in the UK.  The  judge  found
    the Appellant's evidence  to  be  credible  and  that  given  that  the
    Appellant's ex-wife was  accepted  by  the  Respondent  as  working  in
    September 2002 there was no reason to suppose she was  not  working  at
    the date of divorce.  Consequently following that analysis  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied the Appellant met the requirement  of
    Regulation 10(5) and that he met the requirement for a permanent  right
    of residence under Regulation 15(1)(f).

16. It is fair to say that in a throwaway line often  used  on  appeal  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer indicated that she relied on the  Notice
    of Refusal.  It is therefore incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal  to
    address all issues albeit that it  is  clear  that  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's imprisonment was not a matter that was specifically  raised
    on appeal.  It is on that basis alone that the Secretary of State seeks
    to find a material error of law.

17. The failure of the judge to have addressed the issue is an error.   The
    question arises as to whether it is material.  It  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant's application form stated that he was  in  prison  from  14th
    June 2013 for six months.

18. Regulation 10(5) and (6) of the EEA Regulations  require  an  applicant
    who has divorced to satisfy 10(5)(a)-(d).  Regulation 10(5)(c) requires
    an applicant to satisfy Regulation 10(6).  Regulation 10(6) imposes two
    conditions either one of which should be met: the 10(6)(a)  requirement
    is the non-EEA national would be a worker,  self-employed  or  a  self-
    sufficient person if we were an EEA national.  That is not  challenged.
    The alternative requirement is 10(6)(b) that the person is  the  family
    member of a person within paragraph (a).

19. I can do no better than quote directly from paragraph 40 of HS:-

         "If construed literally regulation 10(6) may give rise to problems.
         On divorce, a person ceases to be a  family  member  by  reason  of
         marriage. That does not cause  the  right  of  residence  to  cease
         however as regulation 10(5)(a) makes plain. Family members  with  a
         retained right of residence in regulation 10 and  regulation  14(3)
         must be a term of art and mean a person who comes within regulation
         10(2) to (5). Further a non EEA family member does not have  to  be
         economically active during  the  marriage  and  nor  is  there  any
         indication in Article 13 of the Directive  that  they  have  to  be
         economically active on their own  account  on  termination  of  the
         marriage".

20. When applying this alongside the factual matrix of this case  I  am  of
    the view that the  Appellant  would  have  considerable  difficulty  in
    meeting the requirement of the Regulations had imprisonment taken place
    during the period of continuity.  The fact  remains  however  that  the
    period of imprisonment took place  some  considerable  time  thereafter
    namely two and a half years and that the facts are not in dispute  that
    he had five years continuous residence prior to 2011.   Consequently  I
    am satisfied that the finding made by the judge was the  one  that  was
    open to him as a matter of fact and that there is nothing to  stop  the
    clock from running.  I am satisfied looking at the  factual  matrix  of
    the case that the decision in Onuekwere is  completely  different.   In
    those circumstances the conclusion has to be whilst the judge erred  in
    law in not  giving  due  consideration  in  his  determination  to  the
    position relating to the fact that at time of application the Appellant
    was in prison that error is not material as the outcome of  the  appeal
    would  be  the  same.   For  all  the  above  reasons   therefore   the
    determination discloses no material error of law and the appeal of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
