
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/17713/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 20 October 2017                 |On: 27 October 2017                  |
|                                    |                                     |
|                                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            MOSHOOD ABIOLA AGORO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr S Walker of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Corben, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  3  April  1986.  He
      appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 28 April 2015 to
      refuse to grant him further leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
      under Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration  rules  and
      pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



   2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision
      dated 15 January 2016.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Doyle in a decision dated 14 August 2017, stating  that
      it is arguable that the Judge fell into  error  by  not  granting  the
      appellant an adjournment to establish his  paternity  not  having  had
      fair notice that paternity would be an issue at the hearing. The issue
      of paternity was not raised by the respondent in  her  refusal  notice
      but by the Judge at the hearing and which became determinative of  the
      appeal. It is arguably erroneous that the appellant's  application  to
      adjourn to allow further time to prepare led to unfairness.



   3. It was argued on behalf  of  the  appellant  by  Mr  Walker  that  the
      respondent did not challenge paternity of the appellant but it was the
      Judge who raised it for the first time at the hearing. He said that at
      the hearing, when he made an application for an adjournment to address
      this issue, the Judge refused his application. He submitted  that  the
      Judge fell into material error by only considering the  oral  evidence
      in determining whether the appellant was the biological father of  the
      children.



   4. Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent stated that  he  relies  on  the
      Rule 24 submission but accepted that an adjournment would  have  given
      the appellant an opportunity to prove parentage.



5. I agree with the submissions of Mr Walker that the Judge who  raised  the
   issue of paternity for the first time at the hearing should have  granted
   an adjournment to the appellant for him to address the issue of paternity
   given that the Judge pounced the  issue  of  paternity  at  the  hearing.
   Procedural fairness dictated that the appellant should have been given an
   opportunity to produce a DNA report to prove paternity.



6. I have my reservations that  such  a  report  will  be  produced  at  the
   hearing because the appellant who has had sufficient time to commission a
   DNA report has not done so. If the appellant was confident  that  he  was
   the biological  father  and  his  continued  residence  in  this  country
   dependent on commissioning such a report, he would have done so.  It  was
   said on his behalf that a DNA report requires funds and  he  was  waiting
   for the decision on the error of law hearing before he  commissioned  the
   DNA report.



7. I do not understand this argument  because  the  appellant  would  always
   have to spend the money and produce a DNA report to prove paternity given
   the adverse credibility findings by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
   the appellant was not the biological father of  the  children.  Only  DNA
   evidence showing paternity, would prove otherwise.



8. Be that as it may, Justice must not only be done but it must also  appear
   to be done. The upshot is that there is a material error of  law  in  the
   decision of the Judge in respect of procedural  fairness  by  failing  to
   grant an adjournment for the appellant to produce a DNA report  to  prove
   paternity.



9. I was informed by Mr Walker  that  a  DNA  report  will  be  commissioned
   before  the  fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In   the
   circumstances, I have no other alternative but to remit  this  appeal  to
   the First--tier Tribunal to consider the DNA report, if produced.



10. In the event that no DNA report is produced at the fresh hearing  before
   the First-tier Tribunal confirming that the appellant is  the  biological
   father of the two children,  all  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Fletcher Hill will be maintained.  Judge  Fletcher  Hill's
   decision was without arguable error on the evidence before him, which did
   not include  the  DNA  report,  that  the  appellant  could  not  be  the
   biological father of the children. The decision on  the  evidence  before
   the Judge, is sound, cannot be faulted and free of material error.



11. For the avoidance of any doubt, if no DNA  report  is  produced  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal, confirming the appellant's biological  parentage  to
   the children upon whom he is relying for further leave to remain,  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher Hill's findings of fact must be upheld.



DECISION


Appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms                                  S                                  Chana
            Dated this 25th day of October 2017









