
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/17522/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 September 2016                     |On 05 October 2016            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                         SALAH MUHAMMAD EHMAD SALEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G McIndoe of Latitude Law
For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Ransley promulgated on 19 November  2015  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to  remove
   the  Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  decision  to  refuse   the
   Appellant's claim for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  relationship
   with his step-daughter

Background

4. The Appellant was born on 23 March 1976 and is a national of Libya.

5. The Appellant came to the UK on  7  September  2001  and  his  claim  for
   asylum was refused on 3 March 2003.

6. 18 March 2003 the Appellant underwent an Islamic  wedding  ceremony  with
   his partner [JA]. Her previous marriage was dissolved on 18 May 2004.

7. The Appellant appealed the  refusal  of  asylum  but  was  appeal  rights
   exhausted on 9 February 2003.

8. 16 June 2004 the  Appellant  absconded  but  married  his  partner  on  9
   October 2004.

9. 3 September 2006 the Appellant returned to Libya. He then flew  to  Paris
   from Tripoli on a valid Schengen visa and applied for  spousal  leave  to
   enter the UK on 19 December 2006 but this was refused.

10. 25 November 2010 the Appellant made further submissions and on  16  June
   2011 he was granted 3 years' discretionary leave for his family life with
   his wife and step-daughter.

11. 2014 the Appellant separated from his wife.

12. On 15 August 2014 he made the application the subject of this appeal.

13. On 21  April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

   a) The Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  as  a
      partner as his relationship had broken down and he had no new partner.

   b) The Appellant did not meet the definition of parent in the  Rules  for
      leave under Appendix FM.

   c) There were no circumstances to warrant a grant of  leave  outside  the
      Rules

The Judge's Decision

14. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Ransley ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision.

15. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  Judges  assessment  of
   Article 8 outside the Rules was flawed in that the Judge failed to engage
   with the argument  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship with his step-daughter and also  failed  to  assess  whether
   there were  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Libya  by
   reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

16. On 5 May  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

17. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  McIndoe  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) He relied on the grounds.

   b) In  relation  to  Ground  1:  section  117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  he  argued  that  the  Judge  had
      summarised the evidence in relation  to  the  Appellants  relationship
      with his step-daughter but had failed to recognise that inspite of the
      opposition of her mother the child had maintained a relationship  with
      the Appellant.

   c) He accepted that the Appellant had no court order confirming  that  he
      had access but argued that the documents at pages  showed  that  there
      was ongoing contact taken together with the Appellants oral evidence.

   d) He accepted that there was in force a non-molestation order which  was
      in fact in relation to both  the  Appellants  ex-wife  and  his  step-
      daughter until she turned 16 on 9 June 2016.

   e) In relation to Ground 2 his argument  was  that  due  to  the  country
      situation there would be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant
      reintegrating in Libya. He argued that while the evidence  might  have
      been insufficient to  get  him  over  the  'protection  hurdle'  taken
      together with the lengthy residence in the UK it  was  sufficient  for
      the Judge to conclude that he succeeded under paragraph 276ADE(vi).

18. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that:

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 Notice.

   b) He noted that the Appellant had returned to Libya in 2006 and 2014  at
      the time of AT.

   c) The test in 276ADE(vi) was a high hurdle and the Judge set  outall  of
      his circumstances.

   d) In relation to the suggestion that  the  Appellant  had  a  subsisting
      relationship  with  his  step-daughter  he  asked  how  it  could   be
      maintained if to do so was a breach of a court order.

   e) The Rule required there to be a current  relationship.  The  Appellant
      may have wanted the relationship to continue but the evidence of  that
      was very sparse. The material referred to  suggested  that  his  step-
      daughter did not answer the phone to him.

   f)  The  past  relationship  was  not  determinative   of   the   present
      relationship.

The Law

19.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

20. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible.

Finding on Material Error

21. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

22. The first ground argued that  the  Judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of
   Article 8 in that she failed to adequately engage with the argument  that
   the public interest did not require the Appellants removal where he had a
   genuine and subsisting relationship with a British Citizen child.

23. I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  made  findings  in  relation  to  the
   Appellants relationship with his step-daughter which were open to her  on
   the evidence by reference to paragraph 117B(6). The Judge was required to
   consider not only whether the Appellant  had  a  historical  relationship
   with his step-daughter but whether that relationship was subsisting.  She
   took into account the  evidence  of  the  Appellants  ex-wife  and  step-
   daughter from 2011 and concluded on the basis of that evidence  that  the
   Appellant had not played as significant a role in the care of Alana as he
   claimed.

24. The Judge then noted that Mr McIndoe  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
   had difficulty maintaining  contact  with  his  step-daughter  after  the
   marriage break down and that the Family Court refused to make  a  contact
   order at a hearing on 11 August 2015 on the basis that his  step-daughter
   could chose when she turned 16.

25. The Judge also took into account as relevant to  the  issue  of  whether
   his relationship with his step-daughter was subsisting that in June  2014
   his ex-wife obtained a  non-molestation  order  in  June  2014  and  this
   remained in force until June 2016. It is not entirely clear  whether  the
   Judge appreciated that the Order applied to both his ex-wife and  to  his
   step-daughter as  Mr  McIndoe  acknowledged  before  me.  Thus  it  seems
   difficult to see how  the  Judge  could  be  invited  to  accept  that  a
   relationship was subsisting as part of a public  interest  assessment  if
   such behaviour involved the Appellant in breaching the terms of  a  Court
   Order.

26. Mr McIndoe relied on  documents  at  pages  157-158  of  his  bundle  to
   suggest that the relationship was subsisting and these were  specifically
   addressed by the Judge at paragraph 45 of her decision. Her assessment of
   that 'sparse' material was of course against the background of  the  non-
   molestation order. These documents consist of two undated pages  of  very
   brief Facebook messages, which appear to cover two  dates  in  which  his
   step-daughter acknowledges that  she  misses  the  Appellant  but  cannot
   contact him as her mum had said she could not together with  confirmation
   that she 'missed' a call from him. I am satisfied that while it may  well
   be that the Appellant wished to pursue the relationship  with  his  step-
   daughter, and he had clearly had a  role  in  her  life  because  of  his
   marriage to her mother, after the breakdown of that relationship and  the
   non-molestation Order which was in force  at  the  time  of  the  hearing
   before her the Judge was entitled to conclude that the  relationship  was
   no longer subsisting. The Judge was entitled to conclude that the undated
   Facebook messages did not justify a different conclusion.

27. In relation to the second ground that the Judges findings  at  paragraph
   26-35 in relation to paragraph 276ADE(vi) were flawed I am satisfied that
   the Judge engaged with the arguments and evidence placed  before  her  in
   great detail and considered all of those factors that were relevant to  a
   determination of the issue given the high hurdle set by  the  requirement
   of 'very significant obstacles.' Against a background which was based  on
   the Appellant having spent the majority of his formative  year  in  Libya
   (paragraph 34) the Judge took into account the security situation  and  I
   noted that all of the evidence before her pre dated the Country  Guidance
   case of AT and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT
   00318 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal concluded there not such  a  high
   level of indiscriminate violence in Libya, within the meaning of  Article
   15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive")  so
   as to mean  that  substantial  grounds  existed  for  believing  that  an
   individual would, solely by being present there, face a real  risk  which
   threatens his or her life or person. The Judge  also  took  into  account
   that the Appellant had chosen to return to Libya in  2014  to  visit  his
   family, he speaks the national language has worked and is resourceful and
   is a young fit man. She was entitled to conclude that he failed  to  meet
   the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)

28. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote  (1):  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

29. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

30. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

31. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
5.10.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

