
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17246/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 2 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Agnes [M]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Arain, Legal Representative, ARA Immigration
Services Ltd
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I see no need for, and do not make,  an  order  restricting  reporting
      about this case.

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Maciel,  allowing  on  human  rights
      grounds  the  appeal  of  the  present  respondent,  hereinafter  "the
      claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
      her further leave to remain exceptionally.

   3. The facts relied on are distressing  and  I  think  can  be  described
      truthfully as tragic.  The appellant has a daughter who is  a  British
      citizen and is a qualified nurse.  Sadly, she is desperately ill.  She
      has a condition set out in the papers which means  that  her  life  is
      probably close to its end.  I do not wish to be unkind putting  it  in
      such dark terms but that is the truth of the matter and  there  is  no
      point in being mealy-mouthed about it.  It is well-understood by those
      involved.

   4. The claimant has made several visits to the  United  Kingdom  lawfully
      and most recently came into the United Kingdom with permission to  see
      her daughter, who was then already known to be very gravely ill.   For
      reasons that are obvious to anyone with any experience of life and any
      glimmer of human compassion and decency she wanted to stay and it must
      be emphasised that the Secretary of State has allowed her to stay  for
      a time because the Secretary of State has given her exceptional leave.
       That was for a short time and it has now come to an end.

   5. When considerations of public interest arise I have to  bear  in  mind
      that the Secretary of State has allowed  her  to  remain  outside  the
      Rules and has now decided not to  allow  her  to  remain  outside  the
      Rules.  Mr Staunton was not able to explain to me  what  has  changed.
      If there is a good reason for this change it has not been presented to
      the Tribunal.

   6. There has been a short period of time when the claimant  has  been  in
      the United Kingdom without leave.  She did not make an application for
      further permission to remain before her existing leave ran out.  It is
      not clear from the papers precisely  how  long  she  remained  without
      permission but it is a period of a few weeks.  This is in no  sense  a
      case of an  appellant  who  has  disappeared  from  the  gaze  of  the
      Secretary of State and was only prompted to  legitimise  her  position
      when there is an immediate threat of removal.

   7. It is perfectly  obvious  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
      appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  decided  that  it  was   a
      disproportionate interference with the "private and  family  life"  of
      the appellant and her British citizen adult daughter not to refuse her
      permission to remain.  This is because as well as the  human  feelings
      which are obvious in this case there is very compelling evidence  from
      a variety of authoritative sources that  the  appellant  is  providing
      valuable necessary practical nursing care for her  daughter.   She  is
      looking  after  a  variety  of  intimate  needs  that   I   need   not
      particularise and it is no exaggerated to say that the claimant's care
      has probably prolonged her life.

   8. The Secretary of State's appeal is based primarily on  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's refusal or failure to direct her mind to  the  requirements
      of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
      It is certainly very desirable in all cases where  judges  are  making
      Article 8 assessments that the terms of the Act are acknowledged.   It
      may even be necessary as a matter of law.

   9. I have looked at that section  with  the  help  of  Mr  Staunton  this
      morning.   The  section  makes  the  point  that  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control was in the public  interest.   There  is
      nothing in this judge's decision that is inconsistent with that.   The
      judge was plainly dealing with an exceptional case.

  10. The section tells us that certain things are in the  public  interest.
      They include that there  is  economic  independence,  the  ability  to
      integrate in society and the ability to speak English.  All  of  these
      things are made out in this case.  The appellant is plainly an English
      speaker, she  is  plainly  integrated  in  society  because  there  is
      evidence that she is finding time, with her daughter, to be associated
      with a church that is supporting her.  The point is that there  is  an
      element of social life outside the  home  which  is  part  of  greater
      society.  It is also a clear fact that the claimant is not a burden on
      the taxpayer.  She is  living  off  her  daughter's  savings  and  the
      benefits that are properly paid to the daughter.  There  has  been  no
      increase in payment as a result of the  claimant's  arrival.  She  has
      also benefitted from payments from a  well-known  Zimbabwean  charity.
      All this was evidenced before the First-tier Tribunal and was  clearly
      accepted if not discussed in some detail.

  11. Section 117B requires that little weight should be given to a  private
      life that is established at a time when a  person  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom unlawfully.  There is an element  of  that  here  because  the
      person has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  few  weeks  without
      permission.  This is not a weighty point.  The  bulk  of  the  private
      life has been established when the claimant has  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom with permission.

  12. Further, in my judgment, this is not a "private life"  case.   I  have
      said many times that the distinction between private life  and  family
      life is an invention of the Secretary of State and is not what is  set
      out in the Convention which protects a person's  "private  and  family
      life" but if it is to be thought of in these  terms  the  relationship
      between adult children and their parents is not normally thought of as
      family life. However there are additional qualities here, particularly
      the considerable dependency as a  result  of  the  daughter's  medical
      condition.  I do not find that section 117B(4) is relevant to this but
      if it is it is only a minor negative factor.

  13. Similar points are made about private life being  established  when  a
      person's immigration status is  precarious.   It  has  certainly  been
      precarious and so there is a better point to be  made  there  for  the
      Secretary of State but this is a quite exceptional case on  its  facts
      and the important relationship is "family" rather than "private" life.

  14. It is also plain to me that there  are  considerable  savings  to  the
      public purse as a result of the  claimant's  presence  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  This is not said lightly.  It is evidenced.  She  is  saving
      the taxpayer money by providing healthcare for her daughter that would
      have to come from another source.

  15. One of the points made in the  grounds  is  that  the  claimant's  own
      circumstances might change and she might become financially  dependent
      on the state.  That is absolutely right but the answer to that,  which
      is recognised in the Secretary of State's policies, is  to  constantly
      review the situation.   People  allowed  to  remain  on  human  rights
      grounds only get short terms of leave.  This  situation  might  change
      and if it does a different decision  might  be  justified  but  it  is
      perfectly obvious to me that if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had gone
      through Section 117B as she was probably supposed  to  have  done  she
      would have reached  precisely  the  same  conclusion.   The  error  is
      immaterial.

  16. I indicated in my hearing room and I record here that I  think  it  is
      regrettable that in the  very  sad  circumstances  of  this  case  the
      Secretary of State said in the refusal letter that the claimant  could
      maintain contact with her daughter via visits and  modern  methods  of
      communication. This is undoubtedly right but is a rather crass  remark
      in the context of the high  degree  of  support  and  dependency  that
      exists between the claimant and her daughter in this case.

  17. The First-tier Tribunal erred immaterially.

  18. I therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and I  affirm  the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision.



Notice of Decision:    The appeal is dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 December 2016                |

