
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17105/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 April 2015                     |On 10 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                            lukasz tomasz wozniak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
Interpreter:  Ms K Medwicz-Starba from Applied Language Solutions
     Interpreted the Polish and English languages


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publication of
    details about this appeal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland who was born in 1984.

 3. He has lived in the United Kingdom for some time although  the  precise
    time of arrival has not been accepted by the respondent.

 4. Clearly he was present in the United Kingdom in April 2006  because  he
    is known to have committed driving offences at that time.

 5. He has been in trouble on several occasions  and  I  set  out  below  a
    record of his criminal convictions:

         8 Sep 2006    Fined for careless driving.

         15 May 2007   Curfew order and electronic tagging  and  conditional
                      discharge for failing to  surrender  to  custody  and
                      theft from shops.

         2 Feb 2008    Fined and disqualified from driving for twelve months
                      for fraudulent  use  of  vehicle  documents,  driving
                      whilst uninsured and breach of conditional  discharge
                      of conditional discharge.

         16 Dec 2011   Sentenced to 32 months' imprisonment for offences  of
                      robbery.

 6. In a letter dated 23 July 2012 the respondent explained her decision to
    make a deportation order with reference to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  I have not been able to find the date
    of that decision but it was clearly about 23 July 2012, if not actually
    on that date.

 7. The terms of the letter were unequivocal.  The Secretary of  State  did
    not accept that the  appellant  had  achieved  five  years'  continuous
    residence in accordance with the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.
    The right of an EEA national to be in the United Kingdom is to exercise
    treaty rights.  Typically this means to be working but seeking work  or
    consuming  services  such  as  education  very  often   satisfied   the
    requirements of the Rules.  The Secretary of State observed that  there
    was no evidence that the claimant had done any of these things.  As  is
    well understood by people familiar with this area of  the  law  an  EEA
    national who has accrued five years' residence has acquired a permanent
    right of residence and can only  be  removed  on  "serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security".  An EEA national who has accrued ten
    years' continuous residence has even better protection and can only  be
    removed on "imperative grounds".

 8. An EEA national who has achieved neither of these things may be removed
    on grounds of public policy, security or public health  but  there  are
    restrictions  on  the  power  to  deport  that  are  set  out  in   the
    Regulations.  One of the requirements, recognised in the refusal letter
    is that the "conduct of the person concerned must represent a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".

 9. The Secretary of State addressed this point at paragraphs 21 and 22  of
    her letter.  The Secretary of State said that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown that he had addressed his propensity to alcohol abuse or to  lose
    his temper when drunk, or that he had distanced himself  from  the  co-
    defendant in the offence for which he was most recently convicted.  The
    Secretary of State concluded that the appellant had a "propensity to re-
    offend and that you  represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to justify your deportation."

10. Other matters were considered but they did not cause the  Secretary  of
    State to change her mind.

11. The appellant appealed the decision and  the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in October 2012. The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
    the appeal.

12. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal found
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law particularly  for  failing  to
    show it had had regard for paragraph 21(6)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The Upper Tribunal allowed  the  appeal.   It  found
    that the appellant had rehabilitated himself.  Crucially, it found that
    the  appellant  had  weaned  himself  off   alcohol   dependence   and,
    unremarkably, behaved himself as a  consequence.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal but that decision was overturned  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal. The Upper Tribunal's error lay in being overly  concerned  with
    the  prospects  of  reintegration  rather   than   the   considerations
    particularly required by the Regulations.

13. Paragraph 20 of the Upper  Tribunal's  determination  was  particularly
    troublesome.  There the Upper Tribunal found that the appellant  was  a
    present threat to public policy but there were reasonable prospects  of
    rehabilitation.  The Court of Appeal found it "impossible to reconcile"
    the finding that the appellant was a genuine and serious threat to  the
    fundamental interests of society with the  finding  that  there  was  a
    durable solution to his alcohol problem and his offending.   The  court
    also said that it was concerned that excessive weight had been given to
    the "advantage of his remaining in this country, if there  was  a  real
    risk of serious re-offending".

14. The case was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

15. The Upper Tribunal was criticised  for  its  conclusions  when  it  re-
    decided the case but not for its decision to set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. It was not clear to me if the Court of  Appeal
    had indicated if it was satisfied with the finding that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.

16. Mr  Parkinson  argued  that  there  was  an  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  I think he was entitled to do that but I disagree
    with his submission. There was no proper analysis of  the  requirements
    of paragraph 21(6).

17. For the avoidance of doubt I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I must remake the decision. The Secretary of State must prove,  on  the
    balance of probability, the facts necessary to support her decision.  I
    must decide for myself whether or not to allow the appeal  by  applying
    the facts to the requirements of the rules.

19. I have noted the evidence last given to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge accepted that  the  appellant  had  undertaken  work  in
    relation to alcohol awareness and that he claimed  to  have  benefitted
    from  a  course  entitled  "Adapt  to  Live  More  Responsibly  in  the
    Community" and  that  he  made  attempts  to  rehabilitate  himself  by
    abstaining from alcohol. I see no reason to go behind these findings.

20. The appellant gave evidence before me.  He said that he  was  in  full-
    time work and he lived ordinarily with his brother  who  had  supported
    him by attending the hearing before me.  He was not registered  with  a
    general medical practitioner in the United Kingdom.  He said he was  no
    longer required to be in contact with the probation officer but he  had
    reflected on his life when he was in prison.  He had given up drink and
    got a job and kept out of trouble.   He  had  no  strong  ties  in  the
    community except his brother but he had nothing in Poland.   He  had  a
    married sister in Scotland.

21. Arguably unnecessarily, given that he  gave  his  evidence  through  an
    interpreter, but to  put  the  point  beyond  all  possible  doubt,  he
    confirmed that he could still speak Polish.

22. He said that he was not an alcoholic.  He was someone who used to drink
    too much.  He did not need to be on a programme suitable for alcoholics
    because alcoholism was not his problem.  He had addressed  the  reasons
    for drinking alcohol excessively and his family had helped him  not  to
    drink.  He said that going to the gym was doing him more good.

23. Significantly, Mr Parkinson said that he was not aware of the appellant
    having committed any further offences.  He had checked and there was no
    record of any further criminality.  I remind myself that the  Secretary
    of State is uniquely placed to find out about people's criminal records
    and, in the absence of contrary evidence from the  respondent,  I  find
    that the appellant has kept out of trouble.

24. I also find that the appellant has not established a permanent right of
    residence in the United Kingdom.  There is evidence that he has  worked
    on occasions during his stay in the United  Kingdom  but  there  is  no
    evidence that he has worked continuously or been looking  for  work  or
    otherwise acting in accordance with treaty rights for a period of  five
    years.  He is therefore entitled only to the lowest level of protection
    allowed by the Regulations.

25. I set out below the parts of Regulation 21 that are relevant:

         21.  (1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

              (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

              (3) [not relevant].

              (4) [not relevant].

              (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy or public security in relation to a  person  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin.

             (7)  [not relevant].

26. When the Secretary of State made her decision in July  2012  she  noted
    that the NOMS1 assessment of the offender found that he posed a "low to
    medium risk  of  re-offending".   The  Secretary  of  State  said  that
    although she acknowledged that  was  the  finding  of  the  appropriate
    officer "the serious harm which would be caused as  a  result  [of  the
    appellant re-offending] is such that it is not considered reasonable to
    leave the public vulnerable to the effects of your re-offending." I  do
    not understand how that approach relates to the obligations imposed  by
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It  appears  to  me  that  the
    Secretary of State  was  not  willing  to  decide  the  application  in
    accordance with the regulations which she is obliged to follow.

27. The Secretary of State considered it reasonable to have regard  to  the
    absence of evidence that the appellant had separated himself  from  his
    co-offender or had addressed alcohol problems and found that "you  have
    a propensity to re-offend and that you represent a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat to the public to justify your deportation."

28. I am very aware of the seriousness of the appellant's  offending.   The
    incidents that took him to prison involved attacks on  members  of  the
    public.  The victims were beaten and  items  were  stolen.   They  were
    punched and kicked and the Recorder dealing with the offence  described
    it as "completely terrifying experience for these two innocent men".

29. The Recorder also referred to the need to protect the public and warned
    the appellant that he would be "looking at a very substantial period if
    you commit similar offences". However he also said:  "I  do  not  think
    the issue of dangerousness arises in this case  in  the  light  of  his
    record". It is quite  clear  that  the  Recorder  was  considering  his
    obligation  under  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  to  consider  the
    Dangerous Offenders Provisions but he was not satisfied that there  was
    a  significant  risk  of  the  offender  committing  further  specified
    offences and that there was a  significant  risk  of  serious  harm  to
    members of the public being caused. This is of minimal relevance to the
    decision that I have to make. The Recorder  was  applying  a  different
    legal test in a different legal context but  it  does  not  hinder  the
    appellant's case that the Recorder did not impose an extended sentence.

30. I have to decide the case on the evidence before  me  when  I  make  my
    decision.  I have the advantage of knowing how  the  appellant  behaved
    after his release from prison. I am  not  told  the  release  date.   I
    expect it to have been in January 2013.   The  appellant  has  had  two
    years in the community and has not got into trouble.  In  the  case  of
    someone who was thought to be a risk to the public because he could not
    or would not control his drinking I find this period of good  behaviour
    to be very illuminating.

31. I am very doubtful that the appellant did represent a "genuine, present
    and sufficiently serious threat" when  the  case  was  decided  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I consider it much more likely  that  the  disgust
    evoked by the offence of robbery has infected the approach to the case.
    It should not have done. The Regulations do not permit that.

32. I cannot conclude now that the appellant's conduct  does  "represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat".   I  remind  myself
    that his convictions do not in themselves justify the decision. Removal
    of an EEA national is only permissible under the Regulations where  the
    threat comes from him and the evidence does not support such a  finding
    in this case. This clearly affects the whole approach to the case.

33. Nevertheless I remind myself also of  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    21(6).  The appellant has no particularly telling  health  or  economic
    characteristics.  He is a man who will work when he can. He has support
    from his family in the United Kingdom.  Although he has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for some years his cultural integration is  modest.   He
    has not mastered the English language.  That is not  to  his  discredit
    but it is a fact in the case and is not a sign of integration.

34. I have no reason to doubt the evidence that he has minimal  links  with
    Poland.  His relatives seem to have  removed  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    This is not something that takes matters very far.  Clearly  a  man  of
    his age and experience of life in Poland could be removed there  and  I
    do not think there is any serious argument to the contrary before me.

35. However when I take all these things into account I cannot  agree  that
    his conduct qualifies him for removal and therefore I must and do allow
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and
substitute a decision allowing the appeal under the European  Economic  Area
Regulations.

Signed
Jonathan Perkins  Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           Dated 4 June 2014
