
G[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/17595/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                           MR PRATHEEPAN NATRAJAN
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Martin, counsel instructed by Nag Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 13th  May  1977.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 4th January 2006, with entry  clearance  as
a student valid to 2nd February 2007. His leave was then  extended  to  31st
October 2010 and on 13th December 2010 he was granted  further  leave  as  a
Tier 4 (General) student to 25th April 2011.  On  4th  April  2011,  he  was
granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post  Study)  Migrant.  On  22nd  March
2013, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain as Tier 4  (General)
Student.

2.    This application was refused on 8th May  2013  pursuant  to  paragraph
245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that, if further leave  were
granted, the Appellant would have spent more  than  5  years  as  a  Tier  4
(General) Migrant or as a student and none of the  exceptions  applied.  The
Respondent's calculation was based on: (i) 17th September 2007  to  30  June
2010 when the Appellant  was  studying  for  a  BSc  Hons  in  Technology  &
Ecommerce (2 years, 9 months and 14 days); (ii)  22nd  March  2010  to  25th
February 2011 when the Appellant was studying for an MBA (11  months  and  4
days). When added to the current proposed course of  study  of  2  years,  5
months and 2 days this amounted to a period of time in excess of 5 years.

3.    The Appellant appealed and his appeal came before First Tier  Tribunal
Judge Bennett for hearing on 23rd May 2014. The Appellant  was  not  present
having suffered an accident as a result of which he was in hospital  however
a request for an adjournment was rejected  and  the  appeal  was  dismissed.
The Appellant sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal and in a decision dated 22nd October  2014,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Perkins allowed his appeal to the extent  of  remitting  it  for  a  hearing
before the First Tier Tribunal on the basis that it  had  been  procedurally
unfair to have refused to have adjourned on the basis that  the  Appellant's
oral evidence would not have made any  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
appeal.

4.    The appeal then came before First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  for
hearing on 1st December 2014. The Appellant attended and gave  evidence.  In
a decision promulgated on 18th December 2014, she dismissed  the  appeal  on
the basis that she was satisfied that the periods  of  study  the  Appellant
undertook towards the BSc Hons degree in IT and Ecommerce at  BTTE  and  the
BSc Hons degree in Business Management at MERC Education were "degree  level
study" for the purposes of paragraph 6 of the  Immigration  Rules  and  this
amounted to 1 year and 4 months [18 refers].  The  total  period  of  degree
level study amounted to 3 years and  1  month.  Consequently,  the  proposed
further grant of leave for 2 years, 5  months  and  1  day  would  exceed  5
years, by 6 months and 1 day [19].

5.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis  inter  alia
that the Judge erred in her construction of "degree level study" at [18]  of
her decision as "degree level study" is at Level 6 or above  and  any  study
below Level 6 should not count towards the 5 year period and  even  if  that
is wrong, the second period of April 2008 to January 2009 was  pre-sessional
and did not lead to a degree, so should also not count towards  the  5  year
period.

6.    Upon renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, permission  to  appeal
was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty on 13th May 2015, on  the  basis
that it was arguable that the Judge erred in law in finding  that  the  pre-
sessional studies carried out by the Appellant at MERC Education,  prior  to
the commencement of the BA Hons in Business Administration,  were  study  at
degree level and should be counted for the purposes of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)
of the Immigration Rules.

7.    In a rule 24 response dated 27th May 2015, the Respondent opposed  the
appeal on the basis that the Judge's conclusions were open to her.



Hearing

8.    At the hearing before me, Mr Martin sought to expand  on  the  grounds
of appeal. He pointed out there was very little guidance in the  policy  and
if either of the periods he  says  should  not  be  counted  i.e.  the  pre-
sessional period of level 4 study which  may  have  contributed  from  April
2008 to 2009, this would take the Appellant below  the  5  year  limit.  The
application the Appellant made in 2007 was to  take  a  course  which  would
have resulted in a BSc in Technology & Ecommerce. In  his  application  form
he indicated at 5.4. that it was level 4, as it was his  understanding  that
the first year was at diploma level. There is no  requirement  to  undertake
each level and if he stopped at  a  level  he  would  be  entitled  to  that
qualification. It is accepted that he did not even complete the first  year,
so the suggestion that any  marks  would  have  contributed  to  any  finals
result does not amount to a period  that  should  have  been  considered  as
degree level or leading to a degree.

9.    In respect of the second period ie. April 2008 to January  2009,  this
does not just rely on the Appellant's recollection or understanding  of  how
the course worked. He had a letter  from  MERC  education  dated  6  January
2009, which was contemporaneous with his studies and  that  letter  informed
him the whole topic had been  withdrawn  because  it  had  been  offered  in
association with the University of Wales and that association had ended.  In
those circumstances his studies would not count towards a degree. Mr  Martin
submitted that at [18] the emphasis by Judge Canavan on paragraph 6  of  the
Rules is wrong in that, if her  interpretation  is  correct,  studies  would
count if the college states it leads to a degree, even if it may only be  an
English language course. The Respondent accepts levels 3, 4 & 5 do not  lead
to a degree. Mr Martin stated  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  find  any
jurisprudence on the point.

10.   In response, Ms Vidyadharan submitted that it was  pertinent  that  at
[18] the Judge arrived at the conclusion that cumulatively  the  Appellant's
studies amounted to a period of 3 years and 1 month and that it was  "common
sense that a course of study described as a BSc Hons or BA  Hons  degree  is
"degree level study." She handed up a copy of the decision in  Islam  [(para
245X(ha) five years study) [2013] UKUT 00608 and relied on  [11]  where  the
Upper Tribunal held inter alia that: "The appellant had leave as  a  student
for 4 years to pursue his degree course, that he chose to  "drop  out"  (and
not inform UKBA of that fact" does not deny that the whole of the period  of
leave (excluding pre and post-course leave  granted  under  para  245  ZY(b)
counts towards the maximum 5 year period and whatever he chooses  to  do  in
that period, he did it during a period of leave as  a  student.  It  is  the
period of the leave and not the  actual  study  which  is  the  measure  for
calculating the period spent in  the  UK  imposed  by  para  245ZX(ha)."  Ms
Vidyadharan submitted that the duration of courses  was  as  the  Judge  has
found according to the certificates and it was only  the  assertion  by  the
Appellant that certain levels of study were not included; there was  nothing
in terms of objective evidence provided by the Universities to support  that
contention. There was no error of law and the Judge  had  been  entitled  to
come to that conclusion.

11.   In response, Mr Martin sought to distinguish the  decision  in  Islam.
He submitted that when that Appellant dropped out he did not  undertake  any
study in the 2 year period and that there was a  clear  distinction  between
someone who has leave and has started  a  course  and  this  case  with  the
evidence from MERC. He accepted that in respect of the  earlier  period,  it
is simply the Appellant's word  but  in  terms  of  the  second  period  the
college has confirmed the course was level 4 and so if this is not  counted,
the whole period is under 5 years. In respect of the  Judge's  reasoning  at
[18] he acknowledged that if one was at University that  may  be  right  but
with these sorts of studies and colleges it is not all necessarily part  and
parcel of the same thing. Whilst the course was  under  the  auspices  of  a
degree course, each part is modular and separate. He invited me  to  re-make
the decision.

Decision

12.    I  reserved  my  decision.  Having  had  the  opportunity   to   hear
submissions from both parties and to consider further the  decision  of  the
Upper Tribunal in Islam (op cit) I  find  that  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Canavan erred materially in law in that her  decision  neither  referred  to
nor took into account the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Islam as to  the
correct test to be applied.

13.   I now proceed to decide the appeal. It is clear from the  decision  in
Islam at [11] that it is the period of leave and not the actual  study  that
is the measure for calculating the  period  of  time  spent  in  the  United
Kingdom imposed by paragraph 245ZX (ha). The  fact  that  an  Appellant  may
have dropped out is irrelevant as the whole period  of  leave  still  counts
towards the 5 years, excluding the periods of pre and post study  leave,  as
set out in paragraph 245ZY(b) of the Rules. In order to count towards the  5
years of degree level study, it follows that this must be leave  granted  in
respect of degree level study. On the basis of this  analysis,  I  calculate
the Appellant's leave in respect of degree level study as follows:

    (i)    4.1.06 to 2.2.07 i.e. 1 year, 4 weeks and 2 days,  in  order  to
    study to study the final year of a BA Hons course in Business & Finance
    at Northumbria University (minus 5 months in accordance with  paragraph
    245ZY(b))= 8 months and 2 days;

    (ii)   4.3.08 to 31.10.10 i.e. 2 years, 8 months in order  to  continue
    with a BSc Hons course in IT and Ecommerce (minus 5 months as above = 2
    years, 3 months);

    (iii)  13.12.10 to 25.4.11 i.e. 4 months, 1 week, 5 days  in  order  to
    study for an MBA  at  the  City  of  London  College,  but  awarded  by
    Birmingham City University (minus 14 days = 3 months, 28 days)

14.   The overall amount of  time  spent  pursuant  to  leave  in  order  to
undertake degree level study or above, taking into account  periods  of  pre
and post study leave, as set out in paragraph 245ZY(b)  of  the  Rules  thus
amounts to 3 years, 3 months. The  proposed  extension  of  leave  to  study
towards the ACCA qualifications (NQF Level 7) of 2 years,  5  months  and  1
day would have taken the Appellant over the 5 year  time  limit.  Therefore,
the question of whether or not the pre-sessional courses  constitute  degree
level study or not does not matter for the purposes of this appeal,  because
it is clear on the basis of the leave already granted that the extension  of
leave applied for would have contravened paragraph 245ZX(ha) of  the  Rules.
However, note (ii)  to  paragraph  245ZY  provides  that:  "A  pre-sessional
course is a course which prepares a student for the  student's  main  course
of study in the UK." On this basis, it would  appear  that  a  pre-sessional
course does not constitute degree level study and should  be  excluded  from
consideration of the 5 year period.

15.   I note that the first two previous periods of leave for  degree  level
study were as a student rather than as a Tier 4 (General) Student,  however,
the Upper Tribunal in Islam at [24] made clear,  having  heard  argument  on
the point, that pre-Tier 4 leave is included rather than excluded  from  the
calculation of the 5 years degree level study.

16.   It follows that the Respondent was correct to refuse  the  application
with regard to paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules  and  I  dismiss
the appeal.

17.   I note that whilst permission to  appeal  was  sought  in  respect  of
Article 8 of the ECHR, permission was not granted  on  this  basis  and  the
matter was not pursued before me. It is remains open  to  the  Appellant  to
make an application for leave to remain under the  private  life  provisions
of the Immigration Rules.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22nd November 2015

