

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA178232015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2016                             |On 9th June 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 MANOJ KUMAR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lynch of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the sake of consistency with the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  shall
       hereinafter referred to the Secretary of State as the Respondent and
       Mr Kumar as the Appellant.
    2. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 20 April 2015. His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Kelly ("the Judge") following a hearing on 23 October
       2015.

The grant of permission


    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted permission to  appeal  (15
       April 2016) stating that it is arguable that:

             1) the Judge erred in law by stating that the term  partner  is
                not defined in the Immigration Rules,
             2)  the  Judge  might  have  misconstrued  the  length  of  the
                cohabitation and might have failed to  give  cogent  reasons
                for accepting the Appellant's evidence, and
             3) failed to apply Agyarko v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

Discussion


    4. Mrs Peterson accepted that in finding that the couple had  cohabited
       since September 2011 [21], it was immaterial whether the  Judge  was
       right or not regarding whether a  partner  was  defined  within  the
       Immigration Rules. That was because even by the definition  provided
       within appendix FM  Gen  1.2  (iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the
       cohabitation period of 2 years was met as the  application  was  not
       submitted until 11 August 2014 which was almost 3  years  after  the
       couple commenced cohabitation. Ground 1 was a complete red herring.


    5. The Judge found [20] that the documentation clearly showed that  the
       couple had cohabited since at least June 2013 [20] which [21/28] was
       well over 2 years before the date of hearing.  He  found  [21]  that
       they had absolutely no reason to  give  false  testimony  about  the
       matter, they had on any view been cohabited more than 2 years at the
       date of the hearing of the appeal, and [22] because of the sponsor's
       unhesitating frankness in informing the Tribunal that  her  children
       had no contact with their father. These were findings the Judge  was
       entitled to make  on  the  evidence  and  the  submission  from  the
       Respondent is nothing more than a disagreement with this.  There  is
       accordingly no merit in ground 2.


    6. Regarding ground 3, the Judge  did  not  identify  Agyarko.  He  did
       identify the correct test within Ex (1) (a) (ii) of Appendix  FM  of
       the Immigration Rules as being one of reasonableness as explained in
       EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874. He was entitled to  find  that
       it was plainly unreasonable for  the  children  of  the  Sponsor  to
       follow the Appellant to India if their mother remained here.


    7. He identified the correct test in relation to the Sponsor within  Ex
       (1) (b) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as to whether  there
       were insurmountable  obstacles  or  very  serious  hardship  in  her
       following the Appellant to India. He identified [33] the factors  as
       supporting that contention as being that she had never lived outside
       the United Kingdom, had never  spoken  to  or  met  the  Appellant's
       family, would be relocating to a country she  had  never  previously
       visited, had no knowledge of the language  customer  or  culture  of
       India, would be leaving settled employment, would be  isolated  from
       everything she knew apart from the Appellant and her  children,  and
       would also have to cope with the inevitable tension that would arise
       in her relationship with her  children  resulting  from  their  more
       rapid assimilation of Indian language and culture. The Judge was, in
       my  judgement  having  considered  those  factors,  entitled  to  be
       satisfied that there were very serious difficulties and a consequent
       level of hardship which amounted to an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
       family life being enjoyed in India. I was therefore  satisfied  that
       ground 3 amounted to nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
       Judges factual analysis which on the evidence  he  was  entitled  to
       reach.


    8. There was no material error of law. I do not set the decision aside.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
7 June 2016
