


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17577/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 11 August 2016                          |On: 15 August 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 abdul kadir
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Datta of Haque & Hausman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 31 December 1990. He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  E  B  Grant,  dismissing  his  appeal   against   the
      respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in
      the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 5 January 2011 with  leave
      to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 20 April 2012. On
      18 August 2012 he was granted further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant until 31 May 2014.


   3. On 30 May 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and submitted with his application  a
      Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  for  a  Diploma  in
      Strategic Management  &  Leadership  at  London  College  of  Advanced
      Management.


   4. In a  letter  dated  14  January  2015  the  respondent  informed  the
      appellant that the sponsor licence  for  London  College  of  Advanced
      Management had been revoked on 12 January 2015 and that  his  CAS  was
      therefore no longer valid. He was given a period of 60 days  in  which
      to obtain a new CAS from another Tier 4 sponsor  and  submit  a  fresh
      application.


   5. Following the appellant's request of 6 March 2015 for  the  return  of
      his passport which had since expired,  the  respondent,  in  a  letter
      dated 11 March 2015, advised him that his passport was still valid and
      sent him a certified copy of the passport together with a  further  60
      day extension until 14 April 2015 to submit a fresh application with a
      valid CAS.

   6. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent on 29  April
      2015, on the grounds that he had  not  produced  a  valid  CAS,  since
      London College of Advanced Management was no longer listed on the Tier
      4 Sponsor register as a Tier 4 sponsor. He was awarded zero points for
      Attributes  and  Maintenance  and  therefore  could   not   meet   the
      requirements of paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to  Appendix  116(e)
      of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.

   7. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  In  his  grounds  of
      appeal, he asserted that the respondent's decision was  unfair  as  he
      had not been able to sit the IELTS examination to obtain the  required
      English language certificate without his original passport  which  the
      respondent had refused to send him.


   8. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on  7  December
      2015 in the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Grant found  that  it  was  not
      correct that the appellant required his original passport to  sit  the
      IELTS test, but found that he could have used  his  national  identity
      card from Bangladesh. Since he had failed to submit  a  valid  CAS  he
      could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  The  judge
      dismissed the appeal on that basis and also on Article 8 human  rights
      grounds.


   9. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      on the grounds that the judge was wrong to find  that  he  could  have
      used his national identity card from Bangladesh as the IELTS form made
      it clear that candidates taking the test outside their own country had
      to present a current passport.  The  attested  copy  of  his  passport
      provided by the respondent was not accepted by the IELTS  provider  as
      the original passport was required. Further, his  Bangladesh  identity
      card had expired and he was not able to obtain a new one as he was not
      present and residing in  Bangladesh.  The  respondent's  decision  was
      therefore unfair.


  10. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
      granted on 27 June 2016.


  11. In her Rule 24 response,  the  Secretary  of  State  stated  that  the
      appellant did not need his passport to sit the English  language  test
      as he already had a City and Guilds certificate which was valid and he
      was therefore not required to take the IELTS test.


  12. At the hearing before me Mr Datta submitted that City & Guilds did not
      appear in the respondent's policy or the list of  acceptable  awarding
      bodies  set  out  in  Appendix  O  or  as  part  of  the  transitional
      arrangements for Appendix O and therefore the appellant needed to  sit
      the IELTS test. He relied on the decisions in  Forrester,  R  (on  the
      application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2008]
      EWHC 2307 and 'Q' & Ors, R (on the  application  of)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 364 in  submitting  that
      the respondent had displayed a lack of common sense by  not  returning
      the appellant's original passport to enable him to sit the IELTS test.
      The appellant could not sit the test without his original passport. He
      could not have used his Bangladesh identity card as he was taking  the
      test outside his own country and  in  any  event  he  could  not  have
      obtained a new Bangladesh identity card as  he  was  not  residing  in
      Bangladesh.


  13. Mr Tufan submitted that the City &  Guilds  qualification  would  have
      been sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  finding  a  new  sponsor  and
      obtaining a new  CAS,  as  the  appellant  did  not  fall  within  the
      transitional provisions for Appendix O. In any  event,  there  was  no
      unfairness on the part of the respondent. Mr Tufan relied on the  case
      of EK (Ivory Coast) v The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2014] EWCA Civ 1517, as confirmed in Kaur v The  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 13, in that regard,  which  he
      submitted had found that Naved (Student - fairness - notice of points)
      Pakistan [2012] UKUT 14, as relied upon by the appellant, was  wrongly
      decided. There was in any event no evidence from the appellant to show
      that the certified copy of his  passport,  as  provided  by  the  Home
      Office, was not acceptable for the IELTS test. Mr Tufan suggested that
      the refusal by the Home Office to return the passport was in any event
      a matter for challenge by way of judicial review  and  not  through  a
      statutory appeal.


  14. Mr Datta reiterated the points made previously, relying on the case of
      Patel (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT
      211, and submitted that there was no reason why the Home Office  could
      not have sent the original passport to the test centre if they did not
      want to send it to the appellant.

Consideration and Findings

  15. Having had regard to the  documentary  evidence  before  me  now,  and
      indeed on the basis of the documentary evidence before Judge Grant,  I
      would agree that the presentation by the appellant of  his  Bangladesh
      identity card would not have been sufficient to permit him to take the
      IELTS test. That appears to be made clear  in  the  IELTS  application
      form at page 23 of the appellant's appeal bundle, at point 10, and the
      first paragraph of the IELTS Notice to Candidates at page  25  of  the
      bundle.  To that extent, therefore, I find that Judge Grant  erred  in
      her findings at [4].

  16. However whether or not that error is material is a matter for  further
      consideration. Mr Tufan submitted that it was not, as there was in any
      event no unfairness on the part of  the  respondent  in  refusing  the
      appellant's application on the basis that she did.

  17. One reason given by Mr Tufan for concluding that  there  was  no  such
      unfairness was that the appellant could have used his  City  &  Guilds
      English language certificates to obtain a new CAS and did not need  to
      take the IELTS test and therefore did not need his passport. According
      to the respondent's Rule 24 response and to the extract from the  City
      & Guilds website produced by Mr Tufan, any certificates issued by City
      & Guilds for International ESOL (IESOL)  examinations  held  before  6
      April 2015 could be used for UK visa  applications  until  5  November
      2015. The appellant's City & Guilds certificate is for an  IESOL  test
      taken on 11 December 2013 and would therefore appear  to  fall  within
      this category as being valid for use in obtaining a new CAS. Whilst Mr
      Datta submitted that the City & Guilds article referred only  to  visa
      applications and that City & Guilds were not listed as  an  acceptable
      awarding body in Appendix O or the transitional provisions applying to
      Appendix O, I note that he  has  supplied  extracts  from  Appendix  O
      relevant only to 30 June 2014 and thereafter. Mr Tufan submitted  that
      those provisions did not apply to the appellant as  he  had  made  his
      application on 30 May 2014, prior to 1 July 2014, and  I  accept  that
      that is correct. There is no evidence  before  me  to  show  that  the
      appellant could not have relied upon his City  &  Guilds  certificates
      and, on the contrary, the evidence I have indicates that he could have
      done so.


  18. Accordingly there was no need for the appellant to take the IELTS test
      in order to find a new sponsor and obtain a new CAS, and  he  did  not
      need his original passport. It cannot therefore  be  argued  that  the
      appellant's failure to produce a  valid  CAS  within  the  time  limit
      provided to him could be said to be attributed to the  respondent  and
      to give rise to unfairness on the part of the respondent  through  the
      refusal to return to him his original passport.


  19. In any event, even if the appellant could not have  used  his  City  &
      Guilds certificate to obtain a  new  CAS,  there  is  no  evidence  to
      support the appellant's claim that a certified copy  of  his  passport
      bearing a certification from UK Visas and Immigration would  not  have
      been acceptable proof of identity to enable  him  to  take  the  IELTS
      test. It is particularly relevant to note from  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's solicitors dated 6 March 2015 requesting the return of the
      appellant's passport that the request was initially made on the  basis
      that the passport had expired and  that  the  certified  copy  of  the
      expired passport was not acceptable to any sponsor. The certified copy
      of the appellant's passport at pages  16  to  18  of  the  appellant's
      bundle shows that the date of expiry of the passport was originally 13
      October 2014, but that it was extended for a  year  to  expire  on  13
      October 2015 (page 17). It is clear from the letter of 11  March  2015
      from UKVI that a certified copy of the passport including the  renewal
      page was then sent to the appellant, suggesting that the  problem  for
      the appellant in finding a sponsor was not so much  that  he  did  not
      have the original document, but  that  the  copy  with  which  he  had
      initially been provided had not included the  renewal  page  and  thus
      suggested that  the  document  had  expired.  Whilst  the  appellant's
      solicitors then made a further request, on  14  April  2015,  for  the
      original document, there is no evidence to show that the document sent
      to him by UKVI on 11 March 2015 was not acceptable by any  college  or
      test centre. I find it highly unlikely that a  document  certified  by
      the Home Office itself as  a  true  copy  of  the  original  would  be
      rejected.

  20. However even putting those matters aside, I do not consider  that  the
      respondent's decision refusing  the  appellant's  application  can  be
      considered to be unlawful and unfair. The appellant was given not  one
      but two extensions of 60 days to enable him to find a new sponsor. The
      respondent clearly  acted  in  accordance  with  her  own  policy  and
      guidance and in accordance with the established case law on  fairness,
      in providing the appellant with a considerable amount of time to  find
      a new sponsor. If it was indeed the case that a test provider  refused
      to allow the appellant to take the IELTS  test  without  his  original
      passport, then it was open to the appellant to challenge the  decision
      of the test-provider or sponsor on grounds of unfairness. I agree with
      Mr Tufan that the principles in EK (Ivory Coast)  apply,  albeit  that
      the circumstances are not identical, and that there was no  breach  by
      the Secretary of State of her public duty to act fairly.


  21. In the circumstances there was  no  unfairness  on  the  part  of  the
      respondent in refusing the appellant's application on the  basis  that
      she did.  The  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules as he had not presented a valid CAS. Judge Grant was
      entitled to find that that was the case  and  to  dismiss  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules, as well as on human rights  grounds.  Any
      error that was made in finding that the appellant could have used  his
      Bangladesh  national  identity  card  to  sit  the  IELTS   test   was
      immaterial.

DECISION

  22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. I do not  set
      aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  15/08/2016
