
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr HECTOR JOSEPH WRIGHT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel (instructed by AJA
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge N Osborne on 15  January  2015
         against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan  who  had
         allowed (to the extent of finding that the decisions  were  not  in
         accordance with  the  law)  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
         Appellant's decisions dated 11 April 2014 to refuse  to  grant  the
         Respondent leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
         remove him.   The  decision  and  reasons  was  promulgated  on  26
         November 2014.


    2.     The Respondent is a national of Jamaica,  born  on  30  November
         1947.  He had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  in  November
         2000.  Subsequently he obtained leave to remain as a spouse but the
         relationship failed and he became appeal rights exhausted in  2005.
         In 2008 the Respondent made his application for  further  leave  to
         remain, which was not refused until 11 April 2014.  The judge found
         that  the  application  had  been  considered   under   the   wrong
         Immigration  Rules,  in  particular,  that  it  should  have   been
         considered under paragraph 317.


    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Osborne because he  considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge had  erred  when  finding  that  the
         Secretary of State's decisions were not in accordance with the law.
          The judge had misinterpreted Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402.


    Submissions - error of law


    4.     Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Secretary of State  relied  on  the
         grounds of onwards appeal and submitted that this was a clear  case
         of legal error in relation to what was in substance  an  Article  8
         ECHR claim, as the grant of permission to appeal indicated.   Singh
         [2015] EWCA Civ 74 at [56] had shown that the  Secretary  of  State
         had been entitled to apply the post 9 July 2012 Immigration  Rules.
         The decision should be set aside and remade at a fresh hearing.


    5.     Mr Richardson for the Respondent  accepted  that  Singh  (above)
         applied.  He also candidly pointed out that the  judge's  reference
         to paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules (no longer in force)  was
         mistaken in any event, as the application had been made outside the
         Immigration Rules on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   He  accepted  that
         there had been no proper hearing and that there was no  alternative
         to a full rehearing before  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The delay which this would cause was regrettable.


    6.     There was nothing which Ms Brocklesby-Weller wished to add.


    The error of law finding


    7.     Both parties accepted that there had been material errors of law
         in  the  decision  and  reasons.   The  tribunal  agrees  with  the
         submissions made which need not be repeated.   The  judge  did  not
         have the advantage of Singh  (above),  a  judgment  providing  much
         needed clarification of the law in this area of Article 8 ECHR  law
         where there had been conflicting  authorities  as  to  the  correct
         treatment of applications made prior to 9 July 2012.


    8.     The decision cannot stand in the light of Singh (above) and  the
         tribunal accordingly  sets  its  aside.   There  has  not  been  an
         effective hearing and there are no  sufficient  findings  of  fact.
         There is no alternative but  to  return  the  appeal  for  a  fresh
         hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.


    9.     There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.




    DECISION


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets  aside  the  original  decision  and  directs  that  the
    original appeal should be heard again before a differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, not  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan, on a date to be fixed.






    Signed Dated 25 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
