

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Langanside, Belfast                  | Promulgated on:             |
|On 12 June 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |On 7 July 2014               |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                   Between

                               DMYTRO KALININ
                          (No Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barr of Creighton & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  The origins of this appeal can be traced to a decision made  on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of
      State"), dated 7 May 2013, whereby the Appellant's application  for  a
      residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the "2006
      Regulations") was refused.  The operative passage in the  decision  is
      the following:




        "You have not provided any evidence of your dependency on your  EEA
        national sponsor at any time, either in-country or  in  the  United
        Kingdom.   You  have  not  provided  any  evidence  that  you  were
        dependent  on  your  EEA  national  sponsor  immediately  prior  to
        entering the United Kingdom ....".


    It is common case that the  decision  letter  erroneously  referred  to
    Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations, whereas the relevant provision is
    Regulation 7, which defines the "family members" of another  person  as
    including  such  person's  dependants.   Per  Regulation   17(1),   the
    Secretary of State must issue a residence card to persons  who  satisfy
    the prescribed conditions.

2.   The basic  matrix  is  uncomplicated.   The  Appellant  is  a  Ukranian
    national, aged 28 years.  His mother is a EEA national who, within  the
    compass of Regulation  17(1)  of  the  2006  Regulations,  is  residing
    lawfully in the United Kingdom.  In making his application for  an  EEA
    Family Permit,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  Appellant,  by  virtue  of
    Regulation 7(1), to establish that he is dependent on his  mother.   As
    the excerpt above indicates, the decision-maker was not satisfied  that
    the Appellant had discharged this burden.

3.   By its determination promulgated on  8  January  2014,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  The sole  issue
    was whether the Appellant was dependent on his mother.  The Immigration
    Judge formulated in correct terms the guiding  principle,  namely  that
    dependency is a question of fact.  While  the  judge  acknowledged  the
    provision of financial support to the Appellant from  both  his  mother
    and United Kingdom step-father, he reasoned that this did  not  qualify
    the Appellant as a dependant under Regulation 7 on two grounds.  First,
    the support was time-limited.  Second, he was "leading  an  independent
    life albeit eased by monies received from his mother and  step-father".



4.   It is apparent from its determination  that  the  FtT  concentrated  on
    past events.  There was no focus on the state of play at  the  time  of
    the appeal hearing or in the  more  recent  past.   Thus  there  was  a
    failure to give effect to the requirement enshrined in the decision  in
    Reyes v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKUT  314,
    [19]. Taking into account also that English is not the native tongue of
    the Appellant's mother, it is accepted on the Appellant's  behalf  that
    the  aforementioned  failure  may  be  attributable  in  part  to   the
    orientation of the evidence elicited from her at the hearing.

5.   Whatever the explanation, I am of the opinion that  the  FtT  erred  in
    law for the reason stated above.  Further, I consider  the  materiality
    of this error to  be  beyond  plausible  dispute  since,  had  it  been
    avoided, the outcome could have been  different.   Accordingly,  I  set
    aside the decision of the FtT.




THE DECISION RE-MADE

6.   In re-making the decision, I have considered:

    (a)  All of the documentary evidence presented to the FtT.


    (b)  The additional documentary  evidence  which  I  admit  under  Rule
15(2A).


    (c)  The witness statements of the Appellant's mother and stepfather.


    (d)  The oral evidence of the Appellant's mother .

7.   Bearing in mind the observation which I have made in [4] above,  it  is
    apparent that the evidence adduced from the Appellant's  mother  before
    this Tribunal is more extensive than her evidence at first instance.

8.   I preface my findings with the observation that the Appellant's  mother
    was an impressive witness, whose testimony was devoid of  invention  or
    exaggeration.  I make the following specific findings:

    (a)  Having completed  his  education  and  undertaken  his  compulsory
        military service, the Appellant worked for some  five  years,  from
        the ages  of  21  to  26.   This  was  fairly  menial,  though  not
        untypical, security work.  Though employed, his mother continued to
        support him financially.


    (b)  This financial  support  manifested  itself  particularly  in  the
        Appellant's mother paying for his wedding.


    (c)  Some months before the Appellant applied for a visitor's visa,  in
        May 2012, his wife divorced him, the main  reason  being  that  the
        Appellant had no job or income.  He  had  lost  his  previous  jobs
        through redundancy.


    (d)  Post-divorce, the Appellant's mother  continued  her  practice  of
        sending money and parcels to both the Appellant and  his  estranged
        spouse.


    (e)  The Appellant, since his divorce,  has  resided  in  his  mother's
        house in the Ukraine at no cost to  him.   All  of  the  property's
        outgoings and maintenance costs have been paid by  his  mother  and
        her sister.


    (f)  Having secured a visitor's visa, the Appellant visited his  mother
        and step-father in Northern Ireland between 1 August  2012  and  31
        May 2013.  Throughout this period he was  entirely  dependent  upon
        them for accommodation, board,  clothes,  pocket  money  and  other
        outlays.  His mother financed him for the  purpose  of  socialising
        and travelling locally.  In addition, she paid for golf classes and
        equipment, together with the costs of attending a local gymnasium.


    (g)  This financial support has continued since the Appellant's  return
        to the Ukraine.  His mother has been sending him  100  Euros  every
        month, as previously.  This was discontinued temporarily on account
        of banking problems  in  the  Ukraine.  It  is  essential  for  the
        Appellant's subsistence, given that he has  no  earnings  or  other
        resources.

9.   Based on the findings rehearsed above I  conclude  that  the  Appellant
    has at all material times been impecunious,  the  antithesis  of  self-
    sufficient and significantly dependent on his mother for financial  and
    other material  support.  All  the  relevant  evidence  points  to  the
    conclusion that he has been incapable  of  self-support  for  a  period
    approaching  two  years  It  follows  that  he  is  a  dependant  under
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations.

DECISION

10.  This is as follows:

    (a)  I set aside the decision of the FtT.


    (b)  I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.





                          Signed:
                           [pic]
                                               The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date:     24 June 2014




Footnote: Paragraphs [1] & [2] corrected under Rule 42, 07 July 2014.
