
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA184902015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2016                             |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal Deputy judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED ATIF PARVEZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan appeals with permission against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) promulgated  on  8th
    October 2015, in which it dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
    Respondent's refusal of 6th May 2015 to grant him leave  to  remain  in
    the UK.

Background

 2. There  is  a  protracted  immigration  history  to  this  appeal.   The
    Appellant entered the UK in 2008 and at  that  time  claimed  to  be  a
    British citizen born in Halifax in 1989.  This turned out to be untrue;
    he is apparently called Poona Khan, not Mohammed Parvez as claimed.  He
    is a citizen of Pakistan.  The fact of his real identity  was  admitted
    by the Appellant at the time of the hearing before the  FtT.  There  is
    also a question over whether the Appellant used deception to gain entry
    to the UK.

 3. On 2nd March 2013  the  Appellant  married  Shabana  Kosar,  a  British
    citizen, in an Islamic ceremony.

 4. On 24th January 2015 their first child was born.  It is correct to  say
    that when the Appellant's  appeal  came  before  Judge  Saffer  on  2nd
    October 2015, Mrs Kosar was pregnant with the couple's second child.

 5. By the time of the UT  hearing,  Mrs  Kosar  had  given  birth  to  the
    couple's second child. Unfortunately he suffers  medical  problems.  He
    has heart, lung and hand abnormalities.

The FtT Hearing

 6. Judge Saffer heard evidence from both the Appellant and Mrs  Kosar.  He
    also took into account  various  pieces  of  documentary  evidence.  In
    reaching his decision the judge found the following;

       .  the Appellant had lied over his identity.

       . he has been here unlawfully for the entire duration of his stay.

       . he entered into his relationship with Mrs Kosar  in  the  knowledge
         that he was here unlawfully.

 7. The judge then said this [39]

         "He (the Appellant) obviously would wish to be with Mrs  Kosar  and
         (their child) and be present during her pregnancy and the impending
         birth.  It would not be reasonable to require (their child) or  Mrs
         Kosar to leave the United Kingdom with the  Appellant  given  their
         settled status, her impending confinement, and the  fact  that  she
         has all her family and job here."

    Nevertheless he went on to dismiss the appeal.

 8. Permission to appeal was sought, the main ground being that there was a
    failure by the judge to  properly  consider  and  apply  the  statutory
    public  interest  considerations   under   Section   117B(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. Permission was granted and the relevant part  of  the  grant  reads  as
    follows:

         "In respect of Section 117B(6) it is arguable that  the  judge  has
         misdirected himself in  respect  of  the  statutory  framework  and
         applicable test.  Accordingly I grant  permission  on  this  ground
         alone."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for legal error and the  decision
    remade.

The UT Hearing

10. Ms Khan appeared for the Appellant and Ms Pettersen for the Respondent.
     Prior to the UT Hearing, the Respondent served a Rule 24 Response.  In
    that Response it was conceded by the  Respondent  that  the  judge  had
    erred in his decision and that there was no opposition the  Appellant's
    application, on the narrow scope set out above in the permission.

11. Mrs Pettersen submitted that if I was satisfied that the  judge  erred,
    then the appropriate course would be for me to set aside  the  decision
    and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.
    The rehearing would require further evidence to be heard concerning the
    couple's second child.

12. Ms Khan asked me  to  give  consideration  to  continuing  the  hearing
    straight away in the Upper Tribunal.  She said that the  Appellant  and
    his wife were anxious that the case proceed as soon  as  possible,  not
    least because the future of the second child gave cause  for  increased
    anxiety.

13. I gave consideration to  Ms  Khan's  submissions  but  there  were  two
    problems against continuing.  Part of  the  Appellant's  case  now,  is
    going to centre on the health of the second child.  I enquired with  Ms
    Khan what evidence she was able to bring to deal with that issue.   She
    responded saying that she had been able to take a handwritten statement
    from Mrs Kosar only that morning, outlining the fact  that  the  second
    child suffered from medical problems. There was no medical report  from
    the child's professional health carers.

14. Ms Pettersen, quite properly, said that she had not had an  opportunity
    to see either the mother's statement  nor  to  consider  any  available
    medical evidence. She further submitted that it  would  be  appropriate
    for a full medical report on the child's condition to  be  obtained  by
    the Appellant and for the Respondent to be  given  the  opportunity  to
    consider any fresh evidence.

15. The second problem which arose was that no interpreter had been  booked
    for the hearing.  The  Appellant  requires  the  services  of  an  Urdu
    interpreter.  Ms  Pettersen  said  in  all  the  circumstances  it  was
    appropriate to adjourn the hearing  and  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal since a  fact-finding  exercise  would  now  be  necessary  to
    consider the fresh evidence.

16. After taking instructions Ms Khan agreed to this course.  She  did  ask
    that I make directions for the case to be expedited because the  family
    were, naturally, already anxious enough with the  situation  concerning
    their second baby.  They wished to  get  matters  settled  as  soon  as
    possible.

17. I accept that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside
    for legal error on this basis. Nowhere in the decision do I see that  a
    full consideration and analysis of Section 117B(6) has been carried out
    by that Tribunal.  However I find it is not  necessary  for  the  whole
    decision to be set aside.  Ms Khan asked  that  the  findings  made  by
    Judge Saffer in [31], [32] and [39] be  preserved.   Ms  Pettersen  was
    agreeable to that course and I see no reason to disturb those findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8th October  2015  is
set aside for legal error.  The appeal is remitted  to  that  Tribunal  (not
Judge Saffer) for a further  hearing,  with  [31],  [32]  and  [39]  of  the
judge's original decision being preserved and for that Tribunal  to  re-make
the decision.

Directions

 1) This appeal to be relisted to  be  relisted  at  Bradford  FtT  for  an
    expedited hearing in six weeks' time.  The hearing will be expected  to
    last two hours.


 2) Medical evidence outlining the medical condition of the  Appellant  and
    Mrs Kosar's second child to be obtained and served upon the Respondent,
    at least five days before the renewed hearing date.


 3) An Urdu interpreter required.


 4) Ms Khan's availability to be taken into  account  when  relisting  this
    matter.


 5) A typed copy of Mrs Kosar's statement to be signed and served upon  the
    Respondent five days before the renewed hearing date.





No anonymity direction is made, none was sought.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     19 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

