
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/18999/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 24 January 2017           |On Monday 30th January 2017          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                       MR VIJAYTHEIVENDRAN PRATHEEPAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Lingajothy, Legal Representative, Linga & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Anstis promulgated on 22 February 2016  ("the  Decision").  By
       the Decision the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
       Respondent's decision dated 1 May 2015 refusing him leave to  remain
       on human rights grounds.

    2. The facts of the Appellant's case are  not  in  dispute.   He  is  a
       national of Sri Lanka. He was born on 2  July  1993.   He  left  Sri
       Lanka with his parents when he was aged  four  years.   His  parents
       fled Sri Lanka and went to India due  to  his  father's  involvement
       with the LTTE.  His parents were granted refugee status in India and
       he was granted status in line with them.  They remain in India.  The
       Appellant says that he is unable to  return  to  India  now  as  his
       status will have lapsed.

    3. The Appellant first came to the UK on 8 May 2010  with  leave  as  a
       student.  That leave expired on 25 May 2011.  Since arriving in  the
       UK he has lived with his paternal uncles who are settled in the  UK.
       One of those uncles has been financially  supporting  the  Appellant
       and his parents prior to the Appellant's arrival in the  UK  as  the
       Appellant's father suffers from medical problems.

    4. On 23 May 2011, the Appellant sought indefinite leave to remain as a
       dependent relative.  That application was refused on 4 August  2011.
       He appealed and his appeal was ultimately dismissed by Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 19 November 2012.   Her  decision  is  not
       directly relevant to the issues which remain in this appeal but  for
       completeness I record that she found that the  Appellant  would  not
       have to return to Sri Lanka as she did not  accept  that  there  was
       evidence to show, as the Appellant asserted, that he would be unable
       to return to India.

    5. Following the dismissal of his appeal, the Appellant remained in the
       UK.  He made two applications for an EEA residence permit,  both  of
       which  were  refused  in  2013  and  2014.   Finally,  he  made  the
       application for indefinite leave to remain which forms the basis  of
       the  Respondent's  decision  under  appeal.   The  Appellant  relies
       principally on his relationship with his  paternal  uncles  and  the
       children of one of those uncles (his cousins).  He also  points  out
       that he has not lived in Sri Lanka since the age of four and has no-
       one there, that he says that he cannot return to India and  that  he
       says that he may be at  risk  in  Sri  Lanka  due  to  his  father's
       previous history.  He has not though made a protection claim.

    6. This is an appeal which proceeds under the Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
       Accordingly, the decision under appeal  is  a  refusal  of  a  human
       rights claim.  There is  not  therefore  any  associated  notice  of
       removal specifying the destination to which the Appellant  would  be
       returned if his appeal fails.

    7. The Judge found that the relationship between the Appellant and  his
       relatives, whilst close, was insufficient to engage Article 8  ECHR,
       based  on  the  case  law  concerning  relationships  between  adult
       relatives [26].  He did  not  accept  either  that  the  Appellant's
       evidence disclosed that his private  life  would  engage  Article  8
       [27].  He went on to record however that, even if he had found  that
       Article 8 was engaged and there was  a  sufficient  interference  by
       reason  of  the  refusal,  he  would  nonetheless  have  found   the
       Respondent's decision to be proportionate [30].

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on  9
       December 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the  Judge  had
       erred by failing to take into account the  Appellant's  relationship
       with his uncles when considering the Appellant's private life.   The
       appeal comes before me to determine whether there is an error of law
       in the Decision and if so to either re-make the decision or remit to
       the First-tier Tribunal to do so.



    Discussion and conclusions

    9.  Before  turning  to  consider  the  Appellant's  grounds  on  which
       permission has been granted, it is worth recording what  is  not  in
       issue before me.

   10. Firstly, the Appellant has  not  claimed  asylum.   The  Appellant's
       barrister  who  appeared  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal   did   make
       submissions based on Article 3 ECHR.  Those are dealt with  at  [31]
       of the Decision. The Judge dealt with that submission on  the  basis
       that there were presently no directions to remove the  Appellant  to
       Sri Lanka.  He found in any event that the evidence did not  support
       a claimed breach of Article 3.  Leaving aside  that  the  Judge  was
       almost certainly entitled to reach that view on the limited evidence
       before him, there was not a challenge to that finding made  to  this
       Tribunal.  It was raised in the grounds seeking permission to appeal
       from the First-tier Tribunal but the Appellant did not rely on those
       grounds when seeking permission to appeal from  the  Upper  Tribunal
       and it therefore plays no part in the permission grant.

   11. Secondly, the Appellant did not  suggest  that  he  could  meet  the
       Immigration Rules in relation to his family or private life.  It  is
       undoubtedly the case that he could not meet the Rules under Appendix
       FM in relation to his family life given his age and  the  nature  of
       the relationship relied upon.  He did not though  seek  to  rely  on
       paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.   As Judge Bruce noted when  granting
       permission, therefore, "it  has  apparently  been  conceded  on  his
       behalf that  there  are  not  'very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration' in Sri Lanka". The Appellant was represented by Counsel
       at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  It must therefore be
       assumed that it was a deliberate decision to pursue the case on  the
       basis that it was  argued.   Counsel  expressly  accepted  that  the
       Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules ([5] of  the
       Decision).

   12. For those reasons,  Mr  Lingajothy's  submissions  were  necessarily
       limited to reliance on  the  errors  asserted  in  relation  to  the
       Judge's consideration of the Appellant's relationship with his uncle
       on the basis of Article 8 outside the Rules.  Mr Lingajothy directed
       my attention to the factual basis for the Appellant's claim in  this
       regard which is set out at [18] and [19] of the Decision as follows:-



            "[18]      I accept what I have  been  told  by  the  Appellant
           about the nature of his relationship with his uncle's daughters.
            Indeed, this does not seem to be disputed  by  the  Respondent.
           He has had a degree of responsibility for them in delivering and
           picking them up from school while their parents are at work, and
           in  consequent  work  such  as  supervising  or  assisting  with
           homework.  He has done this since  his  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom in 2010, except for the recent period  during  which  he
           has been living in Harrow.  However, the girls have  always  had
           their parents available during this time, and he has  never  had
           any sort of parental role in their life.

            [19] The Appellant's uncle has described the Appellant as  like
           a son to him.  I have no doubt on what I have  heard  that  they
           have a close and fond relationship, with the  Appellant's  uncle
           being particularly protective of him.  I also  accept  that  the
           Appellant's uncle had a role in financially supporting him while
           he was growing up in India.  However, I have not  heard  of  the
           Appellant's uncle providing anything  beyond  financial  support
           while he was in India, or, for  instance,  visiting  or  playing
           some other substantial part in  his  life  during  his  time  in
           India.    The  current  close  relationship  between  them  only
           appears to have started on the Appellant's arrival in the United
           Kingdom, by which time he was nearly 17."

   13. Having directed himself in relation  to  whether  that  relationship
       could amount to "family life" for the purposes  of  Article  8,  the
       Judge made the following findings at [25] and [26] of the Decision:-

            "[25]      I do not doubt the strength of the affection between
           the Appellant, his uncle and his uncle's family.   However,  the
           Appellant is now in his early 20s and lived with his  uncle  and
           his uncle's family for only just over a year as  a  child  (from
           almost 17  years  old),  having  previously  apparently  had  no
           contact with them beyond the financial support  that  his  uncle
           was providing to his family in India.

            [26] Whereas the relationship in Boyle had been built up  while
           the nephew was a child (and the nephew was a child at  the  time
           of the application) in this case the  relationship  has  largely
           been established in adulthood.  I am dealing with a relationship
           between an adult nephew and his uncle, and I consider  that  for
           article 8 to be engaged in such a case would require, as Mostafa
           suggests "very unusual circumstances". An example might be where
           the uncle had brought up the nephew from birth or an early  age,
           but that is not the case here.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
           Appellant being close to his uncle and  family  and  financially
           supported by them now, and since nearly 17,  amounts  to  family
           life sufficient to engage article 8."

   14. Whilst I might not have myself have found that  Article  8  was  not
       engaged at all on those facts, the Judge  has  directed  himself  in
       accordance with the relevant case law, it is not said  that  he  has
       misunderstood the facts of the case and he has reached a  conclusion
       which was open to him on the evidence.  I am satisfied that there is
       no error of law in relation to the Judge's finding  in  relation  to
       family life.

   15. That is though, not the end of the matter.  Indeed, the  reason  for
       the grant of permission is expressly stated to be not on  the  basis
       of the finding as to family life but rather on the basis that  those
       relationships are not considered also under the heading  of  private
       life.   As Richards LJ observed in Singh v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [25], the  discussion  of
       whether the relationship is one which engages an individual's family
       life may be an arid debate in circumstances where  the  relationship
       would fall to be considered as  part  of  the  individual's  private
       life.   In this particular case, though, the Judge also  found  that
       the evidence did not establish  that  the  Appellant  had  formed  a
       private life.  At [27], the Judge said this:-

            "[27]      The Appellant does not just rely on the family  life
           aspect of article 8, but also relies on his private life,  which
           is described in one paragraph in his witness  statement.   There
           is, however, no specific material relied upon in support of  the
           Appellant's private life apart from his volunteer work with  his
           church.  I do not consider that this is sufficient to  establish
           a private life sufficient to engage article 8."

   16. If this had been the end of the Judge's consideration of Article  8,
       I would have had no difficulty in finding an error of  law.   Taking
       together a period of residence of six years  (albeit  precarious  or
       unlawful) coupled with the Appellant's relationship with his  family
       in the UK, it is difficult to see how a finding that  the  Appellant
       has not formed some sort of private life  was  open  to  the  Judge.
       However, the Judge did not stop  there.   He  went  on  to  consider
       whether the decision refusing leave would be disproportionate if the
       Appellant's family and private  life  were  engaged  and  there  was
       sufficient interference with it.  At [29] onwards, he said this:-

            "[29]      If I had found that  article  8  was  engaged  to  a
           sufficient extent to satisfy stage two of  the  Razgar  test,  I
           would have gone on to find that any interference with family  or
           private life would have been in accordance with law and, bearing
           in mind section 117B(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002, that the interference was necessary.

            [30] On the question of proportionality, I would have  to  give
           little  weight  to  the  Appellant's  private  life,  which  was
           established at a time when his immigration status was precarious
           (s117B(4)(a)).  Accordingly, the  decision  would  have  been  a
           proportionate interference with his private  life.   As  regards
           family life, in respect of the Appellant's uncle's  children  it
           has not been argued that their best interests required that  the
           Appellant be given leave to remain (section 55 of  the  Borders,
           Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009) and  I  would  have  found
           that the decision to refuse leave to remain was a  proportionate
           interference with the  Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  his
           family life."

   17. I asked Mr Lingajothy how it could be said that there is an error of
       law in relation to engagement of Article 8  in  circumstances  where
       the Judge has gone on  to  make  alternative  findings  relating  to
       proportionality.  In response,  he  submitted  only  that  there  is
       sufficient merit in the Appellant's family and private life claim to
       outweigh the public interest.  I disagree.  This is a case where the
       Appellant has been in the UK on a temporary basis as a student for a
       period of at best three years and for the remaining  period  without
       leave and therefore unlawfully.   I  accept  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller's
       submission that, in circumstances where the claim is based  squarely
       on the de facto parental relationship with his  uncles,  immigration
       control outweighs the family and/or private  life  formed  and  that
       there is nothing which tips the balance in  the  Appellant's  favour
       (based on the claim as it was made and pursued).

   18. For those reasons, even if I were minded to find an error of law  in
       the Decision, I would not find it material and I would not set aside
       the Decision on that account.  In any event, for the  reasons  given
       at [16] and [17] above, I am not persuaded that there is an error of
       law.  The Judge considered the case on the  alternative  basis  that
       the Appellant's claim was sufficient to engage Article  8  and  that
       the Respondent's decision interfered with his private and/or  family
       life.  However, for the reasons  given  at  [30]  of  the  Decision,
       having applied section 117B as he was required to do, he reached the
       conclusion that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in  any  event  a
       proportionate one.  That finding does not disclose any error of law.





DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 22 February 2016 with the consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal is dismissed.


Signed           [pic] Dated:    25 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
