
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/18243/2013
                                                               IA/18244/2013
                                                               IA/18245/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 April 2014                            |On 9 April 2014            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MR RAO MUHAMMAD KAMRAN EJAZ
                             MRS AMBREEN KAMRAN
                        MASTER MUHAMMAD AYYAN KAMRAN
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr Q Anisuddin a legal
           representative from SZ Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr C Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The first  appellant  is  the
      husband of the second appellant and both of them are  the  parents  of
      the third appellant. The first appellant was born on 27 July 1983, the
      second appellant on 9 September 1987 and  the  third  appellant  on  2
      September 2010. I will refer to the first appellant as the  appellant,
      the second appellant as the wife, the third appellant as the  son  and
      to them together as the family. The family have been given  permission
      to appeal the decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maciel  ("the
      FTTJ") who dismissed their appeals against the respondent's  decisions
      of 3 May 2013 to refuse to grant the appellant leave to  remain  as  a
      Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Points-based System  with  the
      wife and son as his dependents. The respondent  also  gave  directions
      for their removal from the UK under s 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006. The appeals of the wife  and  son  stand  or
      fall with that of the appellant.


   2. The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as  a  student  on  24
      September 2003. He  extended  his  leave  as  a  student  for  periods
      expiring on 31 January 2011. Thereafter he was granted leave to remain
      as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant until 2 August 2012. He made  an
      application for leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
      under the Points-based System and the wife  and  son  applied  as  his
      dependents.


   3. The respondent refused the applications. The  reasons  were  that  the
      appellant had failed to submit Specified Documents in support  of  the
      application namely  any  service  contract  or  bank  statements.  The
      appellant maintained that a service contract had been  served  on  the
      respondent.


   4. At the beginning of the  hearing  before  the  FTTJ  the  respondent's
      representative withdrew the s 47 removal directions. I  will  need  to
      return to the question of how the appeal hearing developed.  The  FTTJ
      found that the appellant had not supplied a service  contract  in  the
      required format. The document he relied on  was  in  fact  a  business
      plan. He had not been able to produce a single  contract  to  evidence
      that he had been in business  for  any  period  before  or  since  his
      application.  The  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  the   required
      documents for the purpose of his application to remain in the UK under
      the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant provisions. He had not provided  the
      required documents at any stage and had given no explanation as to why
      he had not done so. The appeals against the decisions to refuse  leave
      to remain as an Entrepreneur and his dependents were dismissed.


   5. The FTTJ went on to consider the grounds of appeal which had not  been
      raised by the family in their applications to the respondent or in the
      grounds of appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  but  at  some  stage
      thereafter and in any event at the hearing before the FTTJ. These were
      that the family had spent more than  10  years  in  the  UK  and  were
      entitled to indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  long  residence
      provisions  of  paragraph  276  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and   the
      respondent's Immigration Directorate Instructions ("IDIs").  The  FTTJ
      records in  paragraph  29  of  the  determination  that  the  family's
      representative insisted that this be dealt with at the hearing  rather
      than being remitted to the respondent for consideration.


   6. The  FTTJ  found  that  these  grounds  involved  the  exercise  of  a
      discretion and that it was necessary to consider not only whether  the
      family had been lawfully in the  UK  with  leave  continuously  for  a
      period of at least 10 years but also whether there were matters to  be
      taken into account which would render it  undesirable  to  grant  them
      indefinite leave to remain. She found that there had been a  break  in
      the family's period of continuous lawful residence. This  was  between
      the expiry of leave on 31 October 2006 and the grant of further  leave
      on 5 December 2006, a period of  35  days  which  was  more  than  the
      permitted concessionary periods. She found that the appellant was  not
      a credible witness, he had lied to the respondent and the Tribunal and
      that his application to remain as an Entrepreneur did not  mirror  his
      true circumstances. It had been made for the purpose of prolonging his
      leave so that the family could "clock up" 10 years in the UK.


   7. The FTTJ went on to consider the appeals on  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds both under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and under
      the jurisprudence outside the Immigration Rules. She  found  that  the
      appellants could not bring themselves within paragraph  276ADE.  Under
      the  Article  8  jurisprudence  outside  the  Immigration  Rules   she
      concluded that the family had established a private life  in  the  UK,
      that all the  tests  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  were  answered  in  the
      affirmative  except  for  the  last,  proportionality,  on  which  the
      conclusion turned. If the family was removed  they  would  be  removed
      together and they had family living in Pakistan.  Notwithstanding  the
      time they had spent in the UK  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
      interference with their right to respect for private and  family  life
      to remove them.


   8. The FTTJ dismissed the appeals. The family applied for  permission  to
      appeal which was refused by a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. It was
      renewed to and granted by a judge in the Upper Tribunal who considered
      that there was an arguable error of law. The FTTJ might have erred  in
      finding that there was a gap of  35  days  in  the  periods  of  leave
      granted and it was arguable that the family did have a continuous ten-
      year period of residence. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal raised additional allegations of errors of law  and  in  more
      detail than the grounds submitted in support of  the  renewal  of  the
      application to the Upper Tribunal.  Mr  Anisuddin  told  me  that  the
      family relied on the grounds submitted to the Upper Tribunal, not  the
      grounds submitted to the First-Tier Tribunal.


   9. I have a Rule 24 reply from the  respondent  and  a  letter  from  the
      family's solicitors dated 18 March 2014 submitting  further  documents
      which were not before the FTTJ. Mr Anisuddin also provided an  extract
      from Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice.


  10.  The  beginning  of  the  hearing  Mr  Avery  asked  to  clarify   the
      respondent's current position on whether there  was  a  break  in  the
      period of continuous leave in 2006. Further  investigations  had  been
      made since the hearing before the FTTJ. He confirmed that in 2006  the
      respondent's caseworker treated the appellant's application as  an  in
      time application and that leave was granted. The application  was  not
      treated as invalid and he was therefore  instructed  to  concede  that
      there was no break in the family's period of lawful residence. However
      this was only one reason for the FTTJ's decision that the family could
      not succeed under the ten-year rule. The  other  was  the  appellant's
      conduct which, he submitted, brought the family within the  provisions
      of paragraph 276B(ii) on which the respondent relied. The  FTTJ  dealt
      with this in paragraph 29.


  11. Mr Anisuddin relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He
      said that the concession by the respondent did not take the family  by
      surprise and he did not need to ask for an  adjournment  in  order  to
      consider this. The appellant had persevered with and succeeded in  his
      studies and the family had a good  immigration  history.  He  accepted
      that the family had asked the FTTJ to deal with the ten-year residence
      question rather than remitting it to the respondent consideration.  He
      also accepted that the FTTJ  had  dealt  with  the  issues  raised  in
      paragraph 276B(ii) but argued that the adverse credibility finding was
      flawed and the evidence  did  not  support  the  conclusion  that  the
      entrepreneur application was falsely based on  made  for  an  improper
      purpose. He submitted that the 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence
      was now conceded discretion should have been exercised in the family's
      favour.


  12. Mr Avery submitted that on the evidence it was open  to  the  FTTJ  to
      find that the application had been made for improper reasons in  order
      to achieve 10 years residence. The findings in paragraph 29 were  open
      to her. He relied on MU (statement of additional  grounds)  Bangladesh
      2010 UKUT 442 (IAC). There was no error of law  and  I  was  asked  to
      uphold the determination.


  13. Mr Anisuddin did not wish to reply. I reserved my determination.


  14. The FTTJ dismissed the appeals in relation to the 10  years  residence
      point for two reasons. Firstly, she found that there had not  been  10
      years continuous lawful residence because of a 35 day  break  in  late
      2006. It has not been necessary for me to consider whether  there  was
      any error of law in the reasoning or conclusion of  the  FTTJ  because
      the respondent now concedes that there  was  no  interruption  in  the
      period of lawful residence. However, the FTTJ dismissed the appeal for
      another reason set out in paragraph 29 in which she said;


         "It was at  the  appellants'  representatives'  insistence  that  I
         decide the issue of Long Residence  as  opposed  to  remitting  the
         matter to the respondent. I find that the issue of granting or  not
         granting indefinite leave to remain is an exercise  of  discretion.
         The wording of paragraph 276C uses the words "may be  granted".  It
         is the case that a decision maker would have to consider  not  only
         whether the first appellant has been lawfully in the UK with lawful
         continuous leave for 10 years but also whether there are matters to
         be taken into account which would render it  undesirable  to  grant
         indefinite leave to remain. I find  that  the  application  for  an
         extension of leave to remain one year before he could  apply  under
         the Long Residence provision, as an Entrepreneur was simply done to
         prolong his leave to "clock" up his  10  years.  I  find  that  the
         application was made with that sole intent. There was a  dearth  of
         any evidence about the business and the first  appellant  struggled
         to explain any aspect of it. Mr Edwards' submission  was  that  the
         application to remain as an Entrepreneur did not mirror  the  first
         appellant's true circumstances. There was no intention to carry  on
         his business and it was set up purely to  support  the  application
         for leave to remain and that he had lied to the Court  and  to  the
         Immigration authorities. I find that the first  appellant  has  not
         been truthful about his business  -  his  intention  to  engage  in
         business or about the time  and  monies  expended  to  develop  the
         business. I find that this  ought  to  be  taken  into  account  in
         considering the grant of leave to remain under the  Long  Residence
         provisions. I  find,  in  all  the  circumstances  that  the  first
         appellant is not entitled to indefinite leave to remain  under  the
         Long Residence provisions. Accordingly, I  dismiss  the  appeal  on
         this ground in relation to the first appellant  and  in  line  with
         this decision, I dismiss the appeals of the  other  two  appellants
         also."


  15. The main thrust of the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  in
      relation to issues which have now been conceded in the family's favour
      by the respondent, namely that there had been a  period  of  10  years
      continuous  lawful  residence.  The  only  other  ground  is  that  in
      paragraph 6 where it is argued that the FTTJ erred in  law  by  basing
      her conclusion that the appellant made the entrepreneur application in
      order to complete 10 years  lawful  residence  on  nothing  more  than
      speculation. Mr  Anisuddin  amplified  this  at  the  hearing  in  his
      submission that the adverse credibility finding against the  appellant
      was flawed.  No  more  detailed  particulars  were  given  for  either
      submission.


  16. The FTTJ gave detailed reasons for her finding that the appellant  was
      not a credible witness. She found him to  be  evasive  and  unable  to
      explain his business dealings. He had prepared a business plan  purely
      to support his application. He could  not  explain  his  own  business
      plan. He had never intended to set up a genuine business. There was no
      evidence as to what monies he had used in relation  to  the  business.
      Whilst the respondent has now conceded that there was no break in  the
      10 year period of residence  the  appellant  had  given  contradictory
      evidence about whether any application he had made was  ever  returned
      to him and if it was when  it  was  resubmitted.  The  effect  on  his
      credibility of these  inconsistencies  does  not  disappear  with  the
      respondent's concession. The FTTJ's reasoning and conclusions  can  be
      found in paragraphs 25 to 28. I find that they provide strong  support
      for the adverse  credibility  finding  and  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant never intended to carry on business and that his application
      for leave to remain as an Entrepreneur and the appeal  which  followed
      the refusal was intended to prolong the family's stay  in  the  UK  in
      order to claim indefinite leave on the basis of 10 years residence. At
      the date of his application on 21 July 2012 the family had not been in
      this country for 10 years.


  17. The FTTJ set out the provisions of paragraph 276A,  B  and  C  of  the
      Immigration Rules in paragraph 21 of the determination. She considered
      the relevant provisions  of  paragraph  276C,  which  refers  back  to
      paragraph 276B, in paragraph 29 including the words "may  be  granted"
      which led her to the correct conclusion that the grant  of  indefinite
      leave was discretionary. She went on to consider the relevant  factors
      under paragraph 276B namely whether there were  matters  to  be  taken
      into account which would render it  undesirable  to  grant  indefinite
      leave to remain. I find that the factors which she took  into  account
      justified the conclusion that  the  family  were  not  entitled  to  a
      discretionary grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The  family's
      representatives pressed the FTTJ to deal with the  10  year  residence
      application rather than referring it back to the respondent and I have
      also been asked to deal with this rather than referring it back to the
      respondent. I find that MU  Bangladesh  support  the  view  that  this
      course of action can be followed.


  18.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 4 April
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

