
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18420/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 15 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             JOSEPH SAID-CALLEJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against a determination by a panel  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal comprising Judge Reid and Mr Yates, dismissing  his  appeal
   against deportation to Malta under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2006.

2) The first ground of appeal is that the panel erred  by  failing  to  have
   regard to the issue of rehabilitation, on the authority  of  Essa  [2012]
   EWCA Civ 1718.

3) This is at best an error of form, not of substance.   The  appellant  did
   not put any case to the First-tier Tribunal that his rehabilitation might
   be better served in the UK than in  Malta.   His  preference  is  not  to
   reside  in  the  UK  but  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland,  where  he  has
   connections, and where he lived after absconding  from  bail  granted  at
   Edinburgh Sheriff Court.  He does not seek to rehabilitate himself in the
   UK.  Whether he is permitted to re-enter the Republic  of  Ireland  is  a
   question for that State.  The  appellant  may  seek  to  enter  there  as
   readily from Malta as he can from the UK.

4) The panel did not fall into any material error of law by failing to  deal
   with  this  matter,  which  could  have  led  to  no  resolution  in  the
   appellant's favour.

5) The second ground is that the panel erred  in  rejecting  the  conclusion
   reached in a parole  report  that  the  appellant  was  at  low  risk  of
   recidivism.

6) At paragraph 67 of the determination, the panel took  into  account  that
   although assessed at a low risk of  general  recidivism  and  of  general
   harm, the scenarios  likely  to  trigger  offending  behaviour  were  his
   previous history of dishonesty, offences of fraud and  lack  of  insight.
   The ground goes on to complain that the panel's conclusion is speculative
   because there was evidence that  the  appellant  had  not  committed  any
   criminal offences in Ireland from 2006 to 2010.  However, what the  panel
   found was that it could not agree with the  conclusion  that  there  were
   significant gaps in the appellant's history, given the considerable  time
   he had spent out of the UK and  the  lack  of  information  during  those
   periods.  Given what was known  of  his  history,  that  was  a  sensible
   observation.  It does not sit well with a claim of  good  behaviour  that
   this was during a period when the appellant was avoiding  proceedings  in
   the UK.

7) The panel was entitled to disagree with  the  conclusion  stated  by  the
   parole board, and gave good, if short, reasons for doing so.

8) The third ground is that the panel  erred  by  not  concluding  that  the
   appellant enjoyed the enhanced protection against deportation afforded by
   Regulations 21(3) and (4) on the basis of 5 or 10 years'  residence.   Mr
   Ndubuisi, however, acknowledged that the only evidence that the appellant
   resided continuously in the UK for even the shorter of those  periods  is
   his own, and he was found to be an unreliable witness.

9) When that became plain, Mr Ndubuisi  sought  to  amount  the  grounds  to
   include an attack upon the adverse credibility findings.  I  declined  to
   permit such amendment, because it came at much too late a stage.  In  any
   event, the panel plainly reached adverse  credibility  conclusions  which
   were properly open for the reasons given.

10) While it is not necessary to go any further  for  present  purposes,  it
   would be surprising if any panel had found the appellant to  be  anything
   but an unreliable witness.

11) The appellant's representative was correct on  one  point  made  by  the
   Presenting Officer in his submissions.  Mr Mullen said that the appellant
   could not reach a qualifying period of residence  even  if  he  had  been
   found credible, because Malta only became part of the EEA on 1  May  2004
   and the appellant absconded from bail in 2006.  Mr  Ndubuisi  produced  a
   copy of Ziolkowski  C-424/10  and  C-425/10  in  which  the  CJEU,  Grand
   Chamber, held that periods of residence prior to  accession  were  to  be
   taken into account for the purposes of the acquisition of  the  right  of
   permanent residence.  However, it remains the  case  that  there  was  no
   evidence found to be credible by  which  the  appellant  could  establish
   either 5 or 10 years' continuous residence.

12) None of the 3 grounds show error of law in any material respect  by  the
   panel of the First-tier Tribunal, such as to require its determination to
   be set aside.  The determination shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                19 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
