
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18201/2013
     IA/18210/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18 March 2013                              |On 27th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               OLatokunbo adio
                            joshua oluwafemi adio

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss P Glass of Counsel, instructed by A2 Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  22
      January  2014,  which  overturned  her  refusal  to   grant   Tier   1
      (Entrepreneur) status on the points-based  system  to  Mrs  Olatokunbo
      Adio.


   2. The original application to the Secretary of State had  been  made  by
      Mrs Adio on 20 March 2013.  That application  was  considered  by  the
      Secretary of State and refused in a letter dated 7 May 2013. Under the
      points-based system Mrs Adio required 75 points under Appendix A.  The
      reason for the refusal was the Secretary of State's determination that
      there  had  been  non-compliance   with   certain   aspects   of   the
      documentation which required to be provided by Mrs Adio.


   3. There were four matters upon which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied.
      Firstly, Mrs Adio had not provided any  marketing  materials  for  her
      business. Secondly, she had not provided evidence of trading  activity
      in the form of one or more contracts. Thirdly, the  contract  provided
      did not meet the  criteria,  as  it  failed  to  detail  the  services
      provided by the applicant. Fourthly, the contract  did  not  meet  the
      criteria, as there was no telephone number or e-mail address  for  her
      business on the contract.

   4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it was dealt  with
      by reference to Rodriguez [2013]  UKUT  42.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      described the lack of the provision of  the  phone  number  and  email
      address as a minor omission that could well have been rectified had it
      been brought to Mrs Adio's attention under the evidential  flexibility
      policy. In these circumstances, and now that the  omissions  had  been
      cured, the Tribunal allowed Mrs Adio's appeal.

   5. The Secretary of State quite understandably took the point  on  appeal
      to this Tribunal that the original  decision  in  Rodriguez  has  been
      overruled by the Court of Appeal: [2014] EWCA Civ 2.  However,  during
      the course of the hearing before us it became  apparent  that  certain
      matters upon which the Secretary  of  State  relied  in  reaching  her
      original decision were erroneous.

   6. Firstly, it appears that the bundle of documents which  the  Secretary
      of State sent to the First-tier Tribunal included two contracts  which
      had been provided to her by Mrs  Adio  with  her  application.  As  Ms
      Isherwood on behalf of the Secretary of State very properly  conceded,
      this would appear to preclude her from relying upon the second of  the
      four matters originally relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  as  a
      reason for refusing Mrs Adio's application.

   7. Secondly,  when  those  contracts  are  examined,  as  the  First-tier
      Tribunal found, each of them sets out  the  services  which  Mrs  Adio
      proposed to provide to her  customers.  Therefore  the  third  of  the
      matters originally relied upon by the Secretary of State falls away.

   8. Thirdly, although it  is  correct  that  neither  of  those  contracts
      provides Mrs Adio's telephone number and email address,  if  reference
      is made, as the Secretary of State did in her decision letter, to  41-
      SD of the Immigration Rules, what is required is not  the  applicant's
      telephone number and  email  address,  but  the  customer's  telephone
      number and email address. If one looks at  the  contract  between  Mrs
      Adio and Kikstem Services, it is apparent that  it  does  provide  the
      latter's telephone number and email address. Although  it  is  correct
      that the other contract does not provide such details,  if  one  makes
      further reference to 41-SD, it is clear  that  an  applicant  is  only
      obliged to provide the Secretary of  State  with  one  such  contract,
      which has been provided in this case.  Thus  the  fourth  matter  upon
      which the Secretary of State relied falls away,  without  recourse  to
      the original decision in Rodriguez.

   9. That leaves the first point upon which the Secretary of State  relied,
      namely the lack  of  provision  of  any  marketing  materials  in  the
      business. It is clear that under part 41-SD of the  Immigration  Rules
      at subparagraph (iii)(iv) this requirement may  be  fulfilled  by  the
      provision  of  a  document  establishing  the  applicant's:  "Personal
      registration with a trade body linked to the applicant's occupation".

  10. Regrettably, and through no fault of Ms Isherwood, she  did  not  have
      available to her the original file of documentation which was provided
      by Mrs Adio to the Secretary of State in March 2013.  However,  we  do
      have Section 7 of Mrs Adio's application  form  in  our  bundle,  from
      which it is apparent that two of the documents listed there were "RSPH
      documents".   Miss Glass who appears on behalf  of  Mrs  Adio  asserts
      that the document which we have seen, which is  a  document  from  The
      Royal Society for Public Health showing that at the material time  the
      applicant was a Fellow  of  that  Society,  would  provide  sufficient
      evidence, as the First-tier Tribunal found,  of  compliance  with  the
      requirement to provide marketing materials. We agree,  as  the  First-
      tier Tribunal held, that if this document had  been  provided  to  the
      Secretary  of State with the original  application  by  Mrs  Adio,  it
      would establish sufficient compliance with that  part  of  41-SD.  The
      only question which has arisen is whether or  not  that  document  was
      provided to the Secretary of State by Mrs Adio with  her  application.
      We have reached the conclusion that it is likely that it was  provided
      by her. Not only was the document specifically listed at section 7  of
      the application form, but, it having been so listed,  it  is  accepted
      that its absence would very likely be a matter which would  have  been
      raised by the Secretary of State with Mrs Adio prior to  the  decision
      being made. In these circumstances we have reached the conclusion that
      the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude  that  Mrs  Adio  had
      fulfilled this aspect of 41-SD. In these circumstances  the  first  of
      the matters relied upon by the Secretary of State also falls away.

  11.  Accordingly and for the reasons we have provided this appeal must  be
      dismissed.




24 March 2014
Mr Justice Jeremy Baker

