
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18189/2015
                                                               IA/18199/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                            |On 24 October 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                       HARPREET [S] (first Appellant)
                          [Y D] (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel, instructed by Pride
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Porter
    promulgated on 13 March 2016 which refused the Article 8 claim  of  the
    appellants.

 2. The background to this matter is that Mr [S], an Indian national,  came
    to the United Kingdom as a student in 2011.  On 13 July 2013 he married
    Mrs [NH] an Indonesian national.  On 14 September 2013 Mr  [S]'s  leave
    as a student was curtailed as the respondent  had  been  provided  with
    information that he had failed to attend his college course.

 3. On 14 September 2013 Mr [S] applied for leave as the dependant  of  his
    wife who had leave to remain in the UK  as  a  domestic  worker.   That
    application was refused.

 4. On 2 January 2015 Mr [S] and his newly born daughter  born  on  8  June
    2014, also an Indian national like her father, made an  application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.   The  respondent
    refused those applications in a decision dated 1 May 2015.

 5. There is no dispute that Mrs [H] has leave  as  a  domestic  worker  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 24 February 2017.

 6. At the core of the Article 8 claim put to the Secretary  of  State  and
    litigated before Judge Porter was the fact of the  appellant  being  an
    Indian national of Sikh religion and of his wife  being  an  Indonesian
    national of the Muslim religion.  The appellants argued that because of
    the difference in religions the couple could not be expected to  return
    to live either in India or in  Indonesia.   Their  families  would  not
    approve of them having married somebody from a different religion  this
    would cause them sufficient difficulty for them to be unable to return.



 7. The respondent refused the Article 8 application under the  Immigration
    Rules. She found that the  application  could  not  succeed  under  the
    partner route as Mrs [H] had  only  limited  leave  and  therefore  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP1.2 of Appendix FM was  not  met.   The
    child had no status to be in the UK, was not settled here and  had  not
    lived here for seven years and therefore  the  parent  requirements  of
    paragraph R-LTRP2.2 were not  met.   The  respondent  went  on  in  the
    refusal letter on page 3 of 9 to consider whether paragraph EX.1 of the
    Immigration Rules  applied  but  concluded  that  it  did  not  as  the
    eligibility requirements had not been met.

 8. The respondent went on to find  that  the  Immigration  Rules  covering
    private life were not met. Mr  [S]  could  not  show  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in India  if  he  returned  and  therefore
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) could not be met.  The respondent's reasoning  was
    that Mr [S] had spent almost the whole of his life in India,  that  his
    immediate family lived there and that he would unarguably  be  able  to
    integrate there whether or not he did so in  his  home  area,  and  his
    family would also have no difficulty.

 9. The Secretary of State went on to find on page 4 of 9 that  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances here showing that leave should be  granted
    outside the Immigration Rules. The respondent's reasoning included  the
    fact that  the  second  appellant,  like  her  father,  was  an  Indian
    national, that there was a functioning education system  in  India  and
    that given her very young age she could be expected to live there  with
    her parents, albeit there would be a degree of  disruption.  The  claim
    that the families could not go to each other's countries for  religious
    and family reasons was not accepted by the respondent.

10. In his decision Judge Porter sets out at [8] that at the outset of  the
    hearing he was asked to adjourn the case.  This was because Mrs [H] was
    giving birth on the day of the hearing.  That fact is not disputed.  He
    stated as follows when making his decision not to adjourn the hearing:

         "8.  At the start of the hearing, a motion to adjourn was  made  on
             behalf  of  the  appellants  on  the  ground  that  the  first
             appellant's wife, described as his  sponsor,  was  shortly  to
             give birth to the parties'  second  child.   Evidence  of  her
             estimated date of delivery was exhibited, and it was submitted
             that her evidence was essential for a  just  determination  of
             the appeal, with regard to the  question  of  proportionality.
             In particular, the sponsor's evidence regarding why the family
             could not be returned to Indonesia was highly relevant to  the
             appeal.  I asked why such  a  motion  had  not  been  made  an
             earlier date by the solicitors  representing  the  appellants,
             given that they must have been aware of this matter, and  also
             why the motion had not been  made  at  the  start  of  today's
             proceedings, given  that  this  was  a  case  that  was  being
             transferred  to  my  court  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day's
             proceedings.  In particular, I referred to the statement  from
             the appellant's wife, produced on this date, which stated that
             she would not be able to attend court due to the stage of  her
             pregnancy.  I was advised by Counsel  that  he  had  not  been
             aware of  the  situation  before  the  hearing  date  which  I
             accepted.  I noted  that  the  attitude  of  the  Home  Office
             Presenting Officer  was  one  of  neutrality  on  this  issue,
             although she did observe that the  appeal  was  by  the  first
             appellant and not by his sponsor.

         9.   In assessing all factors, I determined to refuse the motion to
             adjourn, on the basis that it was being made  at  too  late  a
             stage, and the potential evidence was not, in my view, crucial
             to a fair determination.  In particular, I considered that the
             first appellant would be able to explain fully  why  his  wife
             believed that they could not go to live in Indonesia."

    The appeal, therefore,  then  proceeded,  the  adjournment  application
    having been refused.

11. The appellant's first  ground  of  appeal  challenged  the  refusal  to
    adjourn the hearing in order for the wife to attend to  give  evidence.
    In the grounds of appeal stated that "it was also  submitted  that  the
    evidence of the wife is important to the determination of the  appeal".
    On the second page of the grounds it was identified that:

         "...  the  IJ  did  however  mentioned  at  paragraph  26  of  the
         determination that no objective evidence  was  submitted  regarding
         the  effect  of  the  religious  differences  in  either  India  or
         Indonesia.  It is submitted that  for  this  reason  the  sponsor's
         evidence was very important and the IJ has  erred  in  law  not  to
         grant adjournment."

12. The grounds go on to argue that "fairness" required that an adjournment
    was granted and that proceeding in  the  absence  of  the  sponsor  "is
    against the principle of natural justice and  is  non-existent  in  the
    eyes of the law" and that:

         "...  the  reason  given  for  the  refusing  of  application   for
         adjournment is inadequate and insufficient and the decision  of  IJ
         to proceed with the appeal was also against  the  will  of  natural
         justice.  The IJ has considered the appeal in hasty manner  without
         giving any weight and reason for the  adjournment  of  the  appeal,
         hence, the refusal of appeal is not only against  the  law  but  is
         also negation of basic rights of the appellant."

13. The grounds also refer to the reported case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), the head note of which states:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

14. I have considered this ground carefully, particularly so  in  light  of
    the guidance in Nwaigwe. It is not my conclusion  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  acted  unreasonably  or  unfairly   in   refusing   an
    adjournment.   He  was  told  that  the  sponsor's   evidence   related
    specifically to  the  reasons  why  the  couple  could  not  return  to
    Indonesia together.  Whatever the sponsor's  evidence  on  that  point,
    there was a separate limb of the claim, whether the family could return
    to India. Mr [S] was in attendance at the hearing and was able to  give
    evidence on that aspect of the appeal.  It  has  never  been  suggested
    that Mrs [H] could have given evidence on the difficulties for  her  or
    her family in India. Judge Porter made clear findings that  the  family
    could be expected to live in India so the absence of any evidence  from
    Mrs [H] on Indonesia could not have been material to the outcome of the
    appeal.

15. It was suggested in the grounds that Mrs [H] should have been  able  to
    give evidence about the  best  interests  of  the  child.  It  was  not
    explained why Mr [S] was not  in  a  position  to  give  that  evidence
    himself.  Other than the subjective evidence as to family and religious
    difficulties in India, there has  never  been  anything  identified  as
    capable of showing that the best interests of the very young child  lay
    anywhere other than being with her parents.  It  is  difficult  to  see
    what Mrs [H]'s evidence could have added to the assessment of the  best
    interests of the child, therefore.

16. Put simply, Mrs [H] did not have material evidence to  provide  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal beyond what was available in her witness  statement
    or from Mr [S] and the decision not to adjourn in order for her  to  be
    present was not unfair or in error.

17. It was also argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment
    of the circumstances of the second appellant and  her  best  interests.
    The grounds refer to the guidance provided in Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT
    00197.  As above, however, there has never been anything  here  capable
    of showing that the child's best interests are other  than  being  with
    her parents, whether in the UK or in her own  country  of  nationality,
    India. That was the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal and it was  a
    conclusion fully open to it on the evidence.

18. At the hearing Mr Maqsood  sought  to  argue  an  entirely  new  ground
    without seeking permission to do so. For that reason alone, I  declined
    to take the point. Even had the argument been admitted, it  was  wholly
    misconceived. Mr Maqsood sought to argue that the assessment under  the
    Immigration Rules here should  have  referred  to  the  Rules  for  the
    dependent of a domestic worker and not  those  covering  Article  8  in
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. That is not correct as Mr [S] and his
    daughter applied quite clearly for leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds, not
    as the dependents of a domestic worker.

19. Mr Maqsood also pointed out that the decision is  somewhat  unclear  in
    the final two paragraphs where at [28] Judge Porter appears to make  an
    assessment outside of the  Immigration  Rules  with  reference  to  the
    provisions of section 117A to D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, finding that they did not assist the family  but  then
    appearing to go on in [29] to state  that  a  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment was not carried out.

20. Again this was not a ground that had  been  raised  previously  and  Mr
    Maqsood did not seek permission to vary the grounds and for  it  to  be
    admitted. For what it is worth, I accept that  [28]-[29]  do  not  read
    entirely easily but in the context of the decision as a whole they  are
    not capable of founding legal error. What Judge Porter appears to me to
    be trying to do at [28] to [29] is assess whether it was  necessary  to
    make an assessment outside the Immigration  Rules.   He  ventures  into
    that territory at [28] in order to decide whether he should  do  so  or
    not but then concludes at [29] that  nothing  here  required  a  second
    stage assessment.  The key issue raised by  the  appellants  was  their
    ability to return as a family to India, this had  been  considered  and
    found without merit under the Immigration Rules and there  was  nothing
    more that indicated that a second stage assessment was required. It was
    fully open to Judge Porter to find  at  [28]  that  in  any  assessment
    outside of the Immigration Rules paragraph 117B(5) had to weigh heavily
    against the appellant.

21. For all of these reasons, it  is  my  conclusion  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law  in  refusing  an  adjournment  or  in  the
    Article 8 ECHR assessment and therefore the decision shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
