
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/18636/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/18633/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th September 2014                          |On 9th October 2014        |
|Prepared 25th September 2014                    |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

|Bipasha Bardhan                          |First Appellant |
|RAINA BARDHAN                            |Second Appellant|


                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms M. Vidal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Vidhyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of India and are mother  and  daughter
    respectively.  The First  Appellant,  who  I  shall  refer  to  as  the
    Appellant, was born on 1st October 1963 and the Second Appellant, who I
    shall refer to as R, was born on 9th January 1998 and is  therefore  16
    years of age. They appealed against decisions of the  Respondent  dated
    3rd May 2013 to refuse their application to vary leave to  remain  both
    under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article 8 (right to respect
    for private and family life) of the  Human  Rights  Convention.   Their
    appeals were allowed at first instance  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Metzer sitting at Taylor House  on  30th  June  2014.   The  Respondent
    appeals  against  those  decisions  with  permission  and  the   matter
    therefore comes before me as an appeal by the  Respondent  against  the
    decision of the First-tier.  However, for the  sake  of  convenience  I
    will continue to refer to the parties as they were referred to at first
    instance.

2.   The Appellant was granted entry clearance as a student on  16th  August
    2007 valid until 31st January 2009 and R was granted leave in line with
    that as the Appellant's dependant.  They entered the United Kingdom  on
    10th September 2007.  The Appellant was later granted further leave  to
    remain as a student, then as a Tier 4 Student and  then  as  a  Tier  1
    Highly Skilled post-graduate worker until 9th February  2013.   On  8th
    February 2013, one day  before  that  leave  was  due  to  expire,  the
    Appellants made their applications for variation, refusal of which  has
    given rise to these proceedings.

3.   The Appellant's case was that she had arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    after her marriage broke up, stating that she had been  the  victim  of
    domestic violence.   She  was  divorced  in  February  2006.   She  was
    accepted  to  study  for  a  Master's  in  Business  Administration  at
    Canterbury and R went to school in Canterbury.  The Appellant graduated
    with a distinction in her MBA in October 2010 and went  on  to  form  a
    private limited company of which she is the managing director, coaching
    business start-ups of small and medium enterprises.  R was said to have
    done very well at her school.  The  Appellants  produced  a  number  of
    references in support of the Appellants.

4.   The Respondent  refused  the  applications  because  neither  Appellant
    could meet the Immigration Rules. R was not a British citizen  and  had
    only lived in the United Kingdom (at the date of decision) for 5  years
    and 5 months. They could not satisfy Section E-LTRPT 2.2 which required
    seven years residence nor could  they  succeed  under  section  EX1  of
    Appendix FM. They could not  meet  the  private  life  requirements  in
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules (twenty years residence) and they had not
    lost all ties to India. The stated fear of returning  to  India  should
    more properly be made in person at the Asylum Screening Unit.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   It does not appear to have been argued  before  the  Judge  that  ether
    Appellant could meet the Rules. In closing submissions  the  Respondent
    acknowledged that Article 8(1)  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  was
    engaged in that both Appellants had established a private life in  this
    country which would be interfered with by their return to  India.   The
    issue was the proportionality or otherwise of that interference.

6.   In somewhat brief findings at paragraph 10  of  his  determination  the
    Judge noted that the parties had lived in the United  Kingdom  lawfully
    for "nearly seven years".  He continued:

         "Taking  into  account  the  Respondent's  legitimate  interest  in
         immigration control and noting the  Appellants'  lack  of  ties  to
         India (the First Appellant has only  an  aged  mother  there),  the
         length of time the Appellants have been in the United  Kingdom  and
         what they have done with their time and taking into account further
         the Second Appellant's age upon arrival  and  her  interests  as  a
         child, I have no  difficulty  in  finding  that  carrying  out  the
         balancing exercise in accordance  with  Razgar  there  would  be  a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellants'  rights   to
         private life were the Appellants to be returned to India."

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Respondent appealed the decision to allow the appeal  arguing  that
    the  Judge  had  failed  to  identify  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules in order to found  an  arguable
    case for the grant of leave outside the Rules.  The  Respondent  relied
    on the decisions of the High Court in Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  and  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640.   Only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    the Rules was it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider
    whether there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under them.  The Judge had embarked upon a cursory  analysis  resulting
    in the finding that the decisions were disproportionate.  He failed  to
    identify compelling  circumstances  which  had  not  been  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.

8.   The Judge had also erred by not having regard to  the  requirements  of
    the Rules as a relevant consideration in the proportionality  exercise.
    Paragraph 276ADE(iv) would have  been  particularly  relevant  in  this
    regard.  It was only if a child had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years prior to the application that she could qualify  for  leave
    to remain on the basis that it would not be reasonable to expect her to
    leave.  In this case the child had not been in the  country  for  seven
    years at the date of hearing.  The Judge had embarked on a freewheeling
    analysis unencumbered by the Rules which was not the correct  approach.
    The Judge had failed to have  regard  to  the  Appellant's  immigration
    status when assessing the weight to be accorded to R's best  interests.
    This argument relied on EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874.   Further,
    the Judge had failed to have regard to the public interest in effective
    immigration control.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  on  31st  July  2014.   In   granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:

         "I can understand why the Judge decided as he did  because  he  had
         before him two entirely admirable  Appellants  in  terms  of  their
         behaviour and achievements in this country.  However  sympathy  and
         admiration do not suffice as a basis  for  allowing  an  Article  8
         appeal.  I fear that it is arguable that the  Judge  embarked  upon
         the sort of freewheeling analysis disapproved in Gulshan.  There is
         a lack of hard-edged analysis and adequate reasoning taking  proper
         account of the Rules, the public interest  and  the  need  to  show
         compelling  circumstances  which  would  result  in  removal  being
         unjustifiably harsh."

The Hearing before Me

10.  At the hearing before me the Presenting Officer submitted that  it  did
    not appear that the Judge had directed  himself  towards  the  relevant
    case law.  His determination was rather  brief.   Although  Razgar  was
    mentioned it was not clear that the Judge had carried out  a  balancing
    exercise.  There was no mention  of  Gulshan  or  what  the  compelling
    circumstances were outside the Rules which were  not  recognised  under
    the Rules.  At the date of hearing the Appellants had not been  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years.  The Judge had compassion  and  respect
    for the achievement of both Appellants  but  he  was  not  entitled  to
    embark on a freestanding application under Article 8.

11.  In reply the Appellants' solicitor acknowledged that the  determination
    was brief but that did not detract from  the  matters  put  before  the
    court.  The Judge had the  Appellants'  skeleton  argument  before  him
    which referred to case law including Gulshan. As at  the  date  of  the
    application in February 2013 the Appellants  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for five and a half years.  It was not a near miss.   The  only
    issue had been proportionality  and  the  Judge  had  carried  out  the
    assessment of proportionality correctly.  However, the  Appellants  had
    now been in the United Kingdom for seven years and  if  an  application
    was made now they would come within the provisions of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

12.  At the close of the submissions I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  I
    found  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the   Judge's
    determination such that his conclusions fell to be set  aside  although
    not his findings of fact.  It was not at all  clear  from  the  Judge's
    very brief analysis of the Article 8  claim  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    determination that the Judge had given any consideration at all to  the
    public interest in immigration control and the weight to be given in  a
    proportionality exercise to the fact that the Appellants were  applying
    outside the Rules.  The Judge referred to the  Respondent's  legitimate
    interest in immigration control but appeared to overlook the fact  that
    in carrying out the proportionality exercise  he  needed  to  say  what
    factors weighed on  which  side  of  the  balance.   His  analysis  was
    fundamentally flawed and needed to be remade although  in  doing  so  I
    would preserve the findings of fact that he made  in  relation  to  the
    Appellants.

13.  I invited the parties to  make  further  submissions  and  invited  the
    Appellant to put forward any further evidence she might wish in support
    of her appeal  under  Article  8.   Oral  evidence  was  given  by  the
    Appellant at first instance and I was informed by her solicitor that it
    was not intended to  give  any  further  oral  evidence  now.  Bringing
    matters up to date, R had continued to do well at school,  her  results
    for her GCSEs were now available and there was  a  confirmation  letter
    from the prestigious King's School, Canterbury that R would be able  to
    begin her two year 'A' level course in  September  2014.   During  that
    course R would be a boarder at the school.  The Appellant's company  BR
    Education and Training Ltd was now an approved training  qualifications
    UK centre for Training Qualifications UK,  a  company  which  described
    itself as representing over 100 training providers.

14.   In  closing  submissions  the  Presenting  Officer   indicated   that,
    notwithstanding   R's   tremendous   achievements,   there   were    no
    insurmountable obstacles or  unduly  harsh  circumstances  that  either
    Appellant would face upon return  to  India.   Article  8  was  not  an
    opportunity for an Appellant to choose their place of residence and the
    case law supported that.

15.  In closing for the Appellant it was argued  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to  require  the  Appellants  to  return  to  India.   There  was
    information to suggest that domestic violence  was  prevalent  in  that
    country and the authorities had failed to curb violence  against  women
    and girls. The Appellants had now been here for  seven  years  and  had
    both done well.  Both regarded the United Kingdom as  their  home.   It
    was not a question of just looking at the length of time but  what  had
    been achieved during that time.

Findings

16.  The effect of setting aside Judge Metzer's decision in order that  this
    appeal should be reheard is that in assessing the appeal I  must  taken
    into account Sections 117A, B and C of the 2002 Act. It is correct that
    at the date of the appeal before Judge Metzer the  Appellants  had  not
    been here for seven years.  As the Court of Appeal had made clear there
    is no such thing as a near miss, the argument based on seven  years  or
    more residence would therefore have failed before Judge Metzer  but  by
    reason of the effluxion of time since then it can now be prayed in  aid
    by the Appellants.

17.  Section 117B(6) provides that in the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not
    liable to deportation the public interest does not require the person's
    removal where the person  has  a  qualifying  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 117D defines a
    qualifying child as being (inter alia) a child who  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.

18.  The result of the length of time taken to deal with this matter,  first
    by the Respondent to make a decision and then the Tribunal to deal with
    this appeal, is that by the time the matter came before me R had become
    a qualifying child as she  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more. She had arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 10th September 2007.  The Appellant clearly  has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with R and the only issue  in  the
    case therefore is whether it would be reasonable to expect R  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  If it would not then there would no  longer  be  a
    public interest in the removal of either Appellant  and  when  carrying
    out the proportionality exercise under  Article  8  the  appeals  would
    necessarily succeed.

19.  If it would be reasonable to expect R to leave the United  Kingdom  the
    appeals would fail.  Section 117 supersedes the provisions of paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Appendix FM when  deciding  whether
    this country's obligations under Article 8 would be breached.  Although
    a proportionality exercise must still be carried out, the weight to  be
    ascribed  to  certain  elements  of  an  Article  8  claim   has   been
    significantly affected by the new provisions.

20.  The Judge had erred by not carrying out  the  proportionality  exercise
    correctly based on the law at the date of his decision.  He had made no
    reference to the relevant case law and had not assessed proportionality
    in the light of that case law.  As the Respondent pointed out,  he  had
    not directed himself that he needed to go on to consider whether  there
    were sufficiently compelling and compassionate circumstances such  that
    the appeal should be allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  It may  be
    argued that the tenor of the  determination  is  such  that  the  Judge
    evidently  did  think  that   there   were   compelling   compassionate
    circumstances but to satisfy the test  as  to  adequacy  of  reasons  a
    losing party must reasonably be able to ascertain why they  have  lost.
    The brief determination did not do that.

21.  Having said that, the position has changed again as  a  result  of  the
    change in the law and the requirements that I must now apply.   I  must
    consider the issue of the reasonableness or otherwise of expecting R to
    leave the United Kingdom. In doing so I  bear  in  mind  the  following
    factors:

    (a)  On what might be referred to as the debit side  of  the  equation,
         that neither the Appellant nor R have any leave to remain  in  this
         country save for Section 3C leave.  They  cannot  bring  themselves
         within the Immigration Rules and are applying for leave  to  remain
         outside the Rules.  The private life which they have  built  up  in
         this country has been established when they have been in the United
         Kingdom lawfully but arguably whilst their immigration  status  was
         precarious for some of the time given that initially the  Appellant
         was granted entry clearance as a student with no  expectation  that
         her leave would be made permanent. Little weight is not the same as
         no weight but it is a factor that I must take into account.

    (b)  On the other side of the equation are the matters referred  to  by
         the  Judge  at  first  instance,  in  particular   the   tremendous
         achievements of both Appellants since they have been here  and  the
         very severe disruption which would be caused to R's education  were
         she to be required to return to India.  R  is  now  able  to  be  a
         boarder at  a  distinguished  public  school  and  the  Appellant's
         training company appears to be going  from  strength  to  strength.
         All of that would be put at risk by the Appellant's return.

    (c)  One other factor is argued by the Appellant on  the  side  of  the
         equation that the Appellants should be allowed to remain.  That  is
         the Appellants' fear of domestic violence  if  returned  to  India.
         There appears to be no dispute that the Appellant was the victim of
         domestic violence in India but I see little reason why upon  return
         either the Appellant or R would be exposed to any particular  risk.
         Whilst it  is  true  that  there  have  been  a  number  of  highly
         publicised cases of criminal activity against women  and  girls  in
         India, it is in my view hard to argue that there is  an  inadequate
         system of protection available to Indian citizens  to  the  Horvath
         standard. I would not rate the fear expressed by the Appellants  as
         to what might happen to them if they were to return to India  as  a
         significant factor.

22.  Having set out the matters on either side of the  equation,  what  tips
    the scale?  That the Appellant's company has done well  is  not  in  my
    view such a factor.  Upon return to her country of origin she would  be
    able to use the skills she has acquired in this country.  Section  117B
    (5) of the 2002 Act would undermine the Appellant's claim  to  have  an
    established private life that should not be interfered with.  The  only
    significant matter is the reasonableness or otherwise of expecting R to
    return to India.  To take R away from her education at this stage would
    in my view be unreasonable but  that  is  not  to  say  that  R  should
    necessarily be granted indefinite leave to remain at this  stage.   She
    is a qualifying child, she has lived in the United Kingdom for a period
    of seven years, it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at this present stage where she has just embarked on her
    'A' level course at  a  prestigious  school.   Whether  the  Respondent
    wishes to grant the Appellants discretionary leave for a period of  two
    years or more to enable R to complete her school education is a  matter
    for the Respondent but it is in my view unreasonable at this  stage  to
    expect R to leave the United Kingdom. For that reason I would allow the
    Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  them
    leave to remain.

Fee Award

23.  The Judge of the First-tier allowed the appeals and  ordered  that  the
    appeal fee be repaid  to  the  Appellants.   I  have  set  the  Judge's
    decision aside in relation to the appeal being allowed and therefore  I
    set aside his decision that the Respondent should repay the appeal  fee
    to the Appellants.  I have allowed these appeals because of a change in
    the law which has occurred due to the length of time that this case has
    taken to come to a hearing.  In those circumstances I do  not  consider
    it reasonable that the Respondent  should  be  expected  to  repay  the
    appeal fee to the Appellants. I therefore make no  fee  award  in  this
    case, notwithstanding that I have ultimately  allowed  the  Appellants'
    appeals for the reasons I have stated.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside. I have remade  the  decision  by  allowing  the
Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions.

Appeals allowed.

The Judge at first instance did not make an anonymity order and I also  make
no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Dated this 8th day of October 2014

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
