

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18764/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on:                     |
|On 15 January 2014                            |On 15 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     R S
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant: Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: R S in person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In a determination sent on 28 November 2013 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
   Keane heard an appeal brought by the respondent (hereafter the  claimant)
   against a decision by the appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State for
   the Home Department (SSHD))  dated 4 June 2013 refusing to  grant  her  a
   derivative  residence  card  as  a  "Zambrano  sole  carer"   under   the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as  amended.  Judge
   Keane:


       i) found that the claimant was entirely credible and  that  she  was
          the sole primary carer of her son  D B who is a  British  citizen
          and that he would be unable to reside  in  the  UK  if  she  were
          required to leave;
      ii) held that she did not nevertheless qualify for a derived right of
          residence under reg 15A of the 2006 Regulations and so  dismissed
          her appeal on that ground;
     iii) allowed her appeal on Article 8 grounds.


   2. The respondent challenged the Article 8 decision and was successful in
   obtaining permission to appeal but in the grant of permission Judge Deans
   identified as a separate  "obvious"  point  that  the  claimant  arguably
   should have succeeded in her appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


   3. I should mention at this stage that since the refusal decision of  the
   SSHD the  claimant  has  pursued  applications  for  judicial  review  in
   relation to homelessness problems and also in relation to an  outstanding
   FLR(O) application. None of these resulted in a grant of permission,  but
   I did undertake at the oral renewal application on 8 January  (which  was
   concerned with  the  FLR(O)  application)  to  expedite  hearing  of  her
   statutory EEA appeal so that it could be heard today.


   4. At the hearing before me Mr Deller on behalf of the SSHD conceded that
   the claimant had a derived right of residence under the 2006  Regulations
   and that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  not  so
   finding.  He urged that I set aside the judge's decision and  re-make  it
   by allowing the appeal on EEA grounds. R  S  said  that  whilst  she  was
   grateful to learn that it was now accepted she had  a  derived  right  of
   residence that did not in fact assist her with her  ongoing  problems  in
   relation to benefits and homelessness and legal aid.


   My decision


   5. There is no dispute raised by the  SSHD  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   judge's findings of fact that the claimant is a sole primary carer  of  a
   British citizen whom, if his mother (the claimant) had to leave  the  UK,
   would himself be forced to leave the territory of the Union.


   6. Given these findings the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  in
   dismissing the appeal on  EEA  grounds.  The  claimant  clearly  met  the
   requirements set out in reg 15A (4A).


   7. Accordingly the decision of the judge must be set aside.


   8. The decision I re-make can only be to allow the claimant's  appeal  on
   EEA grounds.


   9. In light of this decision it is unnecessary  for  me  to  address  the
   Article 8 grounds of appeal brought by the SSHD, which Mr Deller conceded
   "fell away". Allowing the claimant's appeal on Article 8 grounds as  well
   would add nothing to my decision, in terms of status or outcome.


   10. R S submitted that I should also allow her appeal under regulation  8
   of the 2006 EEA Regulations on the basis that she  met  the  requirements
   relating to extended family members (other family members). I pointed out
   to her that she was not able to meet those requirements because  (i)  she
   was not a dependent on her son; (ii) she was not a member  of  her  son's
   household; rather he was dependent on her and a member of her household.


   11. R S submitted that she may be forced to appeal  my  decision  to  the
   Court of Appeal because it left her without an effective remedy  for  her
   present situation in relation to access to  housing  benefits  and  other
   welfare benefits and efforts to get a fee  waivers  in  relation  to  her
   FLR(O) application. I  pointed  out  to  her  that  my  jurisdiction  was
   confined to the issue of her appeal against an EEA decision.


   12. At the same time, I would record my concern that if R S is right  and
   a grant of a derivative right of residence will not entitle her  to  have
   access to housing and other welfare benefits in the  same  way  as  other
   persons with EEA residence rights, then there may well be a real issue as
   to whether the relevant government departments and local authorities  are
   acting in compliance with EU law.  There may well be issues  relating  to
   unequal treatment as between two different types  of  EEA  residents  and
   indeed, as between persons with derived rights of residence  and  persons
   with a right of residence pursuant to FLR(O).




   13. For the above reasons:


   The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.


   The decision I re-make is to allow the claimant's appeal on EEA  grounds,
   specifically on the grounds that she has established she  has  a  derived
   right of residence under reg 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations.


   I would also direct that she be issued with a derivative  residence  card
   forthwith upon application.


                               Signed


                               Date:


                               Dr H H Storey
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
