

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/18476/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 3 May 2017                         |          On 9 May 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                    S A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  India  born  on  6  December  1980.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent on  28  April  2015  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain on medical  grounds  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.  His appeal was dismissed by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Chamberlain  (the  "FTTJ")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 September 2016.

 2. Given my references to the appellant's medical condition he is entitled
    to anonymity in these proceedings and I make a direction accordingly.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    grounds there was no material error of law.  However, it was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 10 March 2017 in the following terms:

         "The Appellant is not legally represented  and  it  is  clear  from
         reading the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  had
         given time to the Appellant to submit further evidence and  written
         submissions by 19th August 2016. Whilst the judge had noted that he
         had not received any such evidence  and  proceeded  to  decide  the
         appeal, there is  evidence  to  suggest  that  further  documentary
         evidence had indeed been submitted by the due  date.   Thus  it  is
         arguable therefore that due to procedural unfairness the  documents
         relevant to the Appellant's case have not been taken  into  account
         by the judge and that the Appellant is entitled to consideration of
         his claim. Therefore permissions is granted."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. In his grounds of appeal to this tribunal the  appellant  made  various
    points which I summarise as follows.  The appellant  had  not  received
    the respondent's bundle prior to the hearing before the  FTTJ;  he  did
    not therefore have  the  opportunity  to  "study  and  prepare  for  my
    responses  and  arguments  based  on  the  same".  He  attributed   the
    respondent's failure to provide the bundle to a deliberate  attempt  to
    weaken the appellant's position at the hearing, in  the  knowledge  the
    appellant did not have  legal  representation.   He  confirmed  he  had
    produced "further written submissions" as permitted  by  the  FTTJ  and
    that these had been received by  the  tribunal  by  the  due  date.  He
    provided an update on his physical condition (including material  post-
    dating his letter to the Tribunal of 17 August 2016).  He  stated  that
    he had been under no obligation to pay for NHS  treatment  because  the
    NHS surcharge had come  into  effect  after  his  application  and  the
    appeal. "Moreover, there is no mechanism within the NHS  to  receive  a
    voluntary NHS surcharge payment, unless  it  is  paid  along  with  the
    immigration application. This was verbally confirmed to [the appellant]
    at [his] hospital". He averred that the  FTTJ  had  made  her  decision
    "without considering  the  above  evidences  and  without  taking  into
    account [his] deteriorating health condition".  He requested permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal "so that [he could] continue  with  the
    treatment and monitoring of [his] Chronic Kidney Disease and subsequent
    reoccurring gout attacks, in order to make sure [he does] not  face  an
    early death like situation  in  India  which  is  likely  to  leave  my
    partner,  children  and  old  age  parents  orphaned  and   unsupported
    financially, emotionally and physically. .."  He went on to state:

         "Hence I request that this critical matter be heard  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in the light of all the attached  evidence,  so  that  the
         interests of justice are honestly taken care of, since the  current
         decision breaches my human rights and also breaches  Article  8  of
         ECHR."

    The appellant then refers to the guidance in D v United Kingdom  [1997]
    24 EHRR 423, R (Adam, Limbuela and Tesema) v Home Secretary [2005] UKHL
    66 and N v UK, 27 May 2008.

 6. In his oral submissions to me, the appellant  reiterated  these  points
    and gave a further update on his medical condition and  prognosis.   He
    submitted that the FTTJ would have made a different  decision  had  she
    considered the documents he had provided after the hearing.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Staunton accepted that the tribunal had received
    on 19 August 2016, the due date set by the FTTJ, the appellant's letter
    of 17 August 2016. He noted that paragraph 4  of  the  FTTJ's  decision
    indicated an invitation to the appellant to provide written submissions
    to counter the submissions of the presenting officer  and  the  refusal
    letter.  Instead  the  appellant  had  provided  documentary   evidence
    relating to his medical condition. This had already been considered  at
    paragraphs 21-29 of the decision.  He  submitted  that  the  additional
    evidence was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal  which  could  not
    succeed given the high threshold outlined in N v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31.  Thus there was no  material  error
    of law.



Analysis - Error of Law

 8. The following is the FTTJ's record of events at the hearing, as set out
    in her decision:

         "3. The Appellant was not legally represented. He confirmed at  the
         hearing that he understood the reasons  that  his  application  had
         been refused. He said that he  had  been  through  the  immigration
         rules.  I explained the hearing procedure to  him.   He  then  said
         that he had not received the Respondent's bundle, although  he  had
         repeatedly asked for it.  There was  no  evidence  to  substantiate
         this claim.  The decision had been made on 28 April 2015,  some  12
         months prior to the hearing. I gave him the opportunity to consider
         the contents of the Respondent's  bundle,  which  consists  of  the
         evidence which the Appellant himself provide with his  application,
         together with the Country of Origin Information which  is  referred
         to in the reasons for refusal letter.

         4. I then heard oral evidence from the Appellant. At the conclusion
         of his evidence, the Appellant said he wanted  the  opportunity  to
         provide further written submissions.  I pointed out to him that  he
         had had ample opportunity to instruct legal  representatives  since
         the application was refused in April 2015.  He said that he did not
         want to appoint representatives, but wanted to  consult  with  some
         friends who were lawyers. He gave no satisfactory reason for why he
         had not been able to  consult  with  these  friends  prior  to  the
         hearing. However, given he was not represented I considered that it
         was in the interests of justice to  give  him  the  opportunity  to
         provide further written submissions.  Mr. Vaghela confirmed that he
         was content with this.  I gave the Appellant until 19  August  2016
         to provide any further written submissions. As I had  not  received
         anything by the end of August, I checked with the Tribunal Service.
         On 7 September  2016  it  was  confirmed  to  me  that  no  further
         submissions had been received from the Appellant.

         5. In the circumstances I proceed to make the decision on the basis
         of the evidence before me and the submissions made by the Appellant
         at the hearing in response to Mr. Vaghela's submissions.

         6. The evidence before me consisted of the Respondent's bundle  (to
         Annex O2), further documents provided by  the  Appellant  with  the
         grounds of appeal, consisting of a letter from an Infants School, a
         letter from a Primary  School  and  two  birth  certificates  ....,
         together with two letters from the  Department  of  Nephrology  and
         General Medicine at Guys and St Thomas's Hospital, dated 27 October
         2015 and 25 February 2016, which  the  appellant  provided  at  the
         hearing.  The Appellant did not provide a witness statement."

 9. It is not in dispute between the parties that the  appellant  wrote  to
    the Tribunal on 17 August 2016, after the  hearing,  enclosing  various
    documents, and that his letter was  received  by  the  Tribunal  on  19
    August 2016.

10. However, the first point to  note  is  that  the  FTTJ  had  given  the
    appellant time to make "further written submissions" after the hearing.
    She did so because the appellant had told her he had "wanted to consult
    with some friends who were lawyers".  The  appellant's  letter  to  the
    Tribunal dated 17 August 2016 refers to his having  been  "allowed  the
    opportunity to submit my supporting evidences  before  19th  of  August
    2016, by the  Honourable  judge,  during  the  hearing  session".  This
    statement is not correct: both in her record of proceedings and in  her
    decision the FTTJ refers to allowing the appellant to produce  "written
    submissions" by 19 August.  There is no reference either in her  record
    of proceedings or her decision to the appellant's  being  permitted  to
    adduce additional evidence.  The direction to serve written submissions
    is consistent  with  appellant's  wish  to  consult  friends  who  were
    lawyers.  It is most unlikely the FTTJ would have made a direction  for
    further evidence to be adduced because this  would  have  disadvantaged
    the respondent who would not  have  the  opportunity  to  examine  that
    evidence or make submissions on it, before the FTTJ made her  decision.
    It is also unlikely the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  would  have
    agreed to such a step.

11. The appellant referred at the hearing in the FTT, in his letter  of  17
    August 2016 and in his submissions to me to the fact that  he  had  not
    received the respondent's  bundle  before  the  hearing.  However,  the
    FTTJ's decision records that she gave  the  appellant  access  to  that
    bundle and time to consider it.  She noted that it  contained  all  the
    documents which had been sent by the appellant with his application for
    leave to remain.  Thus I am unable  to  find  that  the  appellant  was
    disadvantaged  by  not  seeing  that  bundle  prior  to  the   hearing.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ's decision demonstrates she  took  its  contents,
    and therefore the appellant's documents, into account in her  decision-
    making.  Her decision to allow  the  appellant  time  to  make  further
    written submissions was sufficient to enable the appellant  to  address
    the late disclosure of the respondent's bundle, particularly given that
    he had already submitted evidence in support of  his  appeal  with  his
    notice of appeal.

12. While I accept that, in principle,  a  failure  to  take  into  account
    material which had been produced  by  the  due  date  would  amount  to
    procedural unfairness I am unable to find  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness in this case for the following reasons.

13. First, the letter and enclosures produced  by  the  appellant  are  not
    written submissions. The appellant's letter of 17  August  2016  is  an
    attempt to adduce additional evidence most of which, he told me at  the
    hearing, had not previously been seen by the  respondent.   Given  that
    the direction of the FTTJ was for further written submissions  to  have
    been provided, it would have been procedurally unfair for the  FTTJ  to
    have taken into account fresh evidence which  the  respondent  had  not
    previously seen and on which the respondent had not had the opportunity
    to make submissions.

14.  Secondly,  this  was  an  appeal  on  Article  3  grounds  only.   The
    appellant's  condition  and  prognosis  were  well  documented  by  the
    appellant in his application to the respondent and in the documents  he
    submitted with his notice of appeal.

15. The FTTJ, at [18], states she did  not  find  the  appellant  "entirely
    credible".  She found his "conduct in relation to  his  appeal  damages
    his credibility and I find that it was his conscious choice  to  attend
    the hearing without  having  instructed  representatives,  and  without
    having prepared at all.  He is a well educated man with friends who are
    lawyers who could have assisted him, but he decided instead  to  attend
    the hearing without having done any preparation.".  This finding is not
    challenged by the appellant. While I  appreciate  he  was  not  legally
    represented at the hearing before me,  an  educated  man  such  as  the
    appellant might be expected to challenge a  finding  that  he  was  not
    "entirely  credible".    The  FTTJ's  findings  in  this   regard   are
    sustainable.

16. The FTTJ also finds that doubt is cast on the appellant's claim that he
    is willing to pay for medical treatment  because  he  had  provided  no
    evidence of any attempt  to  pay  the  NHS  surcharge  or  for  medical
    treatment to date.  The appellant challenges this finding on the ground
    that the requirement to pay  the  NHS  surcharge  with  an  immigration
    application came into effect from April 2015 whereas the appellant made
    his  application  in  October  2014.   However,  irrespective  of  this
    erroneous finding, it is the case that there was no evidence before the
    FTTJ that the appellant had paid for NHS treatment  to  date.  To  that
    extent the FTTJ was justified in raising concerns about his willingness
    to pay for future medical treatment.

17. The FTTJ made the following finding at [19]

         "I also find that it casts doubt on his  credibility  that  he  has
         failed to provide any further submissions, despite asking  for  the
         opportunity to do so, and despite  having  been  given  over  three
         weeks in order to do so."

    This is an inappropriate finding given  the  appellant  had,  by  then,
    written to the Tribunal.  However this error had no material impact  on
    the outcome of the appeal.  Irrespective of  the  adverse  findings  on
    credibility (whether or not sustainable on the evidence),  this  appeal
    was bound to fail.  The sole ground for the appeal was Article  3.  The
    appellant's condition and prognosis was well documented,  including  by
    the appellant himself. Background material was  provided  by  both  the
    appellant and respondent with regard to the availability  of  treatment
    in India. The FTTJ principally  made  her  findings  as  regards  these
    matters on the basis of the medical evidence  and  background  material
    before her, not on the  basis  of  the  appellant's  credibility  as  a
    witness.

18. There was no dispute between the parties that  the  appellant  suffered
    from  chronic  kidney  disease  and  gout.   However,  the  appellant's
    condition was not so debilitating as  to  prevent  him  from  being  in
    employment at the date of the hearing before the FTTJ.

19. The FTTJ cited the evidence of a consultant nephrologist who, following
    an examination in February 2016, did not need to see the appellant  for
    the following six months. The FTTJ inferred, not unreasonably, that the
    appellant's "medical conditions are not at a critical stage". She noted
    the "Appellant was not receiving dialysis and there is no indication in
    this letter that he will need to receive dialysis in the near  future".
    The FTTJ noted the only medication he was taking in February  2016  was
    available in India and that the appellant did not aver otherwise.   Her
    finding that he would be able to obtain his current medication in India
    is sustainable on the evidence.

20. The FTTJ took  into  account  the  opinion  in  2015  of  a  consultant
    nephrologist as regards the availability  of  treatment  in  India  but
    noted it was not consistent with the background  material  provided  by
    the respondent; nor had that consultant given any explanation  for  his
    opinion.   The FTTJ was entitled to prefer the material provided by the
    respondent as regards the availability of dialysis in India should that
    be required in the future.

21. The FTTJ also noted that the appellant was  currently  working  at  the
    date of hearing. He had been working for two years in his current  role
    and had worked prior to that.  She noted  rightly  that  the  threshold
    "required  to  show  that  the  decision  breaches   the   Respondent's
    obligations under Article 3 is very high".

22. In N the House of Lords said that the test in this  sort  of  case  was
    whether the claimant's medical condition had reached  such  a  critical
    stage  (ie  the  claimant  was  dying)  that  there   were   compelling
    humanitarian grounds for not removing him to a place which  lacked  the
    medical and social services  which  he  would  need  to  prevent  acute
    suffering while he was dying.  The fact that he would  be  deprived  of
    medical treatment which would otherwise prolong his  life  is  not  the
    main consideration. Lord Brown pointed out that the  additional  factor
    which set D v UK  [1997] 24 ECHR in contrast to more recent  cases  was
    that D had no prospect of medical and family  support  on  return.   On
    appeal to the ECtHR in N v  UK  Application  ECHR  26565/05  the  Grand
    Chamber upheld the decision of the House of  Lords  and  said  that  in
    medical cases Article 3 only applied in very exceptional  circumstances
    particularly as the suffering was not the result of an intentional  act
    or omission of a State or non-State body.  The legal test was  set  out
    at paragraph 42 as follows

         "A decision to remove an alien who  is  suffering  from  a  serious
         physical or mental illness to a country where  the  facilities  for
         treatment of that illness are inferior to those  available  in  the
         Contracting State may raise an issue under Article 3 but only in  a
         very exceptional case where the humanitarian  grounds  against  the
         removal  are  compelling.  In  the  D  case  the  very  exceptional
         circumstances were that that the applicant was critically  ill  and
         appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed any  nursing
         or medical care in his country of origin and had  no  family  there
         willing or able to care for him or provide him with  even  a  basic
         level of food shelter or social support".

    The ECtHR said that Article 3 could not be relied  on  to  address  the
    disparity  in  medical  care  between  Contracting   States   and   the
    applicant's state of origin.  The fact that the person's circumstances,
    including his or her life expectancy, would  be  significantly  reduced
    was not sufficient in itself to give rise to a  breach  of  Article  3.
    Those same principles had to apply in relation to the expulsion of  any
    person afflicted with any  serious,  naturally  occurring  physical  or
    mental illness  which  might  cause  suffering  pain  or  reduced  life
    expectancy and required specialist medical treatment that might not  be
    readily available or which might  only  be  available  at  considerable
    cost.

23. In GS (India) & Ors v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  it was held that the
    case of a person whose life would be drastically shortened by the
    progress of natural disease if he was removed to his home State did not
    fall within the paradigm of Article 3. Such a case could only succeed
    under that Article if it fell within the exception articulated in D.

24. Since the FTTJ's decision, the judgment in Paposhvili v Belgium
    (Application No. 41738/10, 13.12.16) has been issued. While that
    softened the approach in N v UK, it does not assist this appellant
    whose medical condition is not even such as to prevent him from
    undertaking employment.  Even on the appellant's own evidence, his
    condition does not approach the level of severity required to engage
    Article 3.  The FTTJ found, on sustainable grounds (the background
    material produced by the respondent), that appropriate similar
    treatment was available to the appellant in India.  Even when seen in
    the context of the latest guidance in Paposhvili, the FTTJ's findings
    in the light of N v UK are sustainable and coherent.  On the evidence
    available to the FTTJ, the act of removal of the appellant will not
    expose him to an Article 3 risk.

25. There is no challenge by the appellant to  the  FTTJ's  findings  under
    Article 8 insofar as his family life is concerned.

26. To conclude, in summary, I am satisfied that

      i) The appellant did not produce further  written  submissions  by  19
         August 2016, as directed by the FTTJ.

     ii) The failure of  the  FTTJ  to  take  into  account  the  additional
         evidence in the appellant's letter of 17 August 2016 did not amount
         to procedural unfairness.

    iii) Even if there had been procedural unfairness such as to  amount  to
         an error of law, such an error could not be  material  because  the
         appeal was bound to fail, given the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         condition and prognosis and the availability of treatment in India.

Decision

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

28. I do not set aside the decision.

Signed           A M Black                         Date  8 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed           A M Black                         Date  8 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black







