

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18397/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 January 2017                            |On 23 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Malik Suhail Bin Liaqat                           |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Chohan, of Counsel, instructed by S.Z.
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 8 October  1977,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Onoufriou  who,
    in a decision promulgated on  12  August  2016,  dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision of the  respondent of  6  May  2015  to  refuse  his
    application of  1  August  2014  for  a  permanent  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    European community Law as the spouse of a Ms Klaudia  Eliza  Platkowska
    (the "sponsor"), a national of Poland born on 16 June 1990,  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom as  an  a  European  Economic  Area
    ("EEA") national under regulation 15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (the "2006 Regulations").

 2. The respondent refused the application because she  was  not  satisfied
    that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights in the period  from  July
    2009 to March 2012 (the "first issue").  In  addition,  she  considered
    that it was necessary for the appellant to  submit  evidence  that  the
    sponsor had completed a full 12 months with the same employer under the
    Worker Registration Scheme ("WRS"). She considered that  the  appellant
    had not submitted evidence that the sponsor had completed 12 months  on
    the WRS as required for Polish nationals (the "second issue").

 3. The appellant and the  sponsor  were  married  on  15  May  2009.  They
    divorced on 3 December 2014.

 4. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant was represented by Mr R.
    Parkin, of Counsel. The respondent was not represented.

 5. The judge's Record of Proceedings records  that,  in  relation  to  the
    second issue, Mr Parkin made submissions as follows:

            "Can't demonstrate directly WRS but  see  p30  of  main  bundle
             permitting sponsor to stay in UK which is a  precondition  that
             WRS obtained. Home Office may say W may not have completed  it.
             Strong inference that WRS completed ..."

 6. The judge found that the marriage had lasted for more than 3 years  and
    that at least one year of the marriage was in the  United  Kingdom.  He
    was also satisfied that the sponsor had been working for  a  continuous
    period of five years and therefore that she had been exercising  Treaty
    rights for a continuous period of 5 years.  He  therefore  decided  the
    first issue in the appellant's favour.

 7. In relation to the second issue, the judge said as follows at  para  15
    of his decision:

            "...  the  issue  remained  as  to  whether  [the  sponsor]  had
             completed twelve months on the Worker  Registration  Scheme  as
             required  for  Polish,  and  certain  the  EEA  nationals.  The
             respondent stated that there was no evidence produced  to  this
             effect. Mr Parkin had pointed out the sponsor's passport  shows
             she was granted a residence certificate on  9th  May  2007  and
             that this implied that she had produced her  WRS  registration.
             However my interpretation of the terms of the WRS is  that  the
             registration certificate needs to  be  provided  for  permanent
             residence and  not  a  residence  certificate.  Therefore,  the
             appellant's wife's registration certificate  of  9th  May  2007
             does not imply that she registered  under  the  WRS.  It  would
             therefore appear that this aspect of the requirements  has  not
             been fulfilled and therefore, on this  basis,  the  appellant's
             appeal is refused."

            (my emphasis)

 8. Nowhere in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  or
    the skeleton argument for the hearing before the FtT or in Mr  Parkin's
    oral submissions at the hearing  was  it  contended  that  it  was  not
    necessary for the sponsor to have registered on the WRS.  The  argument
    advanced was that the fact that the sponsor had been issued a permanent
    residence card implied that she had registered on the WRS, which is not
    the same argument.

 9. The grounds submitted in support of the  application  to  the  FtT  for
    permission to appeal advanced the same argument as was advanced  before
    the judge, that the fact that sponsor had had a residence  card  issued
    on 9 May 2007 shows that she had satisfied the requirements of the WRS.
    The grounds refer to page 11 of the  Home  Office  UK  Border  Agency's
    guidance (hereafter the "Guidance") entitled: "Living  and  Working  in
    the UK, Rights and responsibilities of nationals from the  new  members
    states from January May 2004"  - which states as follows:

             "What  are  the  benefits  of   registering   on   the   Worker
Registration Scheme
            Once you have been working lawfully in the  UK  for  12  months,
             without interruption, you will have full free  movement  rights
             and will no longer need to register on the Worker  Registration
             Scheme. You can get an EEA registration certificate  confirming
             your right to live in the UK under European Community law."

10. The Guidance was attached to the application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. It was not before the judge.

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Chohan submitted that the judge had  erred
    in deciding the appeal on the basis  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    sponsor to produce evidence that she had been registered on the WRS for
    a period of 12  months  or  at  all.  He  submitted  that  evidence  of
    registration on the WRS was only necessary if the  12-month  period  of
    registration was part of the qualifying period. The WRS  was  a  scheme
    that was in force from 1 May 2004 until 2009, and then extended  for  2
    years. The decision in the instant case was made on 6 May 2015. The WRS
    had ended by the time the appellant was issued with his  family  permit
    on 13 November 2012, following his successful appeal against an earlier
    decision.

12. In addition, Mr Chohan relied upon the extract from the Guidance that I
    have quoted at my para 9 above.  He  submitted  that,  given  that  the
    sponsor's residence card was issued on 9 May 2007, the paragraph quoted
    above shows that she had in any event been registered on the WRS.

13. Mr. Walker informed me that, if I permitted Mr Chohan to argue that  it
    was not a requirement for the appellant  to  produce  evidence  of  the
    sponsor having been registered on the WRS for 12 months, he would  have
    to take instructions.

14. I asked Mr Chohan why I should permit him  to  advance  this  argument,
    given that this had not been advanced in the grounds of appeal  to  the
    FtT, the skeleton argument that was before  the  FtT  or  Mr.  Parkin's
    submissions before the FtT, nor  in  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  had  been  no
    application for permission to rely upon the new argument and no  notice
    given to the respondent of it.

15. Mr Chohan submitted that he should be permitted to rely  upon  the  new
    argument even if this meant that Mr. Walker had to take instructions. I
    refused him permission to rely upon the grounds  for  reasons  which  I
    will give in this decision. I then asked Mr Chohan to address me on the
    grounds as lodged.

16. Mr Chohan then proceeded to advance the very same arguments but in  the
    context of his submission  that,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was represented by Counsel and that Counsel had not submitted
    a copy of the Guidance, it was nevertheless the duty of  the  judge  to
    familiarise himself with the relevant rules for the WRS and obtain  for
    himself the Guidance which was a document  in  the  public  domain.  He
    submitted that the judge should not simply have accepted the fact  that
    Counsel for the appellant accepted the respondent's position,  that  it
    was necessary for the appellant to submit evidence that the sponsor had
    been registered with the WRS for 12 months. He should have done his own
    research because he could not  otherwise  have  dispensed  justice.  Mr
    Chohan submitted that,  if  the  judge  had  done  so,  he  would  have
    concluded that there was no requirement for registration under the WRS.



17. I have no hesitation in rejecting these ill-conceived submissions.  Not
    only is it the case that the point was not an obvious  one,  especially
    considering the complexity of the rules  and  regulations  relating  to
    European Community law for EEA nationals and nationals of the accession
    countries, Mr Chohan's submission, if accepted,  would  impose  a  very
    onerous duty on judges in the First-tier Tribunal. There is no duty  on
    judges to embark upon such research or the type of  exercise  suggested
    by Mr Chohan, notwithstanding his submission that the Guidance  was  in
    the public domain.

18. Furthermore, and  in  any  event,  the  fact  is  that,  following  the
    conclusion of the hearing, I  attempted  to  download  a  copy  of  the
    Guidance not because I was doing my own research but simply in order to
    "copy and paste" from the Guidance the text quoted at my para 9  above.
    I simply could not locate the Guidance. Thus, even if it  can  be  said
    that there was a duty (which I do not accept) on the judge  to  do  his
    own research or familiarise himself with the relevant rules as  to  the
    circumstances in which registration on the WRS  is  necessary  and  the
    circumstances in which it is unnecessary,  the  judge  could  not  have
    readily located the Guidance unless, by  coincidence,  he  entered  the
    right words in the search facility.

19. My reasons for refusing  permission  to  rely  upon  the  new  argument
    summarised at my para 13 above are as follows:

      i.    This argument was not advanced in the grounds of appeal  to  the
        FtT, the skeleton argument that was before the FtT or Mr.  Parkin's
        submissions before the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly, the  judge
        cannot arguably be said to have erred in law by failing to consider
        an argument not made before him.

      ii.   The argument was not advanced in the grounds of application  for
        permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  had  been  no
        application for permission to rely upon the new argument before the
        hearing. Indeed, none was even made at the hearing before me.

      iii.  I considered the overriding objective in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  to
        deal with cases "fairly and justly".  Mr Chohan informed me that he
        had only been recently instructed. Be that as it may, the  fact  is
        that the appellant had had more  than  ample  time  to  raise  this
        argument and has failed, at every step, to  take  that  opportunity
        until this last possible moment. In these circumstances, even if he
        is refused permission to rely upon this ground, it cannot  be  said
        that his appeal has not been decided fairly and justly.

      iv.   In relation to the merits of Mr Chohan's submission that it  was
        not necessary for  the  appellant  to  produce  evidence  that  the
        sponsor had been registered on the WRS,  he  did  not  address  the
        observation of the judge at para 15 of his decision that:  "...  my
        interpretation of the terms of the WRS  is  that  the  registration
        certificate needs to be provided for permanent residence and not  a
        residence certificate".

20. For the reasons given at para 19 above, in particular para  19.ivv,  it
    has not been shown that the judge materially erred in law.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.



[pic]



Signed                                             Date: 20 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



