
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/18891/2015

                                                     HU/13313/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 March 2018                            |On 4 April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                    1) MO
                                    2) SO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the First Appellant:                Ms T. Murshed, Counsel instructed
by Mondair Solicitors
For the Second Appellant:         Mr M. Mukulu, Counsel instructed by
Orchid Solicitors
For the Respondent:                    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their families.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. The first appellant ("MO") is a citizen of Kenya born on 1 January
      1987. On 12 March 2015 he applied for leave to remain in the UK on the
      basis of his family and private life. The application was refused on
      27 April 2015.


   2. The second appellant ("SO") is MO's younger brother. SO was born on 7
      August 1991. On 10 July 2015 he applied for leave to remain in the UK
      on the basis of his family and private life. The application was
      refused on 25 November 2015.


   3. MO and SO both appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Their appeal's
      were listed together to be heard by Judge Rastogi ("the judge") on 13
      January 2017 at Hatton Cross.  The judge heard the appeals of MO and
      SO separately and separate decisions were delivered (both promulgated
      on 30 January 2017) dismissing the appeals. MO and SO are now
      appealing against the judge's decisions.


   4. In both of the decisions, the judge gave as his reason for hearing the
      appeals separately that there were substantial differences in the
      factual issues in the appeals. The judge noted that Counsel for MO
      wanted the appeals heard together whereas Counsel for SO argued that
      they should be heard separately.


Preliminary Issue


   5. At the outset of the error of law hearing, Ms Murshed and Mr Mukulu
      both requested that I should hear the appeals of their respective
      clients together. Ms Aboni did not object to this. I agreed and
      therefore the appeals were heard together, with Ms Murshed and Mr
      Mukulu being given the opportunity to comment on the grounds advanced
      by the other.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal concerning MO

   6. The factual background is that MO's mother died in 2001 whereupon he
      lived with his aunt and two siblings in Kenya. In December 2003 he
      travelled to the UK on a visitor visa in order to join his father.
      After arriving in the UK, he applied, unsuccessfully, for leave to
      remain as a dependent child of his father. His appeal was dismissed on
      6 July 2005, with negative credibility findings being made about him
      and his father.


   7. MO's father remarried in 2005. MO claims to consider his father's wife
      as a mother figure. Whilst in the UK, MO has obtained GCSEs and A-
      levels. He was offered a place at university which he was unable to
      take due to his immigration status.


   8. In 2009, MO's father and stepmother had twins. MO's father, stepmother
      and half siblings ("the twins") are British citizens. MO claims to
      have a central role in raising the twins and a particularly close bond
      with them. His representative advanced the argument in the First-tier
      Tribunal that he has a "parental role" with the twins such that
      Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
      ("the 2002 Act") is applicable. A report from a paediatric nurse was
      adduced which described MO as having a parental role with the twins.
      She concluded that MO's removal would have a great detrimental effect
      on them. MO's step mother, in her evidence, highlighted the bond
      between MO and the twins.


   9. MO claims to have no family in Kenya and no familiarity with the
      country as an adult.


  10. The judge, applying RK (s117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016]
      UKUT 31 (IAC), found that MO had not taken on the role of a parent of
      the twins given that they live with their biological parents who have
      not relinquished their parental role.


  11. Although the judge did not accept that MO had a parental role, he
      found that he and the twins enjoy a family life together as siblings
      and that they play an important part in each others' lives. The judge
      was also satisfied that MO shares a family life with his father.

  12. The judge did not accept MO's claim to not have family in Kenya. The
      judge stated, at paragraph 44, that MO in his application referred to
      a brother named Duncan with whom he has no contact. The judge went on
      to state:


             As [MO] has been here continuously for 13 years, I accept that
             if he does still have a brother there, then it is one he has
             not seen for 13 years. But for the reasons stated [MO] has
             failed to satisfy me that he has no relatives in Kenya.

  13. The judge considered whether there would be "very significant
      obstacles" to MO reintegrating into Kenya under paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. At paragraph 51 of the
      decision he stated:


             In considering [MO's] ability to integrate, I have regard to
             the fact that although he has never lived in Kenya as an
             adult, he has been living throughout his stay in the UK in a
             Kenyan household, in the sense that at one time or another all
             adult members of the household have been Kenyan nationals. He
             speaks English and there is no evidence he does not speak any
             other languages that may be used in Kenya. Unlike his brother
             [SO] he has not acquired a London or British accident and as
             such I find he presents more obviously as Kenyan then his
             brother.


  14. The judge also found that MO's father would provide him with financial
      support, at least until he established himself in Kenya.


  15. The judge's assessment of Article 8 outside the rules is set out in
      paragraphs 52 to 76 of the decision. Having found that family life
      exists between MO, his father and the twins, the judge proceeded to
      assess the proportionality of his removal from the UK.

  16. The judge began his analysis by considering the best interests of the
      twins. He found that whilst it would be in their best interests for MO
      to remain in the UK given their close relationship with him that would
      be lost by his removal, "that is secondary to remaining with their
      parents and is a factor more easily capable of being outweighed by
      other considerations." The judge also found that the children's best
      interests do not require MO to remain in the UK as their basic needs
      would not go unmet without him.


  17. The judge applied the 2002 Act as follows:


   a. Pursuant to Section 117B(1), significant weight was attached to the
      fact that MO cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and
      that the public interest requires his removal. The judge weighed
      against him that his entry to the UK involved deceit and that he has
      been in the UK unlawfully.


   b. Pursuant to Section 117B(5), little weight was attached to the private
      life he has established in the UK, given his precarious immigration
      status. The judge found that MO's private life was at the upper end of
      the "little weight" spectrum.


   c. MO is not financially independent (Section 117B(3)) but speaks English
      fluently (Section 117B(2))


   d. Sections 117B(4) and (6) were said to not be applicable.


  18.  At paragraph 75, the judge summarised the balancing exercise under
      article 8. The concluding sentence of the paragraph states that MO
      "will be returning with his brother [SO] and I find this is likely to
      be a source of comfort for them both."


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal concerning SO

  19. SO (like his brother MO) claims that his mother died in 2001 whereupon
      he lived with his aunt and two siblings in Kenya. He then, in December
      2003, travelled to the UK on a visitor visa in order to join his
      father. Since arriving in the UK he has been living with his father,
      step mother, siblings and the twins.  He helps with the care for the
      twins and is financially dependent on his father.


  20. At the time of his application, SO believed he had a daughter who is a
      British citizen. However, a DNA test, taken as part of the
      application, revealed he was not in fact the father. Before the First-
      tier Tribunal he maintained, however, that he continued to have a
      parental relationship with the child.


  21. SO has a girlfriend with whom he had been in a relationship for about
      four years by the time of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


  22. SO claims to have no family or connections in Kenya.

  23. The judge found that SO has a family life, within the meaning of
      Article 8 ECHR, with his father and the twins but not with other
      members of the household. However, the judge found that SO's
      relationships with other family members form part of his private life
      in the UK.


  24. In respect of SO's relationship with his girlfriend, the judge noted
      that they do not live together and as such they are not partners as
      defined in the Immigration Rules. The judge did not find the evidence
      of their relationship sufficient to give rise to family life between
      them. He stated:


         "I accept their evidence about the closeness of their relationship
         and their intentions for the future but at present, the
         relationship does not have the hallmarks of longevity and
         commitment such as cohabitation, an intention to marry or actual
         wedlock to give rise to a family life."


  25. With regard to the child SO previously believed to be his daughter,
      the judge found that he did not have a parental relationship or family
      life with her.


  26. The judge found that SO would receive financial support from his
      father if returned to Kenya and would not be destitute. He stated that
      SO "may be returning alone or it may be he will be returning with
      [MO]". The judge acknowledged that because SO had been in the UK since
      he was 12 and to all intents and purposes presents as British he would
      face obstacles to integration in Kenya. However, the judge weighed
      against this that he has grown up in a Kenyan household, is a Kenyan
      citizen, has skills that may help him in Kenya and has the necessary
      attributes of a person capable of integrating into Kenyan life. The
      judge commented at paragraph 43 that he found that the obstacles SO
      would face are greater than those his brother MO would face, but they
      are not sufficient to give rise to "very significant obstacles" under
      Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


  27. In assessing the proportionality of SO's removal under Article 8 ECHR,
      the judge considered the best interests of the twins and the child SO
      previously considered his daughter. The judge did not consider that
      the best interests of the latter required SO to remain in the UK. With
      regard to the twins, the judge found that even though it would be in
      their best interests for SO to remain in the UK, this was "secondary
      to them remaining with their parents in the UK and [sic] more capable
      of being outweighed by other factors."


  28. The judge applied Section 117B of the 2002 Act by (a) attaching
      significant weight to the fact that SO could not meet the requirements
      of the Immigration Rules; (b) taking note of his lack of financial
      self-sufficiency; (c) having regard to his ability to speak English
      fluently; (d) attaching little weight to his relationship with his
      girlfriend of four years given he was in the UK unlawfully when it
      started; (e) giving moderate weight to his private life on the basis
      that his circumstances place him at the upper end of the "little
      weight" spectrum in Section 117B(5); and (d) not applying section
      117B(6)) on the basis that he did not have a parental relationship
      with the child he previously thought his daughter.


  29. The judge considered, at paragraph 62 of the decision, the substantial
      amount of time SO has been in the UK and that at the date of the
      hearing (but not the application) he had spent over half of his life
      in the UK. However, the judge found that he could not place weight
      upon a "near miss" of the Immigration Rules (the relevant rule being
      Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)).


Grounds of Appeal, Submissions and Analysis


  30. Both MO and SO pursued multiple grounds of appeal. I will consider
      each in turn.

Analysis of grounds of appeal pursued by MO

   A. Error in hearing the appeals separately

  31. Ms Murshed submitted that there was commonality in the central part of
      both MO and SO's claims, which concerned their family life with their
      half siblings, father and stepmother, and it was artificial and
      unrealistic - and consequently unfair - to determine the appeals
      separately. She argued that hearing the claims separately was
      inconsistent with PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims)
      Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC), where it was held that the claims
      of a family should normally be heard jointly so as to ensure that all
      material facts and considerations are taken into account in each case.
      She also described the procedural history, which she argued showed how
      the claims had historically been linked, and contended that it was an
      error of law to hear them separately.


  32. I asked Ms Murshed how MO was prejudiced by his appeal being
      considered separately to that of SO. Her response was that there was
      substantial overlap in the evidence and that because the hearings were
      separate all of the material facts relevant to MO were not before the
      judge, who was unable to look at the family situation as a whole.


  33. Mr Mukulu submitted that as the family life of SO and MO emanates from
      the same home, the appeals of MO and SO could not fairly be determined
      unless they were heard together. He acknowledged that SO's previous
      representative had taken a different view, but made clear SO's
      position on this issue was now aligned with that of MO.


  34. Ms Aboni's response was that the judge, having heard both
      representatives on the issue, was entitled to accept the submissions
      of SO's representative. She argued that although there were some
      overlapping issues, the core case advanced by MO was different to that
      of SO.

  35. I agree with Ms Aboni that although SO and MO are brothers (and share
      a household with their father, step mother, and the twins) a large
      part of their appeals concerned different issues. MO was seeking to
      show he had a "parental" relationship with the twins; whilst SO's case
      rested, in part, on his relationship with his girlfriend and the child
      he believed (at the time of the application) was his daughter. That is
      not to say there were not significant areas of overlap - which clearly
      there were - but give the differences in the cases being presented
      there was a reasonable argument to hear the cases separately. The
      overriding objective (Section 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014)
      and case management powers (Section 4), taken together, give a judge a
      broad discretion to decide how appeals should proceed. Having heard
      submissions from SO and MO's representatives, who took opposing views,
      it was open to the judge to decide to hear the appeals together,
      separately, or part together (in respect of the common issues) and
      part separately.


  36. PD and others concerned a family unit (mother, father and child) who
      were facing removal together. Their claims were closely intertwined,
      with the parents' claim resting, in large part, on their being the
      parents of a teenage child who had lived continuously in the UK for 11
      years and therefore that the public interest did not require their
      removal under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It was also a case
      where if the parents lost the appeal the consequence would be to
      stultify the Tribunal's decision regarding the child who qualified for
      leave under the Immigration Rules. Neither SO or MO's case is
      analogous to PD and others. Their family life claims are not about the
      relationship they have with each other. In contrast to the situation
      in PD and others, the consequence of one not succeeding in his appeal
      but the other succeeding would not be to negate the outcome of the one
      who succeeded.


  37. In any event, I do not accept that either SO or MO were prejudiced by
      the appeals being heard separately. The fact that there were areas of
      commonality did not prevent each of them raising those issues in their
      appeal and their appeals were not dependent on each other's. I am in
      no doubt that the outcome of SO and MO's appeals before the judge
      would have been the same whether or not the appeals were heard
      together.


   B. Error in taking SO's case into account in the determination of MO's
      appeal


  38. Ms Murshed argued that once the appeals had been separated the judge
      was not entitled to make reference to evidence or findings in the
      other appeal. The grounds identify (and are critical of) the following
      references to SO's appeal in the decision concerning MO's appeal:


   a. At paragraph 43 the judge made a finding that SO and MO lived together
      and this relationship formed part of MO's private life in the UK.


   b. At paragraphs 44, 73 and 75 the judge referred to SO and MO returning
      to Kenya together. At paragraph 75 the judge said that this was likely
      a source of comfort to them both.


   c. At paragraph 51 the judge contrasted MOs accent to that of SO (which
      was said to be more of a "London or British accent").

  39. The argument advanced by Ms Murshed was that the findings about SO
      "contaminated" the MO decision and it was procedurally unfair to rely
      on findings from the SO case in the MO appeal.


  40. Ms Aboni's response was that the judge was entitled to take into
      account that MO and SO would be returning together to Kenya. She also
      submitted that MO was not prejudiced by the references to SO.


  41. I agree with Ms Aboni. Had the judge taken evidence and submissions
      that were before him in the SO hearing and relied upon them in the MO
      decision without giving MO an opportunity to respond, that would have
      been an error of law (although the materiality would still need to be
      considered). However, this is not what has occurred.


  42. At paragraph 43 the judge observed that MO and SO had lived together.
      This is not a finding from the SO case being imported into the MO
      case. It is a finding that was properly made based on the evidence
      before the judge in MO's appeal.


  43. At paragraphs 44, 73 and 75 the judge referred to MO and SO returning
      to Kenya together. This is not evidence or submissions from SO's
      appeal being relied upon in the MO case. It is simply an observation
      of the consequences of them both being unsuccessful in their appeals.


  44. The judge's comment at paragraph 51 comparing MO and SO's accents is
      an observation by the judge. The point being made by the judge is that
      MO does not have a British accent (which is a finding he was entitled
      to make having heard MO give oral evidence). Nothing in the MO appeal
      turned on the fact that the judge considered SO to have more of a
      British accent.


  45. In a lengthy and detailed decision, the judge has made very few
      mentions of SO. The few mentions that were made are peripheral (and
      not material) to the decision. I am satisfied that the judge
      determined MO's case based solely on the evidence and submissions that
      were before him in that case. This ground of appeal therefore cannot
      succeed.


   C. The judge unfairly failed to raise with MO his concerns about MO's
      brother Duncan before finding that MO failed to establish he did not
      have family in Kenya.


  46. This ground of appeal concerns the judge's findings about MO's late
      brother Duncan. The relevant paragraphs of the decision are 25 and 44
      where the judge stated:


             "25. [MO] gave an explanation in his witness statement as to
             why, when asked about Duncan in the previous appeal hearing,
             he did not say that this was his brother who had drowned. He
             explained he was nervous and anxious and he got confused as
             there is another man the new in Kenya called Duncan. As the
             respondent was not present at the hearing [MO]'s evidence
             about this was not challenged. I occasionally back in the note
             in passing that in his application form [MO] stated he had a
             brother named Duncan living in Kenya. This was not a fact that
             I noticed until preparing this determination. He was
             represented and both he and his representatives would have
             known this was an issue in the previous determination."


             "44. As for the circumstances in Kenya, [MO] claims not to
             have any family there. The issue about the man named Duncan is
             not completely resolved. [MO]'s own application says he has a
             brother named Duncan with whom he has no contact. As MO has
             been here continuously for 13 years, I accept that if he does
             still have a brother there, then it is one he has not seen for
             13 years. But for the reasons stated MO has failed to satisfy
             me that he has no relatives in Kenya."

  47. Ms Murshed argued that it was procedurally unfair for the judge to not
      raise the issue about Duncan. She argued that as the judge only
      noticed the issue after the hearing, he ought to have written to the
      parties in order to enable them to make submissions. Had he done so,
      his attention could have been drawn to the death certificate in the
      bundle confirming Duncan was deceased.


  48. Ms Aboni argued that even if judge erred, the error was not material
      given that Duncan was not a significant factor in assessing the
      circumstances MO would face on return to Kenya.


  49. I agree with Ms Murshed that the judge fell into error by not giving
      MO an opportunity to make submissions about Duncan and that if he had
      been given this opportunity he would have drawn to the judge's
      attention evidence which established, on the balance of probabilities,
      that Duncan is dead. However, I do not consider this error material.
      In his evaluation of whether there would be "very significant
      obstacles" to MO integrating into Kenya, the judge considered a range
      of factors unrelated to Duncan, including that MO:
   a. has grown up in a Kenyan household;
   b. speaks English and has not acquired an English accent that would mark
      him apart in Kenya;
   c. will receive some financial support from his father; and
   d. will be returning with his brother SO.


  50. Reading the decision as a whole, it is apparent that the judge's
      conclusion that there would not be very significant obstacles to MO
      integrating into Kenya (as well as his conclusion that removal of MO
      from the UK would not be disproportionate) did not depend on the
      presence of Duncan in Kenya and that the same conclusion would have
      been reached whether or not Duncan was taken into account.


   D. The judge erred in considering the best interest of the twins


  51. This ground argues that the judge erred in the approach taken to the
      evidence of MO, his parents and the nursing expert as to the impact on
      the twins of MO's removal.


  52. The decision contains a detailed evaluation of the evidence pertaining
      to the twins. It therefore is not arguable that the judge failed to
      consider the evidence.


  53. In my view, this ground of appeal is no more than a disagreement with
      the weight the judge gave to the evidence about the twins. Ultimately,
      Ms Murshad's argument was that more weight should have been given to
      the evidence of MO, his parents and the expert as to the extent of
      negative impact on the twins of MO's removal. However, the weight to
      give to this evidence was a matter for the judge and a disagreement
      about weight is not a basis upon which the decision can be challenged.


  54. I am satisfied that the judge followed the correct approach to the
      evidence concerning the twins. The judge began his assessment of
      Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules by considering what would be
      in their best interests, which he described as a primary
      consideration. He summarised in detail the evidence that was before
      him from the twins' parents and the expert about their close bond
      (which he accepted) with MO. The judge found, inter alia, that the
      twins' lives would be disrupted by the loss of their sibling and carer
      and that there is potential for emotional harm (although he did not
      accept the expert evidence as to the likelihood of this). He concluded
      that it would be in their best interests for MO to remain in the UK,
      although he added the caveat that this was secondary to remaining with
      their parents. Having made a finding as to the twins' best interests,
      the judge proceeded to take this into account in the balancing
      exercise under Article 8, where the judge found it to be outweighed by
      other factors. There is no error this approach, which accords with
      that adopted in Kaur (children's best interests / public interest
      interface) [2017] UKUT 00014). Accordingly, this ground of appeal
      cannot succeed.


   E. The judge failed to place sufficient weight on the fact that MO was a
      child when he entered the UK and has lived all his adult life in the
      UK


  55. Ms Murshad argued that in the Article 8 balancing exercise the judge
      failed to consider the length of time MO has been in the UK or that he
      arrived as a minor following his mother's death. Ms Aboni, in
      response, argued that the judge took into account the relevant
      considerations.


  56. I agree with Ms Aboni. The judge wrote a detailed and thorough
      decision where a careful balancing exercise under Article 8 was
      carried out. It is simply not the case that the length of time MO has
      been in the UK, or that he came as a minor, has been ignored. At
      paragraph 43 and paragraph 44, for example, the judge referred to MO
      having been in the UK for 13 years. At paragraph 68 reference is made
      to MO having come to the UK as a child. Accordingly, I am satisfied
      that this ground of appeal is not sustainable.


Analysis of the grounds of appeal pursued by SO

   A. The judge erred by finding that SO did not have a family life with his
      step-mother.


  57. The judge found that SO has a family life, within the meaning of
      Article 8 ECHR, with his father and the twins but not with his step-
      mother. Mr Mukulu contended that the evidence showed that SO's step
      mother had effectively become his mother and it was irrational to find
      that there was a family life with SO's father but not his stepmother.
      He also argued that the judge erred by not having regard to the step
      mother's evidence.

  58. Mr Mukulu is correct that the judge dealt only briefly with the
      relationship between SO and his stepmother and that the decision does
      not contain an assessment of the evidence of the stepmother. This,
      however, does not mean that the judge has made an error of law. There
      was a considerable amount of evidence before the judge and he was not
      required to address every aspect of it in the decision. SO's primary
      case concerned his relationship with his (assumed) child, the twins
      and his father. These issues were all thoroughly dealt with by the
      judge. I do not agree that failing to address specifically the
      evidence of the step mother was an error.


  59. However, even if the judge did err, the fundamental difficulty with Mr
      Mukulu's argument is that a finding that SO enjoyed family life with
      his stepmother would not have made any difference to the outcome of
      the appeal. There was no evidence before the judge to indicate that
      the relationship between SO and his step mother had a quality or
      nature that went beyond that between SO and his father. On the
      contrary, the argument made by Mr Mukulu was that the relationship
      between SO and his step mother was analogous to that between SO and
      his father. Because the judge found that there was family life between
      SO and his father, he assessed the proportionality of SO's removal in
      light of that relationship. Had family life been found with the step
      mother as well as the father, the evaluation of the proportionality of
      SO's removal would have been the same as there was nothing that the
      addition of the step mother would have contributed to the
      proportionality exercise beyond the issues arising because of the
      relationship between SO and his father. Accordingly, even if (which I
      do not accept) the judge erred by not finding SO and his step mother
      had a family life within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR, the error
      would not have been material as it would have made no difference to
      the outcome.


   B. The judge erred by not finding family life existed between SO and his
      girlfriend

  60. The grounds of appeal submit that, having accepted the evidence of SO
      and his girlfriend that they are in a close relationship which has
      lasted for four and that their intention is to cohabit/marry in the
      future, it followed that family life should have been found to exist.
      Mr Mukula argued before me that the judge's conclusion to the contrary
      was irrational.


  61. I disagree. In Danso v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2015] EWCA Civ 596, the appellant was in a long term relationship
      with a woman he intended   to marry but with whom he did not cohabit.
      The Court of Appeal found that whether the relationship could be
      described as amounting to family life was debatable and that the
      Tribunal's finding that the relationship had not reached the stage at
      which it could be described as family life was not perverse. The
      factual matrix in this case is analogous and I am satisfied that it
      was open to the judge to conclude that family life did not exist
      between SO and his girlfriend.


  62. In any event, the judge, at paragraph 55, considered the position in
      the alternative; stating that if he had found family life to exist he
      would have attached little weight to it in accordance with Section
      117B(4) of the 2002 Act, given that the relationship began whilst SO
      was in the UK unlawfully. This conclusion was clearly open to the
      judge. SO and his girlfriend had been together for only four years,
      did not cohabit, did not have any children and had commenced the
      relationship in the knowledge that SO was in the UK unlawfully. It is
      unlikely any judge would have attached more than little weight to the
      relationship in the proportionality exercise under Article 8.
      Accordingly, if the judge erred in finding family life did not exist
      (which I do not accept), the error would not have been material given
      that the judge would have placed only little weight on the
      relationship in the Article 8 balancing exercise.


   C. The judge erred in assessing SO's parental relationship with the child
      he thought was his daughter and the best interests of that child


  63. Mr Mukula advised that these grounds were not being pursued.

   D. The judge erred by attaching considerable weight to the fact that SO
      could not meet the Immigration Rules and in the approach taken to the
      public interest

  64. Mr Mukula argued that because the Immigration Rules do not make
      provision for the circumstances relevant to SO, it is "double
      counting" the public interest to weigh against SO that he could not
      satisfy the Rules. He submitted that this is not part of the balancing
      exercise under Article 8.


  65.  I asked Mr Mukulu if there was any case law which supported his
      contention. He was unable to cite any. This is not surprising. Section
      117B(1) of the 2002 Act requires judges to take into account, when
      considering the public interest, that the maintenance of effective
      immigration controls is in the public interest. As a consequence, when
      assessing the proportionality of removing a person from the UK, weight
      must be given to the fact that the Rules have not been met. It was
      therefore correct for the judge to attach weight to the fact that SO
      did not meet the Immigration Rules. This challenge to the decision has
      no merit.


Conclusion

  66. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the judge  did  not
      make a material error of law in either of the appeals.



Decision


  67. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the  appeal  by  the  first
      appellant (MO) did not involve the making of  any  material  error  of
      law. MO's appeal is dismissed.


  68. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal  by  the  second
      appellant (SO) did not involve the making of  any  material  error  of
      law. SO's appeal is dismissed.


|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  29 March 2018        |



