
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th January 2015                  |On 16th January 2015                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                          MR VENKAT REDDY AEMIREDDY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr N Jeganathan (Acculegal Solicitors)
For the Respondents:   Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officers)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant  with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Boyd) promulgated on 1st October 2014 by which he dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 2. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge argue that the Judge erred in taking irrelevant  factors
    into account, in particular that the Sponsor's  account  was  opened  a
    month before the application was made when all  the  Appellant  had  to
    show was that he had access to the money at the date of application.

 3. Secondly, the grounds argue that the fact that the Appellant's  company
    was bought "off the shelf"  was  immaterial  to  its  being  a  genuine
    company.  Thirdly, it is argued that the Judge erred  in  finding  that
    the Appellant did not have a web site when there was evidence  that  he
    did and fourthly it is argued that it  was  irrelevant  to  the  appeal
    whether the Appellant had previous experience which, in  fact,  he  did
    have.

 4. The main reason the Appellant's application was refused was because  he
    had submitted a bank statement and letter from the bank in India  which
    appeared to post date the application.  The Secretary of State sent  an
    email to the bank which confirmed that the account was only opened  one
    month after the date of the application.  That email was adduced as was
    the letter dated one month after the application was  submitted.   That
    is not what the grounds suggest,  which  refer  to  the  account  being
    opened one month before the application.  The  author  of  the  grounds
    appears to have  misread  he  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  and  the
    determination.  The Appellant's representative before me said  that  he
    had not seen the bank letter.  That may be the case but  the  Appellant
    must have as  he  submitted  it.   The  evidence  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed.  Even if the  Judge  had  erred  in  other
    respects the errors would be immaterial therefore.

 5. In any event the Judge found, as he was  entitled  to,  that  the  only
    contract that the Appellant produced was not a reliable document.

 6. The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  regarding  the
    Appellant's website all post dates the date of application.

 7. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  fall  into  error  and  his
    determination stands.

 8. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed        Date 15th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
