

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal No:
IA/18237/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
     Determination Promulgated
on 12 August 2014                                  on 26 August 2014



                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                         IRIS AGIA DASS ROBIN (MRS)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Not represented
For the respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan who was born in 1938, applied for
      leave to remain  both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  the
      provisions of the ECHR. That application was  refused  and  an  appeal
      against the decision dismissed.  Both the Secretary of State  and  the
      judge concluded that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
      the rules and could not succeed under the ECHR.


   2. An application for permission to appeal was made and  was  refused  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne who gave full and clear reasons  as
      to why he concluded that there was no arguable error  of  law  in  the
      determination. The application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      where permission was granted. The judge granting permission said:

             (2)  Whilst  brevity  has  its  place  in   the   writing   of
             determinations, it can never be at  the  expense  as  arguably
             here, of clear and adequate reasoning.


             (3) In such circumstances, and without wishing to unduly raise
             the Appellant's hopes, I am just persuaded to grant permission
             to appeal.


   3.  The first ground of appeal states that the  judge  did  not  properly
      consider the guidance  given  in  various  cases  as  to  the  correct
      approach when dealing with the Immigration Rules and the ECHR. As  the
      judge,  in  reality,  considered  the  Immigration  Rules   and   then
      considered article 8, there can be nothing in this point.


   4. The second ground says that the judge did not properly follow the five
      stage Razgar approach. It is also said, in ground 8,  that  the  judge
      did not carry out a proper balancing exercise.  The judge covered  all
      the matters that Razgar demands be  dealt  with,  and  carried  out  a
      proper balancing exercise, covering all relevant points. There  is  no
      legal error in the judge's treatment of article 8.

   5. The remaining grounds are no more than disagreements as to the judge's
      conclusions and the weight that she gave to various matters. The judge
      reached conclusions that she was entitled to reach on the evidence and
      her reasoning is not vitiated by any errors of  law.  The  appellant's
      real problem is that neither of the daughters with whom she wishes  to
      live is settled in this country. As the determination points  out,  at
      the end of paragraph 11, although the respondent's position may change
      if that of the appellant's daughters  changes,  at  the  present  time
      there is no reason to suppose that the appellant can  remain  for  any
      length of time and in those circumstances, as the  facts  are  at  the
      present time, the decision to remove is proportionate.


   6.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed




Designated  Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                  15 August 2014



