
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18355/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 23 October 2013           |
|Decision given orally at the hearing          |                             |


                                   Before


    THE HON. Mr JUSTICE COLLINS SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 KEMAL ZOREL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by VC Legal
(UK)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the dismissal by the First-tier Judge of  the
    appellant's application under the Ankara Agreement seeking to establish
    business here. The business in question was as a self-employed  Turkish
    guitar tutor and musician to operate in Ipswich. Suffice it to say that
    the Secretary of State and the Immigration Judge  both  took  the  view
    that he did not qualify on the necessary requirements to meet the  rule
    on essentially, putting it broadly, financial grounds.  We need not  go
    into that because leave to appeal is very limited.

2.   It was also asserted and indeed there is no question but  that  it  was
    the case that false documents were produced by this appellant in making
    his application.  His claim was that he was not aware of the falsity of
    the documentation since essentially he had relied upon an agent and  so
    the judge had to consider whether he was indeed aware.  The reason  for
    that was that as the rules stood in 1973 which is the date in  question
    it was necessary for an applicant to have been aware of the falsity  of
    the documentation in order to justify refusal on the ground,  which  of
    course is an additional ground,  that  deception  had  been  used.  The
    position now  is  different  inasmuch  as  the  mere  fact  that  false
    documentation had been used is by itself capable of being determinative
    whether or not the individual in question was aware of the falsity.

3.   The judge directed himself correctly that the burden of  proof  was  on
    the respondent to establish that false documents had been submitted and
    he said, again correctly, that the standard of proof remained the same,
    that  is  to  say  the  balance  of  probabilities.   But  he  referred
    specifically to a decision of this Tribunal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  [2009]
    UKAIT 00031. He then went on to  consider  the  evidence.   So  far  as
    material he referred to the distinction between the current  Rules  and
    those applicable in 1973 and it had to be shown that in the light of an
    applicant's character, conduct or associations it  was  undesirable  to
    permit him to remain.  He then dealt specifically with whether he found
    that the appellant was aware of the facility and having  said  that  he
    may well have been helped by an adviser or friend but he had  a  chance
    to consider and that the Secretary of  State  was  aware  that  he  had
    submitted false documents and had tried to cover up his actions.

4.   The judge went on:

         "He was  in  my  view  clearly  aware  that  false  documents  were
         submitted in support of his visa application and  it  does  him  no
         credit whatsoever to now claim firstly, that he used an  agent  and
         secondly, that he did not know what documents the agent  submitted.
         I regret to say that I simply do  not  believe  him  and  in  these
         circumstances it  is  clear  that  his  character  and  conduct  is
         entirely  reprehensible  and  I  cannot  see  on  what  basis   any
         discretion could be exercised in his favour.  There was no need for
         the appellant to  submit  these  false  documents  considering  the
         rather delicate nature of his application for entry clearance ."

5.   The submission made and the only ground on which leave  to  appeal  was
    granted was that there was a failure by the  judge  to  direct  himself
    correctly as to the standard of proof and  Judge  Freeman  who  granted
    permission to appeal picked this up by referring to a passage in NA  in
    which the Tribunal said that having noted that Lord Hoffmann in  Re:  B
    (Children) [2008]  UKHL  35  had  emphasised  the  seriousness  of  the
    consequences did not require a different standard  of  proof,  that  is
    different from the balance of probabilities,

         "We do accept  that  for  the  respondent  to  satisfy  us  he  has
         discharged the burden of proof on him on a balance of probabilities
         he would in the context of  this  type  of  case  need  to  furnish
         evidence of sufficient strength and quality and he and the Tribunal
         would need to subject it to  a  critical,  anxious  and  heightened
         scrutiny."

6.   Judge Freeman said "I have never managed to  follow  the  reasoning  in
    this passage if Re: B is to be treated as binding as it must."  And  he
    said that the correctness should be considered.

7.   With the greatest respect to  Judge  Freeman,  we  see  no  distinction
    which can properly be drawn between the approach that Lord Hoffman  was
    indicating to be correct and the explanation of that approach  set  out
    in NA.

8.   The reality is that, though  illogical  to  some  extent,  there  is  a
    spectrum to be applied in considering whether a matter  is  established
    on the balance of probabilities and the more serious  the  matter  that
    has to be established is the more cogent has the  evidence  to  be  and
    higher as it were in the spectrum of the balance. Thus where dishonesty
    is to be established it is clear that there must be, and the judge must
    approach it on the basis that he believes that  there  is  rather  more
    cogent material which leads him to the conclusion.

9.   It is true that the judge did not say in terms in the decision that  he
    was adopting that approach but it is perfectly clear in our  view  from
    what we have cited from his reasoning that he did take the view that it
    was clear that the appellant was indeed fully aware of the  falsity  of
    the documentation.  So far as the evidence is concerned, not  only  are
    we not surprised at that conclusion but we think that  that  conclusion
    was inevitable on the material that was before the judge.

10.  Of course this appeal would have been dismissed in  any  event  because
    of the failure to  comply  with  what  we  have  called  the  financial
    requirements but it was appropriate in our judgment that  it  was  also
    refused on the basis of the knowing use of deception.  It follows  that
    this appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date


THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS

