
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18087/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MUHAMMAD FAISAL IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, instructed by Farani-Javid-Taylor,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Muhammad Faisal Iqbal, was born on 1 January  1979  and
    is a male citizen of Pakistan.  He had appealed against a  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse to grant him a residence card as  confirmation
    of a right  of  residence  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights within the United Kingdom.  That decision  was
    dated 18 February 2014.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Farmer) which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  16
    February 2015, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    respondent as the appellant and to the appellant as the respondent  (as
    they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. At the hearing before me at Manchester on 13 July 2015, Ms  Brown,  for
    the appellant, accepted that Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 provides that the  Secretary  of  State  alone  has  a
    discretion to issue a residence card to a "extended family member."  As
    Judge Fisher acknowledged when  granting  permission  [3],  the  proper
    course of action for the judge, having found that the appellant and his
    partner were in a durable relationship, was to remit the  case  to  the
    Secretary of State so that she might  exercise  that  discretion.   The
    refusal letter of 4 April 2014 makes no reference to the  existence  of
    any durable relationship.

 3. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I have remade the
    decision.  The appeal of the appellant is allowed to the limited extent
    that the matter is remitted to the Secretary of State in order that she
    might consider the exercise of her discretion to grant the appellant  a
    residence card on the grounds that he is "an extended  family  member."
    The findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal, which are not  tainted
    in any way by the judge's failure to find that the Secretary of State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law, shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  16  February
2015 is set aside.  The decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  in
accordance with the law.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the  limited
extent that the matter is remitted to the Secretary  of  State  to  consider
the exercise of a discretion as to whether to issue  the  appellant  with  a
residence card as an extended family member (see  Regulation  17(4)  of  the
2006 Regulations).

No anonymity direction is made.

(Note: For reasons that are unclear, this decision (which  was  prepared  on
the day of the hearing and, according to my records, signed off on  30  July
2015) does not appear to have been properly promulgated.)


Signed   Date 30 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

