
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18025/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 August 2016                  |On 13 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                 Ms Ana [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah of Vine Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Original Appellant, Ms Ana [R], date of birth 15th March 1982 is  a
    citizen of the Philippines.  Having considered all the circumstances  I
    am satisfied that it is not necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey promulgated on 22nd January 2016.  I  have
    kept the designation of the parties as they appeared in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. By the decision of the  22nd  January  2016  Judge  Pacey  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse her
    further leave to remain to remain in the UK.

 4. By a decision taken on 25th July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Thus  the  matter
    appeared before me to determine in the first instance  whether  or  not
    there was an error in law in the original determination.

    Factual background

 5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 5 February 2012 as a Tier 4
    student with leave valid until 8 June 2013.

 6. Whilst in the United Kingdom the appellant met and began a relationship
    with Mr [LH]. They appear to have met on 12 May 2012 and they began  to
    live together on 21 July 2012. They married on 9 January  2013  in  the
    Philippines. Thereafter they appear to  have  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom, to continue to their lives together in the UK.

 7. On 18 October 2013 the appellant made an application based on Article 8
    of the ECHR. It  appears  that  that  application  was  refused  on  13
    November 2013. There was an application for the decision Respondent  to
    be reconsidered on 25 November 2013.

 8. On 17 November 2014 the appellant  was  served  with  an  IS151A  as  a
    precursor to a removal decision being taken. Whilst the appellant  made
    further submissions the refusal of the Article 8 claim was upheld on  6
    January 2015.

 9. By decision taken on 24 April 2015,  the  appellant's  application  for
    further leave to remain having been refused, the respondent refused the
    appellant's Article  8  claim.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision. The appeal was heard and allowed by Judge Pacey.

10. In refusing the appellant's application the respondent  had  given  the
    following reasons for refusal: -

      a) The application as a partner was considered under  Appendix  FM  R-
         LTRP. Insufficient evidence had been submitted to show  that  there
         was a genuine and subsisting relationship. The  appellant  did  not
         meet the requirements of E-LTRP .1.7., as there were  no  children,
         and, as it was not accepted this was a genuine relationship,  EX.1.
         did not apply.

      b) Further in any event even if there was a genuine relationship  with
         a partner there was no  evidence  that  there  were  insurmountable
         obstacles to their  relationship  continuing  in  the  Philippines.
         Therefore EX.1(b) did not apply.

      c) The appellant  therefore  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  R-
         LTRP.1.1.d.

      d) Consideration was given  to  the  appellant's  private  life  under
         paragraph 276 ADE but the appellant had  not  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom  for  the  prescribed  periods  and  there  were  no   very
         significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration  into  her
         country of  origin.  Therefore  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of 276ADE (1)(vi).

      e) Thereafter consideration  was  given  to  whether  there  were  any
         exceptional circumstances justifying consideration of article 8  of
         the ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

      f) Having assessed all the factors it was decided that there  were  no
         exceptional circumstances warranting  consideration  of  Article  8
         outside the Immigration Rules.

11. In coming to that conclusion consideration was given to all  the  facts
    advanced on behalf of the appellant. The  appellant  had  claimed  that
    there would be no work for either her or her husband; that she  had  no
    family she could rely upon in the Philippines; and no ties. She  claims
    to be settled in the United Kingdom with her husband and  had  a  close
    connection with her in-laws including her  father-in-law  who  suffered
    depression. It was asserted that Philippines was  a  corrupt  and  poor
    country and that  there  was  nothing  there  for  the  couple  in  the
    Philippines. However it was asserted that there was no evidence to show
    that she and her husband would not be able to find work as both of them
    were young and in good health. The appellant  studies  and  the  skills
    learnt in the UK would be  advantageous  in  the  Philippines.  It  was
    considered that the appellant had  social  and  cultural  ties  in  the
    Philippines. Given that her husband had been aware of  her  immigration
    status he should have been aware that she may be removed.  No  evidence
    had been submitted to show insurmountable obstacles in the Philippines.

    Error of Law

12. I would note that the only reason given within the  letter  of  refusal
    for refusing the application under the Immigration  Rules  Appendix  FM
    was that the respondent was not satisfied that this was a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage.

13. It was conceded before the judge that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the rules.  The judge commenced to consider whether  or
    not the appellant could succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

14. Within the grounds of appeal it is suggested that the judge has  failed
    to  consider  whether  or  not  there  are  exceptional   circumstances
    warranting consideration of the appeal outside the Immigration Rules on
    the grounds of Article 8. It is submitted that in  taking  that  course
    the judge has made a material error of law.  Reliance  is  placed  upon
    the case of Singh v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74,  which  supports  the
    approach advocated in the case of Nagre 2013 EWHC 720.

15. A careful reading of paragraph 21 and 20 indicate that  the  judge  did
    not merely commence on a consideration of Article 8. The  judge  looked
    at the circumstances to check whether or not Article 8 was engaged  and
    whether or not the circumstances justified considering  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds. In paragraph 22 the  judge  clearly  indicates  that
    Article 8 is engaged and consideration of Article 8 is warranted in the
    circumstances on the basis  that  the  appellant  has  made  an  honest
    mistake in the past as to dates; that the husband of the appellant  now
    earns sufficient to meet the financial threshold within the Immigration
    Rules; that this was a genuine and real marriage; and that  accordingly
    the prospects of an application from abroad succeeding  are  that  much
    higher. Accordingly the judge has  considered  whether  or  not  it  is
    appropriate to consider Article 8 in the circumstances. The  judge  has
    identified the factors which  she  believes  justify  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the rules. The judge has even referred to the  issues
    of exceptionality and the case law relevant thereto  within  paragraphs
    34 and 35 of the decision.

16. The judge has thereafter made a careful assessment of all the  relevant
    factors relating to Article 8. The judge has carefully  considered  the
    circumstances, which the appellant and potentially  her  sponsor  would
    face in the Philippines. She gives reasons  for  finding  that  the  UK
    national sponsor would not be able to find employment.  She  has  noted
    the dyslexia of the sponsor. She has also noted the connection  between
    the appellant and her in-laws and the medical problems of the in-laws.

17. At the time of the hearing the judge was satisfied that the sponsor was
    in employment and was earning sufficient to meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules. The judge also found  this  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

18. It is further suggested that the judge has failed to  consider  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act  properly.  The  appellant  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom was precarious. In line with the case of  AM  (s  117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260(IAC) it is submitted that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    identify the factors weighing in the appellant's favour in  considering
    that they outweigh factors identified in the statutory provision. Again
    as set out above the judge has clearly given a  careful  assessment  of
    the circumstances of the appellant and the sponsor and has given  valid
    reasons for coming to the conclusions that she has. Equally  the  judge
    has referred to case identified and was clearly mindful of the  factors
    necessary to justify the conclusion that she came to.

19. As a final matter it is suggested that the judge  has  failed  to  make
    proper assessment of the fact that an application could  be  made  from
    abroad, as identified in the case of R (on the application of Chen) IJR
    [2015] UKUT00189(IAC). Judge "makes a specific  finding  that  she  was
    specifically satisfied on the basis  of  the  evidence  presented  that
    there were compelling circumstances which rendered the decision of  the
    respondent disproportionate.

20. The judge has properly assessed all the factors and given valid reasons
    for finding that consideration of Article 8 was  in  the  circumstances
    justified. She has  thereafter  given  ample  reasons  to  justify  the
    conclusion that the decision was not proportionately justified. In  the
    circumstances the judge has fully justified  the  conclusion  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.

21. In the circumstances the judge has given valid reasons  for  coming  to
    the conclusions that she has and there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

22. I dismiss the appeal by the respondent and uphold the decision to allow
    this appeal.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     13 September 2016
