
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18208/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th March 2015                            |On 31st March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
             MR R C CAMPBELL, DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MS OLUBUSOLA QUEEN ADESUYI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Osifeso (Legal representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated on 18th September 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid ("the Judge) allowed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,  Ms
    Adesuyi, brought in response to the appellant's decision to remove  her
    from the United Kingdom under section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999.  That decision, contained in IS.151A Part 2, was made on 11th
    May 2013.

2.   The respondent's case was advanced substantially on the basis that  her
    removal to Nigeria would breach her rights under Article 8 of the Human
    Rights Convention, in the light of family life  with  her  daughter,  a
    British citizen.  In allowing  the  appeal,  the  judge  concluded,  at
    paragraph 26 of the decision, as follows:

         "I am persuaded that (the respondent) merits  the  benefit  of  the
         Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended) as well as the  Articles  of
         the ECHR."

3.   In seeking permission to  appeal,  the  appellant  contended  that  the
    judge's findings were wholly inadequate as it was not  clear  from  the
    decision which rule the appellant's  appeal  had  been  allowed  under.
    Secondly, the judge had not taken into  account  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, brought  into  effect  by
    the Immigration Act 2014.  In this context, there was no assessment  of
    whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the respondent's  child
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Taking into  account  the  child's  young
    age, presently 4 years, the Secretary of State  would  submit  that  it
    would be reasonable for the respondent  and  her  child  to  return  to
    Nigeria together.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 10th November 2014.  In  directions
    served shortly thereafter, the parties were advised  that  they  should
    prepare for the forthcoming hearing on the basis that if  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal were set aside, any  further  evidence  that
    the Upper Tribunal might need to consider if it decided to re-make  the
    decision could be considered at the hearing.

5.   Mr Tufan relied upon the written grounds in support of the  application
    for permission to appeal.  The  judge  had  simply  not  addressed  the
    pertinent issues.  It was not clear from the decision  why  the  appeal
    had been allowed.  The judge  referred  broadly  to  the  Human  Rights
    Convention but there was no adequate analysis.

6.   In response, Mr Osifeso said that although it  was  apparent  that  the
    judge made no mention of particular rules in allowing the appeal,  this
    aspect was subsumed within the decision.  At paragraph 3, the judge had
    expressly borne in mind  the  rules  and  perhaps  had  not  deemed  it
    necessary to go further.  Similarly, the decision showed  that  he  had
    the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 in  mind,  having  mentioned
    them in the same paragraph.

7.   Having heard from the representatives, we concluded that  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside,  as  it  contained
    material errors of law.  In particular, the judge  failed  to  identify
    which rule or rules he had in mind  in  allowing  the  appeal  and  the
    decision contained no adequate human rights assessment.  The very brief
    mention of the rules and the Immigration Act 2014 in paragraph 3 of the
    decision  is  insufficient  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  following
    paragraphs showing how the judge reached his conclusion that the appeal
    fell to be allowed.  At paragraph 17,  there  is  a  brief  mention  of
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  ("the
    2009 Act"), and of the best interests  assessment  which  is  required.
    Although the judge reminded himself  in  the  following  paragraphs  of
    several of the relevant authorities, there is nothing to  show  how  he
    has applied the law to the particular facts in the appeal  before  him.
    The conclusion reached at paragraph 26, set out above, is unaccompanied
    by reasons.  We allow the Secretary of State's appeal and set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Re-making the Decision

8.   We drew the attention of the  representatives  to  the  extent  of  the
    documentary evidence before us, concerning the decision  under  appeal.
    There were copies of Form IS.151A Part 2, the removal decision  itself,
    and Part 1 of the same form, bearing the same date, giving notice to Ms
    Adesuyi (hereafter "the claimant") of liability to  removal.   In  this
    document, there appeared a "specific statement of  reasons",  in  which
    she is  described  as  an  illegal  entrant  who  had  admitted  to  an
    Immigration Officer that she entered the United Kingdom using an  alias
    and that in a later  application  for  leave  to  remain  in  her  true
    identity, she failed to disclose her earlier entry in a false identity.
     The evidence before us did not include a  letter  giving  any  further
    reasons for the removal decision and Mr Tufan confirmed that there  was
    no other letter.

9.   Mr Osifeso said that the Secretary of State ought to have made  a  best
    interests assessment in making the decision, in the  light  of  JO  and
    Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).  The  reasons
    given for the removal decision made no mention of  the  child  at  all.
    Outside the section 55 duty, the claimant was assisted by  guidance  on
    the application of EX.1., and  by  paragraph  7  of  that  guidance  in
    particular.  Mention was made there of the  judgment  of  the  CJEU  in
    Zambrano  (C-34/09),  given  effect  in  regulation  15A(4A)   of   the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended)
    ("the Regulations").  Mr Tufan said that the Regulations put  in  issue
    whether the child would be unable to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    should her mother be removed.  The judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
    AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 showed that the Tribunal might in  some
    circumstances be seized of the section 55 issue, where a decision maker
    had failed to comply with the duty.

10.  In our judgment, the reasons contained in Form IS.151A Part 1 fall  far
    short of what is required as the focus is entirely  upon  the  claimant
    herself.  There is no mention of her child at all.  There is nothing to
    show that the Secretary of State considered the  circumstances  of  the
    family as a  whole  before  making  the  removal  decision.   In  these
    circumstances, we conclude that the guidance given by the President  of
    the Upper Tribunal (IAC) in JO  and  Others  should  be  applied.   The
    reasons given in Form IS.151A Part  1,  containing  no  best  interests
    assessment, show that the Secretary of State has  failed  to  discharge
    the duties imposed by section 55 of the 2009 Act.   As  a  result,  the
    removal decision is not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  claimant
    awaits a lawful decision from the Secretary  of  State,  in  which  the
    circumstances of her child have been taken into account  and  we  allow
    the appeal on this basis.

11.  We emphasised to  Mr  Tufan  that  we  could  see  no  reason  why  the
    Secretary of State should not proceed to make a decision, in the  light
    of our judgment, without delay.  The circumstances of the claimant  and
    her child might all be taken into account in early course.

DECISION

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside,  it  is
    remade as follows:  The appeal is allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity  in  these  proceedings  and  we
make no direction on this occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable in these proceedings and so there can  be
no fee award.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

