
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 29 November 2016                  |On 4 January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves a child. I find that it is appropriate to continue the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr P.V. Thoree of Thoree & Co. Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The following chronology  of  events  will  assist  in  outlining  the
    complex history of the case although some of the exact  dates  and  the
    details of some events are unclear from the evidence  currently  before
    the Upper Tribunal.

    April 2001   The appellant, a citizen of Ecuador, first entered the  UK
                with her husband. She says that she  entered  on  a  visitor
                visa.


    Oct. 2001    The appellant's son was born in Spain and acquired Spanish
                nationality. It is not disputed that he is an EEA national.


    Nov. 2003    The appellant returned to the UK. The appellant says  that
                she produced her ID card and her son's Spanish  passport  on
                arrival but it is unclear on  what  basis  she  was  granted
                entry into the UK.


    08/07/04     The appellant and her husband applied  for  EEA  residence
                documents on the grounds of a derivative right of  residence
                as the primary carers of an EEA child.


    06/10/04     The respondent refused the application.  No  copy  of  the
                decision has been adduced in evidence so it is not  possible
                to know the exact reasons for refusal. However, Judge Adio's
                subsequent decision summarises the decision as a refusal  to
                issue an EEA residence document "under Regulation 29 of  the
                Immigration (European Economic Area)  (Amended)  Regulations
                2003 with reference to Regulation 5(1)  of  the  Immigration
                (European Economic Area) Regulation[s] 2000." The respondent
                was not satisfied that the child was a 'qualified person' or
                that the appellant and  her  husband  could  be  treated  as
                family members or the primary carers of the child.


    11/03/06     Immigration Judge Adio allowed the appellant's appeal.  He
                accepted that the appellant's son was an  EEA  national  who
                was attending school in the UK. The  judge  found  that  the
                Article 12 of regulation 1612/68, as applied by the European
                Court of Justice in Baumbast v SSHD [2003] INLR  1,  applied
                in this case. The judge went on to consider the case of Chen
                v SSHD [2005] INLR 1. He was satisfied that the EEA  child's
                non-EEA national parents were both working,  albeit  without
                permission, and were  able  to  support  the  child  without
                recourse to public assistance. He was  also  satisfied  that
                they had appropriate health insurance. Judge Adio  concluded
                that the effect of Chen  was  that  the  appellant  and  her
                husband had established a right of residence as the  primary
                carers of an EEA national child.


    05/06/06      The  respondent's  application  for  reconsideration  was
                refused. No details have been provided of the nature of  the
                application save for reference to it  in  a  later  decision
                made by Immigration Judge Munro, where it was said that  the
                application was refused because it was out of time.


    13/11/06     It is said that the respondent issued the appellant with a
                document recognising a right of residence in the UK  but  it
                is unclear from the evidence currently before  the  Tribunal
                whether she was issued with an EEA residence card  or  leave
                to remain under paragraph 257C  of  the  immigration  rules.
                What evidence there is suggests that an EEA  residence  card
                was issued but there is no direct evidence of the fact.


    17/12/06     The respondent revoked the appellant's EEA residence card.
                The card was revoked because the  non-EEA  national  parents
                were supporting  the  family  through  employment  that  was
                contrary to their immigration status  at  the  time  of  the
                application. The  residence  documents  of  the  appellant's
                husband and child were revoked on the ground that the  child
                had ceased to be a 'qualified person'.


    05/03/07     Immigration Judge Munro allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.
                She  noted  developments  in  the  law  since  Judge  Adio's
                decision, which included the Court of Appeal decision  in  W
                (China) & X (China) v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1494  and  the
                subsequent Asylum and Immigration Tribunal decision in MA  &
                Others (EU national;  self-sufficiency;  lawful  employment)
                Bangladesh [2006]  UKAIT  00090.  The  decisions  post-dated
                Judge Adio's decision. However, she also  observed  that  it
                was hard to resist the conclusion that  the  respondent  had
                done no more than respond to Judge  Adio's  decision  "in  a
                tokenistic manner, and that at the date of  issue  of  those
                documents he  had  already  decided  to  revoke  them."  She
                concluded  that  the  appellants  were  entitled  to  expect
                residence documents to  be  issued  following  Judge  Adio's
                decision, which was not appealed  successfully.  The  appeal
                was allowed on the ground that the decision  to  revoke  the
                residence documents was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
                There is nothing to suggest that Judge Monro's decision  was
                appealed.


    17/04/07     Again, it is said that the respondent issued the appellant
                with a document recognising a right of residence in  the  UK
                but it is unclear from the  evidence  currently  before  the
                Upper Tribunal whether she was issued with an EEA  residence
                card  or  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  257C  of  the
                immigration rules.  However,  the  respondent's  grounds  of
                appeal to the Upper Tribunal appear to suggest that she  may
                have been issued with an EEA residence card.


    03/06/11     The appellant became divorced from  Rolando  Rodrigo  Vaca
                Carrillo.


    22/03/12     The appellant applied for a permanent residence card.


    02/03/13     The respondent issued a permanent residence card.


    08/10/13      The  respondent  refused  a   similar   application   for
                recognition of  permanent  residence  made  by  the  child's
                father, Mr Vaca Carrillo. Again, a copy of that decision  is
                not in evidence but the reasons for refusal  are  summarised
                in First-tier Tribunal Judge  Iqbal's  subsequent  decision.
                The respondent was not satisfied that the child's father was
                a 'family member' for  the  purpose  an  application  for  a
                permanent  residence  card.  In   considering   whether   he
                continued to have a derivative right  of  residence  as  the
                parent of an EEA national  child  the  respondent  concluded
                that he was not the primary carer of the child and therefore
                did not meet the requirements of regulation 15A(4)(a) of The
                Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
                EEA Regulations 2006").


    27/01/14     First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal allowed Mr Vaca Carrillo's
                appeal on  limited  grounds.  The  judge  noted  that  there
                appeared to be inconsistent decision making given  that  his
                ex-wife was issued with  a  permanent  residence  card.  The
                judge was satisfied that Mr Vaca Carrillo was fully involved
                in his son's life and continued to share responsibility  for
                the child. She noted  that  regulation  15A(7)  allowed  for
                shared responsibility for an EEA national child. Despite the
                fact  that  it  appears  that  the  respondent  had  already
                considered whether Mr Vaca Carrillo met the requirements  of
                regulation 15A the judge decided to allow the appeal on  the
                ground that the decision was not in accordance with the  law
                and  'remitted'  it  to  the  respondent  to  give   further
                consideration to the application rather than determining the
                substantive issues.


    14/04/15     The respondent reviewed the appellant's position in  light
                of the First-tier Tribunal decision relating to the  child's
                father and made a decision to revoke the permanent residence
                card. That decision is  the  subject  of  this  appeal.  The
                respondent noted that the decision in  Chen  did  not  state
                that the non-EEA national parent of an  EEA  national  child
                would have a right to reside as a "family member" as defined
                in EU law. As  such  she  was  not  entitled  to  apply  for
                permanent residence. However, a person who claims to have  a
                derivative right of residence can  apply  for  a  derivative
                residence card from within the UK. The  respondent  admitted
                that her initial application for recognition of a  permanent
                right of residence  was  wrongly  decided.  The  application
                should have been treated as an application for a  derivative
                residence card. Such an application did not give rise  to  a
                permanent right of residence. The respondent considered  the
                evidence that was submitted with  the  original  application
                and decided  that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  for  a
                derivative residence card because there was no  evidence  to
                show that they had comprehensive sickness insurance cover in
                the United Kingdom.


    29/06/15     First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan allowed the appeal. She
                summarised the history of the case and the reasons given  by
                Judges Adio and Monro for allowing the previous appeals. She
                noted that the appellant  applied  for  permanent  residence
                before the enactment of regulation  15A,  but  unfortunately
                the application was not decided until nearly a  year  later,
                at which point, regulation 15A was in force. Judge  Monaghan
                found that the appellant had been  residing  in  the  UK  in
                accordance with the regulations for a continuous  period  of
                five years prior to  the  enactment  of  regulation  15(1A),
                which stated that derivative  rights  of  residence  do  not
                constitute residence for the purpose of permanent  residence
                under regulation 15. She concluded that  the  appellant  had
                already acquired a right of  permanent  residence  prior  to
                regulation 15(1A) coming into force.  There  were  no  other
                reasons to justify revoking the  permanent  residence  card.
                The judge concluded that the decision was not in  accordance
                with the law. She noted that the appellant had comprehensive
                sickness insurance at the date of the hearing.


    25/10/16     The respondent was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
                Upper Tribunal.


3.    The Secretary of State appeals First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monaghan's
    decision on the following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to appreciate  that  the  appellant  never  was  a
         "family member" for the purpose of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and
         could not qualify for permanent residence under regulation 15.


     ii) The Secretary of State accepts  that  the  effect  of  the  allowed
         appeal in 2007 should have led to a grant of leave to remain rather
         than the issue of an EEA residence card. She also accepts that  the
         application for permanent residence made in 2012 should  have  been
         considered under regulation 15A  rather  than  regulation  15.  She
         relies on the decision in PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  251
         to argue that, once a court is satisfied that a  mistake  has  been
         made, it should be slow to fix a public authority permanently  with
         the consequences of the error.


    iii) The grounds go on  to  argue  that  once  the  Secretary  of  State
         recognised the error it was  legitimate  to  revoke  the  permanent
         residence  card.  She  recognised  that   "issues   of   legitimate
         expectation,  fairness  and  proportionality  may  well  arise   in
         relation to mistaken decisions which are  allowed  to  persist  for
         some time" but the judge had  failed  to  consider  that  principle
         because she mistakenly believed that the appellant had  acquired  a
         right of permanent residence.


     iv) The judge's alternative  finding  that  the  decision  was  not  in
         accordance with the law on the ground that the revocation  decision
         was made with reference to regulation 20(2), which gives  power  to
         revoke a registration certificate or residence  card,  rather  than
         regulation 20(3), which gives power to revoke a permanent residence
         card was not sufficient to find  the  decision  unlawful  when  the
         Secretary of State clearly had the  power  to  revoke  a  permanent
         residence card.


Decision and reasons

4.    There is no suggestion that the appellant has ever acted  in  anything
    other than good faith  when  applying  for  recognition  of  rights  of
    residence under EU law. Irrespective of the evolving case  law  arising
    out of the landmark decision in Chen, which developed during the course
    of  the  appellant's  applications  for  recognition  of  a  right   of
    residence, the essence of the Secretary of State's current argument  is
    that the conditions for recognition of a right of  permanent  residence
    could not apply, and have never applied, to the appellant in this case.



5.    The  appellant  applied  for  recognition  of  a  right  of  permanent
    residence following five years residence as the primary carer of an EEA
    national self-sufficient child. The exact terms of the application  are
    unclear on the limited evidence currently before the Upper Tribunal. At
    the date of her application in March 2012 the EEA Regulations 2006  had
    not yet been amended  to  include  provisions  relating  to  derivative
    rights of residence. However, by the date of the respondent's  decision
    to issue  a  permanent  residence  card  on  02  March  2013,  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 had been amended  to  include  regulation  15A,  which
    makes clear that periods of derivative residence  are  not  "residence"
    for the purpose of recognition of a permanent right of residence  under
    regulation 15.

6.    The Citizenship Directive and the EEA Regulations 2006  make  a  clear
    distinction, which has been recognised in a number  of  cases,  between
    the rights of "family members" and other relatives including  "extended
    family members". Regulation 7 specifically defines "family members"  as
    the spouse or civil partner, direct descendants of the EEA national  or
    their spouse or civil partner who are under 21 or  who  are  dependent.
    The definition includes dependent direct  relatives  in  the  ascending
    line. In contrast, regulation  8  makes  clear  that  "extended  family
    members" are not "family members" within the meaning  of  regulation  7
    and sets out a number of circumstances in which a person would  qualify
    as an "extended family member" for the purpose of the  EEA  Regulations
    2006. The distinction between the rights accorded to  "family  members"
    and those  of  "extended  family  members"  is  echoed  the  underlying
    Citizenship Directive.

7.    Following the coming into force of the EEA Regulations 2006 it  became
    clear, if  it  was  not  before,  that  a  person  in  the  appellant's
    situation, who was not a dependent direct  relative  in  the  ascending
    line, is not a "family member" within the meaning of EU  law.  Although
    the appellant is a relative of an EEA national in the  ascending  line,
    she is not dependent upon her son, he is dependent upon her.

8.    The wording of Article 16 of the Citizenship Directive and  regulation
    15 of the EEA Regulations 2006 both make provision  for  EEA  nationals
    and their "family members" to acquire a right  of  permanent  residence
    following continuous lawful residence for a period of  five  years.  By
    virtue of regulation 7(3)  "extended  family  members"  who  have  been
    issued with an EEA residence card shall be treated as a "family member"
    so long as they continue to meet the conditions contained in regulation
    8. An extended family member, in theory, could accrue a period of  five
    years residence in accordance with the regulations as a "family member"
    for the purpose of acquiring a right of permanent  residence.  However,
    they could only do so if they had been a "family member" by  virtue  of
    regulation 7(3) i.e. in possession of a residence card for a period  of
    five years during which time they continued to satisfy  the  conditions
    of regulation 8.

9.    I have outlined why derivative  rights  of  residence  such  as  those
    claimed by the appellant do not come within the definition of a "family
    member" under regulation 7. The appellant was not issued  with  an  EEA
    residence card as a "family member" or as an "extended  family  member"
    and does not meet any of the requirements of  regulation  8.  In  other
    words, she is not and never has been a "family member" for the  purpose
    of EU law. She cannot meet the conditions required to acquire  a  right
    of permanent residence under regulation 15.

10.   The fact that a person with a derivative  right  of  residence  cannot
    acquire a permanent right of residence was  put  beyond  doubt  by  the
    terms of regulation 15(1A). The provision was introduced by way  of  an
    amendment to the EEA Regulations 2006 on 16 July 2012 (SI 2012/1547).

11.   As Judge Monaghan observed, the provision was in place at the date  of
    the respondent's decision in  March  2013.  However,  for  the  reasons
    explained above,  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law in finding that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a
    right of permanent residence before the insertion of regulation  15(1A)
    because the appellant could not, and never did, qualify  as  a  "family
    member" for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b).

12.   The respondent  acknowledges  that  the  Home  Office  decision  maker
    issued the permanent residence card in error.  Unlike  other  forms  of
    entry and residence in the UK, which are granted  at  the  respondent's
    discretion, rights of free movement arise as a result of  the  function
    of EU law and are  not  dependent  upon  the  issuing  of  a  residence
    document. In other words, the issue of a residence card does not  grant
    an EU law right but acts as recognition of an existing right.  In  this
    case the appellant never had a right of permanent  residence  under  EU
    law. However, the fact that the subsequent revocation seems  unfair  in
    general terms does not compel the  respondent  to  accept  a  right  of
    permanent residence when none existed. In such circumstances  it  would
    not be appropriate to fix the respondent with the consequences  of  the
    error on a permanent basis.

13.   Regulation 20(3) makes clear that the  respondent  has  the  power  to
    revoke a document certifying permanent residence if the holder  of  the
    certificate or card has ceased to  have  "or  never  had"  a  right  of
    permanent residence under  regulation  15.  The  fact  that  the  wrong
    provision was mistakenly referred to  in  the  revocation  decision  is
    immaterial in circumstances where the  respondent  clearly  had  lawful
    power, and just cause, to revoke the  appellant's  permanent  residence
    card in circumstances where it became apparent that  she  never  had  a
    right of permanent residence.

14.   For the reasons given  above  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law.

15.   In remaking the  decision  I  have  taken  into  account  the  express
    concession made by Mr Patel, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  that
    the appellant nevertheless meets the conditions for a derivative  right
    of residence and should be issued with a derivative residence card.  He
    accepted that the logical consequence of the  concession  is  that  the
    appeal must be allowed under the EEA Regulations  2006  on  the  ground
    that she continues to meet the conditions for  a  derivative  right  of
    residence.

16.   The respondent recognises that the mistake gives  rise  to  issues  of
    fairness and proportionality. The appellant  made  an  application  for
    permanent residence in good faith albeit that, in law,  she  could  not
    succeed. The respondent did nothing to rectify the  mistake  until  two
    years later, during which  time  the  appellant  thought  she  had  the
    security of permanent residence in the UK.

17.   The chronology suggests that the  appellant  is  likely  to  have  had
    lawful residence in the UK for a period  of  at  least  10  years.  Her
    derivative rights of residence are reliant upon her son, who will reach
    his majority within a few years. Although the appellant  is  unable  to
    qualify  for  permanent  residence  under  EU  law  I  note  that   the
    respondent's policy guidance on applications for long  residence  under
    paragraph 276B of the immigration rules states  that  lawful  residence
    under EU  law  may  be  taken  into  account  for  the  purpose  of  an
    application for Indefinite Leave to Remain under the immigration rules.
    It is a matter for  the  applicant  to  consider,  having  taken  legal
    advice, whether she wishes to make a formal application for  settlement
    under UK law. The respondent  would  have  to  take  into  account  the
    history of the  case  and  her  policy  guidance  in  response  to  any
    application.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal  ALLOWED  under  the  EEA  Regulations
2006


Signed      [pic]      Date 04 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
