

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th January 2015                          |On 29th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               Mr Hiren Odedra
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ceesay (IAS (Manchester))
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    North promulgated on  20th  August  2014  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain on the basis of his private life  and  relationship
    with his partner, Mr Winn.  Permission  was  granted  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on the basis that the Judge may have made  an  error  of
    law in finding that the couple had not been cohabiting  for  two  years
    and  also  in  suggesting  that  they  should  have  registered   their
    relationship.

2.   The Appellant, an Indian national said that he met his partner on  22nd
    August 2012 and they started to live together in December of that year.
     The Secretary of State refused the application under  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the Appellant did not meet the requirements for
    leave to remain as a partner as  they  had  not  lived  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for two years.

3.   The Judge found that they had not.  There was conflicting  evidence  as
    to when they started to live together  but  he  found  that  to  be  in
    December 2012.  The Judge then found there to be no reasons to  justify
    a consideration under the ECHR.  He did not accept it would be a breach
    of Article 8 to expect either the Appellant alone or the Appellant  and
    his partner to move in India.

4.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal are at best  misconceived  and
    at worst misleading.  They suggest that the Judge's  finding  that  the
    couple had not been in a relationship akin to marriage  for  two  years
    was irrational and perverse: It was not.  Mr Ceesay sought to  persuade
    me that a relationship akin to marriage can  subsist  without  constant
    cohabitation - which of course it can.  However, this  couple  met  for
    the first time on 22nd August 2012.  It is  wholly  inconceivable,  and
    frankly nonsense to suggest that they started a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage on that date. However, even if they had it was still less than
    two years, even from the date of the hearing which was on  18th  August
    2014.  It is far more credible  that  the  relationship  took  on  that
    substance when they moved in together in December 2012.   That  ground,
    which was clearly pertinent to the grant of permission  to  appeal,  is
    misleading, being quite plainly wrong.  Furthermore an assertion that a
    Judge has acted perversely or irrationally carries a high threshold and
    should not be made lightly.

5.   The grounds then make a  further  misleading  assertion  in  suggesting
    that the Judge wrongly required the relationship to be registered.   He
    did not.  He said in the determination that he noted that they had  not
    entered into a civil partnership and the claim  by  the  representative
    that they had been unable to do so,.  He asked about this and was given
    no cogent explanation.  It is untrue to assert that  the  Judge  either
    found this determinative or that he did not raise it  at  the  hearing.
    There was no error of law nor any unfairness.

6.   Lastly, the grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing to  consider
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  The only reason put forward for so  doing
    was that in India gay couples are discriminated against.  The Judge did
    not accept that assertion for the reasons he gave.

7.   The grounds in this case are of a kind that should not be advanced  and
    do the Appellant no favours.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an
    error of law and I uphold the decision.

8.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed   Dated 27th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
