
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18707/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 August 2014                              |On 26 August 2014            |
|Prepared on 8 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                         SHIJIR-ERDENE DULAMRAGCHAA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P R Collins, Counsel, instructed by Breytenbachs
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Mongolia, date of birth 16 February  1973,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  14  June  2012,  to
    dismiss an application made on 19 February 2012 for leave to remain  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. The Respondent asserted  there  was
    no right of appeal because the application was made when the  Appellant
    did not have leave to remain.

2.   The Appellant had leave to remain until 28 December  2011  and  applied
    in time in an earlier application, date unknown in December  2011,  for
    leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.    That
    application had been rejected as invalid because it had  not  contained
    the required mandatory particulars in the relevant application form and
    accordingly was not valid.  The mandatory  requirements  were  for  the
    Appellant to have a CAS number allocated.  The Appellant completed  the
    application form but could not  provide  a  CAS  number  because  quite
    simply he had not done the exams and no college would issue  a  CAS  in
    the expectation of the Appellant succeeding.

3.   The Appellant therefore made a further application for leave to  remain
    (Tier 4 (General ) student  migrant)  (the  second  application)  on  9
    February 2012.

4.   Before First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie (the  judge)  it  was  argued
    that in fact the application of 9 February 2012 was simply a  variation
    of  the  earlier  in  time  application.  The  judge  found  that   the
    Respondent's decision on the previous application was not in accordance
    with the law and therefore the Appellant's Section 3C leave  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 continued. The judge accepted there  was  a  valid
    appeal against  the  second  decision.  The  judge  found   the  appeal
    succeeded under Appendix C (maintenance/funds).

5.      Permission to appeal the judge's decision was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R A Cox on 13 June 2014.

6.   It is clear from the case law, particularly the decisions in  Alam  and
    Others [2012] EWCA Civ 960 particularly [50, 51] and  Rodriguez  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 2 [86] that issues of invalidity as opposed to aspects  of  an
    application  that  fell  for  substantive   consideration   should   be
    distinguished  one  from  another  and  the   mandatory   sections   in
    application form have  to  be  completed   for  there  to  be  a  valid
    application.  In those circumstances it is plain and accepted that  the
    Appellant did not provide the CAS  number  required  with  the  earlier
    application.

7.   It was argued by Mr Collins that so long as  something  or  some  words
    were put in  the  mandatory  section  of  the  application,  indeed  as
    illustrated by the particular case, that was  sufficient  to  show  the
    mandatory section had been completed even if what was inserted amounted
    to nonsense or really did not address the  existence  of  such  a   CAS
    Sponsor or the acceptance on a course or even the issue of a CAS number
    or letter subject to meeting requirements.

8.   I reject Mr Collins' argument  because  I  find  that  the  'mandatory'
    section means exactly what it says and unfortunately for this Appellant
    he did not at the date he applied in time in 2011  have  the  necessary
    CAS particulars to complete the mandatory  section.   It  followed  the
    earlier application was invalid. As a fact, the second application  was
    not made in time and  there was no right of appeal  against the refusal
     to the Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was a  clear
    error of law in that he had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal.

7.   The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

8.       There was no right of appeal to the Tribunal.

Anonymity Order
No anonymity order is appropriate.
Fee Award
There is no right of appeal and so there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 19 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
