
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18771/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd September 2014                           |On 10th  September 2014    |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD



                                   Between

                               MS LIZA STUART
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muzenda, Solicitor, Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Zimbabwe  who  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on 8th September 2013 outside the Immigration Rules  in
    reliance upon Article 8 ECHR.  Her  application  was  refused  and  her
    subsequent appeal allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes  in  a
    determination promulgated on 27th May  2014.   Grounds  of  application
    were lodged on the basis that the judge did not consider  the  guidance
    in the case of Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640  namely,  if  there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules is it necessary for  Article
    8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

 2. It was said that the judge had not  made  any  case  specific  findings
    addressing  the  issue  of  arguably  good   grounds   and   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.   The  judge
    had simply noted that there was no  provision  within  the  Rules  that
    would apply to the Appellant.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and it was said that it was not  clear
    what factors weighed in the judge's mind  when  she  decided  that  the
    Appellant's removal would be unjustifiably harsh.  It was said  it  was
    arguable that the judge misdirected herself as to the law and Article 8
    with reference to Gulshan.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. Ms Everett relied on her  grounds  of  application  and  the  grant  of
    permission.  Mr Muzenda said that the  decision  was  a  reasoned  one.
    There had been a recognition of the decisive issues  and  the  relevant
    factors.  Compelling reasons had been given from paragraph  28  onwards
    in the determination.  The failure per se to mention  Gulshan  was  not
    fatal  to  the  determination.   Mention  had  been  made  of   medical
    complications and the loneliness suffered by the Appellant and the fact
    that there were no family connections in Zimbabwe.  Compelling  reasons
    had been given.  I was asked to uphold the decision.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. The judge referred to well-known case law before going on  to  consider
    the case under Article 8 ECHR including mention of R  v  SSHD  (on  the
    application of Nagre) [2013] EWCA Civ 720 (Admin).  Given  the  mention
    of Nagre it is fair to say she appreciated that it was  only  if  there
    were arguably good grounds for granting leave to go outside  the  Rules
    was it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    them.  She identified that there was no provision  in  Appendix  FM  or
    elsewhere in the Rules  for  an  elderly  dependant  relative  who  was
    already here and living with their family to make  an  application  for
    further leave to remain.  She bore  in  mind  the  Appellant's  claimed
    health problems and considered there was an arguable case for grant  of
    leave outside the Rules.  She then applied Razgar v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  She considered two medical reports put forward  by  the  Appellant
    (paragraphs 35 and 36).  She was satisfied that the Appellant  met  the
    substantive requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5.  She  found  the
    Sponsor to be an entirely credible witness (paragraph 37).

 8. She did not consider that the Appellant would, even with the  practical
    and financial help of the Sponsor, be able to obtain the required level
    of care that she needs in Zimbabwe and she identified sound reasons for
    that.

 9.  She  accepted  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  that  the
    Appellant's former home was dilapidated.

10. In paragraph 43 it seemed to the judge likely  that  if  the  Appellant
    were to return to Zimbabwe to make an application for  entry  clearance
    that she would meet  the  requirements  to  be  admitted  as  an  adult
    dependent relative. She noted that the  Appellant  was  80  years  old,
    frail, and had health problems and in all  the  circumstances  did  not
    consider that it would be justified and proportionate to expect her  to
    return to Zimbabwe to make an application for entry clearance.

11. It has to be said that the judge has given entirely clear and  coherent
    reasons for coming to her decision.  I agree with Mr Muzenda  that  the
    fact that she did not mention the case of Gulshan is nowhere near fatal
    to the determination - the question is not whether the judge  mentioned
    a particular case but whether she applied the correct legal principles.
     In a very good determination the judge adopted the  correct  approach,
    and gave detailed reasons for her findings and decision.  There  is  no
    possible error of law in this determination.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

13. I do not set aside the decision.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


