
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/18662/2015
                                                               IA/18665/2015
                                                               IA/19845/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2017                        |On 23 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                     Anrin Hia Ruchita (first appellant)
                          [A A] (second appellant)
                    Md Shahnawaz Rohan (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.   They  are  father,  mother
    and  a  child  aged  9.   Their  application  to  remain  outside   the
    Immigration Rules was rejected by the  respondent  on  30  April  2015.
    Their appeal against that decision was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) Judge Hussain and  dismissed  by  him  on  19  August  2016.   As
    elaborated by Mr Karim, the grounds of appeal were essentially twofold:
    first that the judge failed to  engage  with  relevant  case  law;  and
    secondly that he failed to carry out a proper assessment of  the  issue
    of whether the  third  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) in respect of the reasonableness or not of expecting him  to
    leave the UK.

2.   The two grounds are closely interrelated but  it  is  convenient  if  I
    deal with the second ground first.  There are two discernible errors in
    the judge's assessment of this  issue.   First,  the  judge  failed  to
    address  the  appellants'  circumstances  holistically.   Rather   than
    assessing whether taking all matters relevant to the best interests  of
    the child into account it was reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
    the UK, the judge treated the answer to this issue as one that could be
    simply  deduced  from  his  conclusions  as  regards  the   first   two
    appellants' cases.  At paragraphs 33 and 34 the judge wrote:

         "33. As will be apparent from above, this  appellant  has  to  show
             that he has lived in this country for seven years and it would
             not be reasonable to expect him to  leave.   The  Home  Office
             position is that he will be returning to his home country with
             his parents who will provide for him.

         34.  Current judicial authorities suggest that it is  generally  in
             the best interest of a child to be with its parents.  In  view
             of the conclusion to which I reached in relation to the  first
             and second appellants appeals, it must follow that  it  is  in
             the best interest of the third appellant that he to be removed
             with his parents so that he can be with them."

    Whilst the judge was correct to state that there are  current  judicial
    authorities that emphasise the point that it is generally in  the  best
    interests of the child to live with his or her  parents,  that  general
    proposition has never been seen to  justify  the  removal  of  a  child
    without an assessment of the child's particular circumstances.   Whilst
    the judge went on in paragraphs 34  and  35  to  consider  the  child's
    particular circumstances, he  had  already,  erroneously,  treated  his
    conclusion on them as a  simple  deduction  from  the  failure  of  the
    parents to qualify under the Immigration Rules in their own right.  The
    judge effectively treated the case as one concerned with the first  two
    appellants only, with the child's appeal being  simply  an  adjunct  of
    theirs.  At paragraph 36 the judge stated "in view of  the  failure  of
    his parents' appeal, the conclusion to which I have  come  is  that  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect [the child] to leave the UK."  (See
    also paragraphs 34 and 37).

3.   A second error concerned the failure of the judge  to  treat  the  fact
    that the third appellant had lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  over
    seven years as a factor of significant weight.  As stated by  Elias  LJ
    in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

         "... the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for  seven  years
         would need to be given significant weight  in  the  proportionality
         exercise for two related reasons: first, because of  its  relevance
         to  determining  the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
         interests; and second, because it establishes as a  starting  point
         that leave should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons  to
         the contrary."

    This is true in respect of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and  s.117B(6)  of  the
    NIAA 2002.

4.   In my judgment these two errors were  material  because  it  cannot  be
    excluded that if the judge had correctly understood  "current  judicial
    authorities" he would have reached a different conclusion.

5.   My analysis above also provides the answer  of  the  appellants'  first
    ground of appeal.  It goes too far to require a Tribunal Judge to  cite
    leading cases setting out the legal principles to  be  applied;  it  is
    sufficient if the law the judge applies is the correct  law.   In  this
    case however, the judge's application of the law was at odds  with  the
    guidance given in MA (Pakistan).

6.   At the end  of  the  hearing  I  asked  the  representatives  how  they
    considered I should dispose of the appeal were I to find (as I have)  a
    material error of law.  Mr Karim asked  that  I  re-make  the  decision
    myself.  Mr Tufan asked that it  be  either  remitted  to  the  FtT  or
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for a further hearing.  I have concluded
    that there is no need for a further hearing either before  the  FtT  or
    UT.  Mr Karim's grounds do not take issue with  the  judge's  principal
    findings of fact as regards the parents' circumstances in the UK and in
    Bangladesh; and in relation to the circumstances of the child, Mr Tufan
    has disputed only the judge's evaluation of these.

My Decision

7.   Considering first the issue of the best interests  of  the  child,  the
    third appellant's is clearly a case in which there are factors pointing
    for and against him being allowed to remain in  the  UK.   On  the  one
    hand, as the judge stated in paragraph 35. there are factors indicating
    that his best interests lie in  remaining  in  the  UK:  he  is  "well-
    established" here; he is "well-settled" in his school and appears to be
    excelling educationally; he is actively involved in sports  that  bring
    him into close contact with other young pupils; he is  "well-integrated
    into British society"; he "has a bright future here".  The  judge  does
    not dispute that the boy only speaks English.   It  was  these  factors
    that led the judge to state that "undoubtedly his life in the UK  would
    be better than it would be in Bangladesh."

8.   On the other hand, the appellant is only 9 years of age and  whilst  he
    is  active  in  school  life  and  sporting  activities  (and  recently
    participated in children's television), it  is  not  suggested  he  had
    found significant social ties outside his own family.  As stated by the
    judge in paragraph 36, "he is still of an age where his  life  revolves
    around his parents".  Whilst the child does not speak Bengali or  other
    languages spoken in Bangladesh, it was not suggested that he was  being
    brought up in ignorance of the culture and traditions of his country of
    nationality and  his  religion  was  also  the  same  as  his  parents.
    Therefore  the  only  factor  that  was  likely  to  cause  the   child
    difficulties  in  adapting  to  life  in  Bangladesh  (other  than  the
    inevitable disruption of his current life in the UK) was linguistic.

9.   Focusing primarily on the best interests of the  child,  therefore,  my
    assessment is that on balance they lie with him remaining in the UK.

10.  However as emphasised by the Court of Appeal in MA the  fact  that  the
    child's best interests are for him or her to stay is not  determinative
    of the issue of whether it is unreasonable to expect him or her  to  go
    or of the outcome of the wider proportionality assessment.

11.  In considering the issue  of  reasonableness  of  expecting  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK I remind myself that his continuous residence
    in the UK for nine years is a significant factor to be weighed  in  the
    balance in his favour and that the child's best interests are a primary
    consideration.  However, I also remind myself that on the facts of  his
    case the assessment of his best interests is  not  one-way.   The  fact
    that he was being brought up by his parents with  an  understanding  of
    the culture and traditions of Bangladesh and also shared their religion
    (Islam) which is  the  main  religion  in  Bangladesh  means  that  his
    difficulties in adapting to life  in  Bangladesh  will  essentially  be
    limited to lack of a shared language.  He  has  no  significant  health
    difficulties.

12.  Against this background I next weigh in the balance the general  family
    circumstances likely to affect  the  third  appellant  in  relation  to
    Bangladesh.  Here it is important to take note  that  the  FtT  clearly
    rejected the claims of the first two  appellants  that  they  would  be
    socially isolated.  At paragraph  31  when  considering  whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the couple (re) integrating into
    society in Bangladesh, the judge found:

         "31. I accept that in the time the first and second appellants have
             been in this country they will have established ties here  and
             their ties with their home country will be much weaker than it
             had been when they left.  However both the appellants have the
             benefits of family members.  I note that  the  two  appellants
             both maintained that they will have nowhere  to  live  and  no
             means of financial support.  That position is  unlikely  given
             that they all have family members.  In the long run  both  the
             appellants will have to and no doubt will find their own place
             in their societies where they have spent their  adulthood.   I
             appreciate that with a young child life will not be  initially
             easy for them.  However what the rule requires is for them  to
             demonstrate that there would be 'very significant  obstacles'.
             The word 'very' is not superfluous and is  intended  to  raise
             the bar high."

13.  Another factor  I  must  weigh  in  the  balance  when  assessing  both
    reasonableness and proportionality is the immigration  history  of  the
    first two appellants.  The first appellant entered the UK as a  student
    in 2003 and his leave was extended in that capacity  until  July  2007,
    but he received no further extension as he failed to  provide  evidence
    that he had completed his previous course, the second appellant entered
    the UK in March 2007 on a visitor's visa.   Both  were  served  notices
    that they were overstayers in June 2011.  Their immigration status  has
    been precarious throughout and they now seek to rely on the  ties  with
    the UK that have been strengthened by their own decision not  to  leave
    the UK as required.  In my view, although the  third  appellant's  nine
    years of residence is a significant factor  there  are  strong  reasons
    making it reasonable to require the child to leave the UK.  Removal  to
    Bangladesh, his country of  nationality,  will  be  together  with  his
    parents, so the family unit will be maintained.  The parents  have  not
    lost ties with Bangladesh, even though they are weaker than  when  they
    both left.  It is not unreasonable to expect that the  third  appellant
    will be able to adapt to  Bangladesh  society  in  a  relatively  short
    period of time.  There is functioning education system in Bangladesh to
    which their child would have a access.

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that  the  third  appellant  does  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv).   The   first   two
    appellants do not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    relevant to them - for the reasons given by the FtT judge.

15.  I have also given consideration to whether the appellants are  able  to
    establish compelling circumstances sufficient to  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  Taking into account all
    relevant considerations including those set out in s.117B of  the  2002
    Act I am not persuaded there are compelling circumstances.  Even taking
    into account that all three appellants speak English and even assessing
    the first two appellants  as  financially  independent,  their  private
    lives in the UK were formed at a time when their immigration status was
    precarious.  For the same reasons as it is not unreasonable  to  expect
    the third appellant to leave the UK under paragraph  276ADE(iv)  it  is
    not unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK  under  s.117B(6).
    Applying established principles of case law, including those set out in
    MA (Pakistan)  I  conclude  that  the  appellants'  appeals  should  be
    dismissed.

16.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law.

    The decision I re-make is to dismiss their appeals

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 21 May 2017
       [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

