
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/18385/2014
                                                               IA/18386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Wednesday 23 September 2015       |On Thursday 24 September 2015        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MRS KAINAT QAVI
                              MISS SHANZAY BAIG
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First Appellant is the wife of Mr Qavi Zaman  Baig  ("Mr  Baig").
       The Second Appellant is the daughter of the first  Appellant  and  Mr
       Baig.  By a decision dated 25 March 2014, the Respondent  refused  Mr
       Baig's application for variation of leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
       Entrepreneur and gave directions for his removal  to  Pakistan.   The
       First and Second Appellant were refused leave to remain as Mr  Baig's
       dependents.

    2. The appeals of Mr Baig and the Appellants were  dismissed  by  First-
       Tier Tribunal Judge Woolley by a decision promulgated on  9  December
       2014 ("the Decision").  Permission was granted to appeal the Decision
       on 19 May 2015 by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey.  The  appeals  were
       listed before me on  23  September  2015  to  determine  whether  the
       Decision contained a material error of law.

    3. By letter dated 15 September  2015,  J  S  Solicitors  wrote  to  the
       Tribunal indicating that they were no longer instructed  by  Mr  Baig
       and the Appellants.  On 17 September 2015,  Lawise  Solicitors  filed
       notice of withdrawal in relation to Mr Baig's appeal (IA/18384/2014).
        The Tribunal consented to the withdrawal on that day but noted  that
       the withdrawal notice did not extend to the appeals of the First  and
       Second  Appellants.   The  Tribunal  enquired  of  Lawise  solicitors
       whether they intended also to withdraw the appeals of the  First  and
       Second Appellants but was told that Lawise acted only for Mr Baig and
       they were not also instructed by the First and Second Appellants.

    4. The First and Second Appellants' appeals  therefore  remained  listed
       before me.  There was  no  attendance  by  or  on  behalf  of  either
       Appellant.  No explanation was received for their non-attendance  and
       no  application  was  made  for  an   adjournment.   There   was   no
       representation on behalf  of  the  Respondent  who  appears  to  have
       assumed that the withdrawal related to all three Appellants.

    5. It appears that the First and Second Appellants do not  pursue  their
       appeal.  It is difficult to see in any event how their appeals  could
       succeed in the light  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  lead  applicant's
       appeal.  Accordingly, I find that there is no material error  of  law
       in  the  Decision  and  the  appeals  remain  dismissed   under   the
       Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

DECISION

The First-Tier Tribunal's decision contains no material error of law.

The Appellants' appeals therefore remain  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
Rules and on human rights grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 23 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
