
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th December 2014             |On 22nd December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                              AMANPREET MUNDIAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A David, instructed by the Law Partnership
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India who had applied for  further  leave
    to remain as a  spouse.   He  appealed  against  the  refusal  of  that
    application and his appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge P
    J Holmes.  The issues with regard to the Immigration Rules were whether
    the Appellant met the English  language  requirements  and  whether  he
    satisfied the financial requirements of Appendix FM to the Rules.   The
    judge found that  the  English  language  requirements  were  met.   As
    regards the financial requirements he accepted that documents had  been
    produced supporting the income claimed as at the  date  of  application
    but he dismissed the appeal under the Rules as the evidence showed that
    the income had since decreased.  The appeal was  also  dismissed  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal,  contending  that  the
    necessary payslips to prove income had in fact been submitted with  the
    application but had been returned by the Home Office.  It was also said
    that the decision was unnecessarily harsh under  Article  8  ECHR.   On
    10th October 2014  permission  was  granted  only  in  respect  of  the
    challenge relating to the Immigration Rules.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr David for the  Appellant  had  submitted  a
    detailed skeleton argument.  Mr Mills for the Secretary of  State  said
    that having viewed the file he could concede that there was an error in
    the judge's determination  as  the  Home  Office  at  the  hearing  had
    conceded the evidence of finance was in order.   The  missing  payslips
    had in fact been  submitted  and  returned  and  were  present  at  the
    hearing.  With regard to finance there was no  bar  to  evidence  being
    produced at the hearing provided it related to the correct  period  and
    the Presenting Officer on that occasion had been satisfied.   The  only
    outstanding issue was the English language certificate  and  the  judge
    found in favour of the Appellant in that respect.  There  had  been  no
    challenge to that finding.  He accepted that the  relevant  period  was
    six months prior to the date of application  with  regard  to  finance,
    which might seem odd but appeared to be the case.

 4. I agreed with the contention put forward by Mr Mills and I am  grateful
    to him for his practical and realistic approach.  I  did  not  need  to
    call upon Mr David to address me.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    judge at first instance and allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. With regard to  fees  Mr  David  accepted  that  the  English  language
    certificate had not been submitted with the application.  My  view  was
    that it was therefore legitimate  for  the  respondent  to  refuse  the
    application at that stage and I decided to make no fee award.

 6. There was no request for an anonymity order and I could see no need for
    any such order to be made.

Decisions

The original decision involved the making of an error on a point of law  and
I set it aside.

I now remake the decision and the appeal is allowed  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Dated 19 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have decided to make no fee award for the reasons set out above.



Signed        Dated 19 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

