
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18264/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th July 2015                    |On 14th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    J C D
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Beach, Counsel instructed by Selvarajah & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 5th October  1984
    and she applied for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  23rd
    December 2013 on the  basis  of  her  family  and  private  life.   The
    Secretary of State decided on 2nd April 2014 to refuse further leave to
    remain and remove the appellant.

 2. The history of the appellant is that she had entered the United Kingdom
    as a student and subsequently entered a relationship with AN in January
    2014.  She then became pregnant and her child  was  due  on  8th  April
    2015.

 3. In a decision dated 9th February 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Farmer allowed JCD's appeal under Article 8 finding that removal of the
    appellant would be an interference with her private  and  family  life.
    However, he took into account the rights of an unborn child  which  are
    not generally recognised further to I X v United Kingdom (1980)  19  DR
    244.  The child was born on 23rd March 2015.

 4. That decision was therefore found to have an error of law (because  the
    rights of an unborn child were taken into account) and set aside.

 5. At the hearing before me it was submitted that the appellant should  be
    entitled to the benefit of Regulation 15A of the EEA Regulations:

         "Derivative right of residence

         15A. (1) A person (P) who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
                  the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A)  or  (5)  of
                  this regulation is  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  to
                  reside in the United Kingdom for as long  as  P  satisfies
                  the relevant criteria.

             (2)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

                  (a)  P is the  primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  (the
                      relevant EEA national); and

                  (b)  the relevant EEA national -

                      (i)  is under the age of 18;

                      (ii) is residing in the United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                           sufficient person; and

                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if P were required to leave.

             ....

             (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

                  (a)  P is the primary carer  of  a  British  citizen  (the
                      relevant British citizen);

                  (b)  the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
                      United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  the relevant  British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
                      reside in the UK or in another EEA State  if  P  were
                      required to leave.

             (5)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

                  (a)  P is under the age of 18;

                  (b)  P's primary carer is entitled to a  derivative  right
                      to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  virtue   of
                      paragraph (2) or (4);

                  (c)  P does not have leave to enter,  or  remain  in,  the
                      United Kingdom; and

                  (d)  requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent
                      P's  primary  carer  from  residing  in  the   United
                      Kingdom.

             ....

             (7)  P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another  person
                  if

                  (a)  P is a direct relative or a legal  guardian  of  that
                      person; and

                  (b)  P -

                      (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for
                           that person's care; or

                      (ii)  shares  equally  the  responsibility  for  that
                           person's care with one other person who is not an
                           exempt person.

             (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer  of  another
                  person by virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the  criteria  in
                  paragraphs  (2)(b)(iii),  (4)(b)  and  (4A)(c)  shall   be
                  considered on the basis that both P and  the  person  with
                  whom care responsibility is shared would  be  required  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

             (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply if  the  person  with  whom
                  care responsibility is shared acquired a derivative  right
                  to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  this
                  regulation prior to P assuming equal care responsibility.

             (8)  P will not be regarded as  having  responsibility  for  a
                  person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole
                  basis of a financial contribution  towards  that  person's
                  care.

             (9)   A  person  who  otherwise  satisfies  the  criteria   in
                  paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be  entitled
                  to a derivative right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  where the Secretary of State or an immigration officer has
                  made a decision under regulation 19(3)(b),  20(1),  20A(1)
                  or 23A."

 6. Sanade (British  children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2011]  UKUT  00048
    confirms that where a child is a British citizen,  which  clearly  this
    child must be as there was no challenge to the paternity of the  child,
    it is not possible to require the child to relocate out of the European
    Union or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do  so.   It
    was this case which prompted the introduction of Regulation 15A and  in
    the particular circumstances of this case as it is now being  argued  I
    accept that the appellant can succeed on EEA grounds.

 7. The evidence of the appellant and her partner was  that  the  appellant
    was the primary carer of their son born on 23rd March 2015.   There  is
    no specific definition of 'primary carer' save for that given above  in
    the Regulations.  The birth of the child is clearly a matter  which  is
    now a relevant factor.  Oral evidence was given to the effect that  the
    child was being breastfed, the father continues to work  full-time  and
    had already taken his two weeks' paternity leave.   I  accept  that  as
    the father is working full-time he would be in jeopardy of  losing  his
    job which he stated he had worked very hard to establish.  There was no
    evidence that other members of his family could step in and  take  care
    of the child in the United Kingdom.  I take into account Section 55  to
    the effect that the best interests of the child  should  be  considered
    and that at such a young age the best interests for the child would  be
    to remain with the mother and father.

 8. I am, however, not persuaded  that  the  mother  does  not  further  to
    Regulation  7(a)  (ii)  share  'equally  the  responsibility  for  that
    person's care with one other person who is not an exempt person'.

 9. The husband is indeed an exempt person. Although he may be  working  he
    has legal responsibility for the child and  cannot  be  said  that  the
    appellant's spouse does not at any time assist with  the  child's  care
    bearing in mind they are living together.  Nor can it be said that  the
    father does share primary responsibility for the child's care.  For the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations, it is open to him to make arrangements
    for the child care.  The best interests of the child  may  be  relevant
    but for the purposes of EU law I am not persuaded that the child  would
    have to leave the European Union.   I am aided in  this  interpretation
    by Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regs)  [2013]  UKUT
    00089 (IAC) which confirms that with  respect  to  Union  principles  a
    violation of Article 20 of TFEU only arises where  a  refusal  decision
    would lead to a situation where a Union citizen  child  would  have  to
    leave the territory of the Union; a  denial  of  economic  benefits  or
    failure to keep the family together does not deprive the citizen of the
    enjoyment of the Article 20 right.  The mere fact that there  has  been
    an interference with family life does not entail that  there  has  been
    such a deprivation.

10. As such further to Regulation 15A(7) I do not accept that the appellant
    has  primary  responsibility  for  her  child's  care  and  can  derive
    assistance from the EEA Regulations.

11. The appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules in relation
    to the partner route because of the circumstances of her marriage to  a
    Filipino national. (ELTRP.1.9).   A  previous  relationship  must  have
    broken down permanently. Nor has she lived with  her  partner  for  two
    years prior to the application.   There were said to be difficulties in
    respect of the annulment and divorce of marriage in the Philippines.  I
    note Mr Melvin's submissions to the effect that there was  no  expert's
    opinion or firm opinion in relation  to  the  law  in  the  Philippines
    regarding marriage annulment and divorce  but  the  country  background
    material produced did make numerous  references  to  the  difficulties,
    delays and cost of annulment and  divorce  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    Philippines is a Catholic country.

12. Nor can the appellant  make  an  application  under  the  parent  route
    because she cannot comply with E-LTRPT.2.3 of Appendix FM as she  lives
    with and is the partner of the other parent who is a British citizen.

13. On that basis should the matter be considered outside  the  Immigration
    Rules?  Should the appellant be expected to return  to  make  a  formal
    application for entry clearance?  The case of R (on the application  of
    Chen) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT
    189 (IAC)gives guidance in relation to such an application:

         "(i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to re-join family members in the U.K.   There  may
             be cases in which there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary
             separation to enable an individual to make an application  for
             entry clearance may be disproportionate.   In  all  cases,  it
             will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of
             State evidence that such temporary separation  will  interfere
             disproportionately with protected  rights.   It  will  not  be
             enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

         (ii) Lord Brown was not laying down a legal test when he  suggested
             in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to make an  application
             for entry  clearance  would  only  'comparatively  rarely'  be
             proportionate in a case involving children (per Burnett J,  as
             he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das) v SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  2070
             (Admin)).

         (iii)    In an application for leave on the basis of an  Article  8
             claim, the Secretary of  State  is  not  obliged  to  consider
             whether an application for entry clearance (if one were to  be
             made) will be successful.  Accordingly, her  silence  on  this
             issue does not mean that it is accepted that the  requirements
             for entry clearance to be granted are satisfied.

         (iv) In cases where the Immigration Rules (the 'IRs') do not  fully
             address an Article 8 claim so that it is  necessary  (pursuant
             to R (Nagre)) to consider the claim outside the IRs, a failure
             by the decision maker to consider Article 8  outside  the  IRs
             will only render the decision unlawful if the claimant in fact
             shows that there has been (or, in  a  permission  application,
             arguably has been) a substantive breach of his or  her  rights
             under Article 8."

14. As decided in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985,

         "... if the relevant group of  Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a
         complete code then the proportionality test will be more at  large,
         albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg law."

15. In addition, because of the birth of the child, (a  compelling  factor)
    and the consideration of the difficulties of return to the Philippines,
    I find that there are arguable grounds to consider the  matter  outside
    the rules.  Not all relevant factors had been considered Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

16. The test to be applied is that of proportionality.   As  stated  in  MF
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192:

         "41. We accept this submission. In view of the strictures contained
             at para 20 of Huang, it would  have  been  surprising  if  the
             Secretary  of   State   had   intended   to   reintroduce   an
             exceptionality   test,   thereby   flouting   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence.  At first sight, the choice of the  phrase  'in
             exceptional circumstances' might suggest that this is what she
             purported to do.  But the phrase has been used in a way  which
             was not intended to have this effect  in  all  cases  where  a
             state wishes to remove a foreign national who relies on family
             life which he established at a time when  he  knew  it  to  be
             'precarious' (because he had no right to remain  in  the  UK).
             The cases were helpfully reviewed by Sales J in  R  (Nagre)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
             (Admin).  The  fact  that  Nagre  was  not  a  case  involving
             deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is   immaterial.    The
             significance of the case law lies in the repeated use  by  the
             ECtHR of the phrase 'exceptional circumstances'.

         42.  At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement in  the  case  law
             that, in 'precarious' cases, 'it is likely to be only  in  the
             most exceptional circumstances that the removal  of  the  non-
             national family member will constitute a violation of art  8'.
             This has been repeated  and  adopted  by  the  ECtHR  in  near
             identical terms in many cases.  At paras 41 and  42,  he  said
             that in a  'precarious'  family  life  case,  it  is  only  in
             'exceptional' or 'the  most  exceptional  circumstances'  that
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8.  In our view, that is not to say  that
             a test of exceptionality is being applied.  Rather it is that,
             in  approaching  the  question  of  whether   removal   is   a
             proportionate interference  with  an  individual's  article  8
             rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal.  In our view, it is no coincidence  that  the  phrase
             'exceptional circumstances' is used in the new  rules  in  the
             context of weighing the  competing  factors  for  and  against
             deportation of foreign criminals",

17. I have applied the five stage test further to Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL
    27 and accept that the appellant has established  a  private  and  more
    importantly a family life in the United Kingdom and that the  threshold
    for engagement of that life has been reached.

18. Following guidance in SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317, it is  clear
    from above that the appellant could not  comply  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Not least she commenced living with  her  partner  in  November
    2014 and as she is not married  and  she  states  that  she  cannot  be
    married for the reasons given above until  she  is  able  to  effect  a
    divorce then she is unable to make an application under the Immigration
    Rules as a spouse.  She cannot comply with  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to the requirements for the appellant under  GEN.1.2  to  have
    lived with her partner for two years prior to the application.  Nor can
    she fulfil the requirements for a fianc�e visa because she is  unlikely
    to be in a position to marry for  a  month  if  not  according  to  the
    submissions of Ms Beach months.  There would therefore be  a  delay  of
    indeterminate length in the appellant making an application  for  entry
    clearance should she be returned.  Whilst I note that on the face of it
    the decision to remove the appellant is in accordance with the  law,  I
    take the factors in relation to the Immigration Rules  and  have  given
    weight to those factors and note that  removal  is  necessary  for  the
    protection of rights and freedoms of  others  and  the  maintenance  of
    immigration law.  I return to a consideration of  the  public  interest
    below.

19. The best interests of the child must be to remain with both parents and
    specifically  the  mother.   I  have  identified  in  relation  to  the
    difficulties in making entry clearance  applications  from  abroad.   I
    must also consider Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act and with respect to the appellant's private life I note that
    she and her partner formed a relationship when they both knew that  her
    status in the UK was precarious, but Section 117B does not 'catch'  her
    family life - or relationship with her husband unless she was living in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully. She made her application  for  leave  to
    remain prior to the expiry of her visa.

20. There was some confusion in the oral evidence given  by  the  appellant
    and her partner when at first  under  cross-examination  she  confirmed
    that she had not pursued an annulment because of the expense and  delay
    whereas when requestioned about this she  stated  as  she  did  in  her
    witness statement that she had instructed a lawyer in the  UK  to  take
    matters forward.  Her partner did not seem to be aware  of  the  matter
    because curiously he stated that there was  no  input  he  could  give.
    That said, I do not accept that she would be deliberately holding up an
    annulment to bolster her claim for leave to remain.  It would be in her
    interests to formalise her relationship with her partner.

21. Although  the  formalities  of  the  Immigration  Rules  had  not  been
    considered in detail in relation to finance I accept that  her  partner
    does have a well-paid job with Credit Suisse and could on the  face  of
    it ensure that his family are financially secure and that she would not
    be a burden on the state.  It is also clear that she can speak English.



22. Section 117B(6) confirms that in the case of a person who is not liable
    to deportation the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where (a) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and (b) it would not be reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

23. It has already been seen that the appellant does  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with this child who  is  a  qualifying
    child and it is not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.
    The child here is a British citizen and  EEA  national  and  cannot  be
    expected to remove from the United  Kingdom  further  to  Sanade  cited
    above.  That said, I do not accept that this  necessarily  defeats  the
    Secretary of State's position but nonetheless is a factor that I should
    take into account when assessing the proportionality balance.

24. It was presented to me that there  was  a  breakdown  in  the  marriage
    between the appellant and her husband (effectively but not  legally  an
    ex-husband) in the Philippines and that the family would be at risk  on
    return and that this was not specifically challenged although Mr Melvin
    did question the value and the weight to be attributed to the  Articles
    submitted.

25. I do not accept that the child's father would necessarily  be  arrested
    on entry to the Philippines.  I do  accept  that  any  entry  clearance
    application would necessarily be delayed for some time which would  not
    be in the interests of the child or the  family  bearing  in  mind  the
    separation which would ensue.  The child in question is a British child
    who has rights to the health system in this country  and,  even  though
    the appellant herself has family  there,  clearly  the  nuclear  family
    would be financially challenged should they remove to  the  Philippines
    on a permanent basis.  I do not accept that it would  be  in  the  best
    interests of the child for the father to look after the child in the UK
    because of the age, feeding and his job and  I  have  given  above  and
    indeed there was no real challenge by the Secretary  of  State  to  the
    proposition that it was the mother who was the carer of the  child  and
    that it was in the child's best interests to remain with the mother  at
    only 4 months old and have the advantage of the  British  health  care.
    It is the best interests of the child which are a primary consideration
    in this matter and the best interests are to remain in the UK with both
    father and mother in a financially  secure  environment  and  home  and
    without temporary or permanent separation from either.

26. I have taken into account Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 and on the  basis
    of my reasoning I find that it would be disproportionate to remove  the
    appellant and I therefore dismiss the appeal under  Regulation  15A  of
    the EEA Regulations but allow the appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is in place because of the involvement of a minor.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the facts as they are now before the Tribunal differ to those  first
placed before the Secretary of State.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
