
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18772/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 23rd April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY



                                   Between

                               ms monica blake
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singer, Wellers Law Group, Bromley
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 24th October  1977.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  8th  May  2013
    refusing her application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under the Human Rights Act 1998 and  refusing  to  vary  her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Her appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Jones on 3rd February 2014.  The appeal was allowed
    on human rights issues, in a determination promulgated on 11th February
    2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Osborne
    on 28th February  2014.   The  grounds  of  application  are  that  the
    evidence does not disclose any  exceptional  circumstances  that  would
    make  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  unjustifiably   harsh,
    particularly with reference to her social and cultural ties in Jamaica.
     The grounds of application also state that the judge found  the  delay
    occasioned by the Respondent to be a determinative factor in the appeal
    and yet delay alone cannot be  a  determinative  factor.   The  grounds
    argue that the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    findings of the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nasim and Others (Article
    8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)  relating  to  the  nature  and  purpose  of
    Article 8 and its limited utility in respect of private life cases.

 3. There is  a  Rule  24  response  which  states  that  the  Respondent's
    application amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with the First-
    tier Judge's assessment of the facts.  The response refers to EB Kosovo
    [2008] UKHL 41 and goes on to state that all three of  the  aspects  of
    delay mentioned in that case apply to this case.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer directed me to paragraph 41 of the determination
    which states that the appellant's Article 8 claim is based entirely  on
    her right to  private  life,  not  family  life.  He  referred  to  the
    appellant's "genuine" mistake in her  application  on  5  August  2011,
    (when she had leave to remain in the United Kingdom), stating that when
    she resubmitted her application on 28 August 2011,  she  was  an  over-
    stayer. He then referred to the judge finding the "delay" on  the  part
    of the Home Office prejudiced the appellant,  submitting  that  if  her
    history is looked at, any delay was  justified.  At  paragraph  47  the
    judge refers to the appellant's few ties  to  Jamaica.  The  presenting
    Officer submitted that her mother is there and she spent the  first  25
    years of her life there.

 5. The Presenting Officer referred to the appellant's private life in  the
    United Kingdom being mainly as a student and submitted that  the  judge
    has not given any reasons as to how her moral  and  physical  integrity
    will be damaged if she has to return to Jamaica and submitted that when
    assessing proportionality the judge has not dealt properly with  public
    interest and  the  necessity  of  immigration  control  in  the  United
    Kingdom, finally submitting that paragraph 47 is  deficient,  resulting
    in an error of law which goes to the materiality of his decision.

 6. The appellant's representative submitted that  even  if  the  balancing
    exercise is recalculated, specifying the matters  referred  to  by  the
    Presenting Officer, the result  will  still  fall  in  the  appellant's
    favour, so there is no material error of  law.  He  submitted  that  in
    paragraph 47 the judge did not require to give more detail  as  he  had
    done this previously in the determination and found the appellant to be
    credible. He referred to the delay, submitting that had  the  appellant
    not made a mistake in her original application she might well have been
    granted ILR  or  at  least  would  have  accumulated  10  years  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom which would have entitled her to  apply
    for ILR under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules.  He  submitted
    that the appellant's private life was not only as a  student.  Most  of
    her family members are here and the judge had  before  him  letters  of
    support from friends and relatives, evidence of her good character, her
    help in the church and her role in the community.

 7. The representative referred  me  to  the  said  case  of  EB  (Kosovo),
    submitting that although the judge did not quote this case,  he  quoted
    the cases that preceded it. The representative referred me to Nasim and
    others UKUT 00025 (IAC), submitting that although this is different  to
    the current case the judge paid  close  attention  to  the  nature  and
    purpose of Article 8,  and  in  the  current  case  the  appellant  has
    substantial private life out with her studies.

Determination

 8. The judge has carefully set out the history of this case and the burden
    and standard of proof.  He has found the Appellant to be  credible  and
    her witness to be credible.  He has dealt with Article 8 of EHCR in the
    correct way, referring to the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

 9. The judge has based his decision on the Appellant's private life.

10. He is satisfied that the minor mistake made in her application  of  5th
    August was indeed, only a mistake.  He has noted the length of time the
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom, the  majority  of  that  time
    with valid leave and he has referred to delay by the Respondent, taking
    into account the appellant's history and the reasons  for  this  delay,
    noting at paragraph 46 that the Appellant possibly missed  out  on  the
    opportunity to make an application for settlement based on  ten  years'
    long residence, as a result of her original application of  5th  August
    2011 being returned to her.  The judge finds that this  must  weigh  in
    the appellant's favour in his assessment of proportionality.

11. The judge has considered the evidence on file in its  totality,  taking
    into account her presence in the United Kingdom as a student  and  also
    the considerable evidence before him of her private  life  outside  her
    studies.

12. It is clear  that  the  appellant's  claim  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and this must weigh against her when  proportionality
    is assessed but the judge has given proper  reasons  for  his  findings
    based on what was before him.

13. The Presenting Officer has submitted that the judge has not taken  into
    account public interest and the necessity for  immigration  control  or
    made a decision on how the appellant's  moral  and  physical  integrity
    will be affected if she has to return to Jamaica.

14. In the judge's balancing exercise he has found the  appellant  and  her
    witness to be credible, has considered the effect of her application of
    5 August being rejected and has given this and the delay on the part of
    the Home Office considerable weight in his balancing exercise. This  is
    not a case where delay is the only determinative factor.  He  is  aware
    that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom legally for  most  of
    her stay and has been here for around 11 years, has few remaining  ties
    to Jamaica and has most of her family members in  the  United  Kingdom,
    all of which go to the appellant's moral and physical integrity. He has
    found that all of these matters weigh in the appellant's favour.

15. Public interest is clearly affected  by  the  delay  and  the  original
    application not being dealt with by the Home Office. The  same  applies
    to the  necessity  for  immigration  control.  The  judge  has  clearly
    considered the appellant's moral and physical  integrity  when  dealing
    with proportionality and found that these matters, including  the  fact
    that the claim cannot meet the terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  are
    outweighed by the issues in  the  appellant's  favour.  The  judge  was
    entitled to reach his decision based on what was before him.

Decision

16. There is no material error of law in the judge's determination.

17. The judge's decision that the Appellant's appeal succeeds, shall stand.

18. Anonymity has not been directed






Signed                              Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the upper Tribunal


