

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/18009/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On  7 April 2017                           |On 31 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR TEJINDER SINGH
                         (Anonymity order not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Hoare (Solicitor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought
   with the permission of  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
   decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Samimi  hereinafter  "the
   judge") made after a hearing of 15 July 2016,  to  allow  the  claimant's
   appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 7  May  2015,
   refusing to vary leave to enter or remain and deciding to remove him from
   the UK.

2. There is something of a history to all of this. The claimant,  who  is  a
   national of India and who was born on 25 April 1981, entered the UK on 16
   January 2005 having obtained entry clearance as a student. He  was  given
   valid leave, on that basis, until 28  February  2006,  such  leave  being
   extended until 30 April 2007 and then to 30 November 2007. Prior  to  the
   expiry of the latter grant he had met and commenced a relationship with a
   Polish  national  one  Dorota  Druzko  and,  indeed,  there  is  evidence
   indicating that the two had married on 14  September  2007.  In  reliance
   upon that relationship the claimant applied on 29 November  2007  for  an
   EEA Residence Card. That was granted,  although  seemingly  not  until  4
   March 2009, with an expiry date of 4 March 2014.  On  3  March  2014  the
   claimant sought a Permanent Residence Card but, on  25  April  2014,  his
   application was refused. He appealed against that  decision,  but  on  21
   January 2015, he withdrew his appeal. On 26 January 2015 he  applied  for
   indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence in  the  United
   Kingdom. It appears that the Secretary of State treated that as  a  human
   rights claim rather than simply as an application under  the  Immigration
   Rules because in a letter  of  4  May  2015  an  officer  acting  on  the
   Secretary of State's  behalf  told  him  "your  human  rights  claim  has
   therefore been refused". That was in a  covering  letter  attached  to  a
   decision of 28 April 2015 refusing leave to remain.  That  decision  was,
   shortly after, overset by the decision of 7 May 2015 referred  to  above.
   The claimant appealed and it appears his appeal has been treated as being
   against both of those decisions. In December 2015, whilst the appeal  was
   pending, he says that his marriage broke down and that his wife left  him
   and left the UK. His appeal, as noted, succeeded.  The  judge's  decision
   was promulgated on 26 July 2016.

3. The judge, in a short written decision, set out the relevant  immigration
   history. It was said that the appeal had been brought under Section 82(1)
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The  Secretary  of
   State's position as to matters up to the hearing was summarised  in  this
   way;

                  "4.  The  Respondent  has   considered   the   Appellant's
application  in  a  letter                       dated  28.4.2015.  this  in
summary provides that having regard  to  the                     Appellant's
immigration   history,   given   that   the    Appellant    had    withdrawn
his EEA Appeal on 23.1.2015, he would  not  have  had  a  S.3C  (Immigration
            Act 1971), and accordingly, he had  been  without  lawful  leave
from 25.4.2014,              amounting to a  period  of  approximately  nine
months  (277  days),  and  hence                  breaking  the  Appellant's
period of continuous residence. Consequently, the             Appellant  has
been    found    to    complete    a    continuous    lawful    period    of
approximately nine years and three months to the date  of  the  respondent's
            decision."



4.    So, in short, the Secretary of State's position was that the  claimant
had  failed  to  clock  up  ten  years  continuous  lawful  residence  under
paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules.

5.    The judge though decided,  on  the  basis  of  published  Home  Office
policy, that if a person was exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom
then the period in which he or she  was  so  doing  would  on  discretionary
grounds be counted as lawful  residence  under  paragraph  276A.  The  judge
quoted from what he termed "the Respondent's Guidance on  Long  Residence  -
version 13.0". He thus concluded;

                 "8. I find that the Appellant clearly had  been  exercising
treaty rights as a                      family member  of  an  EEA  National
until the time of his application, and the                periods  of  break
that   formed   the   basis   of   the   respondent's   refusal    do    not
disqualify him as he was exercising  EEA  right  to  reside  throughout  the
            disputed period, and that right had not  b  [sic]  curtailed  or
cancelled by                      virtue of Regulations 19 or 20 of the  EEA
Regulations.  I  find  that  the                        Appellant  had  been
exercising   treaty   rights   as   the   family   member    of    an    EEA
national  in  accordance  with  Regulation  15  of   the   EEA   Regulations
            throughout the  relevant  period.  I  therefore  find  that  the
Appellant  has                      satisfied  the  requirements   of   Long
Residence Rules in accordance with                       Paragraph  276B  of
the Immigration Rules."

6.    The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  contending,
in a nutshell, that the claimant had not had a right  of  appeal  such  that
there had been no valid appeal before the judge; that the judge had  had  no
proper basis to "assume"  that  the  claimant  had  been  exercising  treaty
rights at any point beyond the date on  which  his  original  residence  had
been issued; that the judge had wrongly proceeded  on  the  basis  that  EEA
Residence rights and leave to remain were interchangeable concepts and  that
the judge had misconstrued the policy guidance which he had had regard to.

7.    Permission having been granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  me  to
address the question of whether or not the judge had erred  in  law  and  if
so, what should flow from that. Representation was as  stated  above  and  I
received helpful submissions from each representative.

8.    I have concluded that, whilst it was brief and might  have  benefitted
from fuller reasoning, the judge's decision did not involve  the  making  of
an error of law. I explain why below.

9.    It had never been argued before the judge  that  there  was  no  valid
appeal. I accept that in principle, however, such a  fundamental  point  can
be properly raised for the first time in grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

10.   The Secretary of State though, in the grounds, makes reference to  the
amendments to what are referred to as the "new  provisions"  and  which  now
appear at section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002. It is accepted in the grounds that those  new  appeal  provisions  had
applied from 6 April 2015. The Secretary of State argues that  the  relevant
decision was not the refusal of a protection or  human  rights  claim  or  a
challenge to a revocation of a protection claim so that, therefore,  it  was
not appealable under section 82(1) as amended. However, as noted above,  the
application had been characterised by the  Secretary  of  State  himself  as
being a human rights claim. I am satisfied,  therefore,  that  the  decision
under appeal was a refusal of a human rights claim in addition to a  refusal
of a claim under the Immigration rules and  that,  therefore,  there  was  a
valid appeal before the judge.

11.   As to the judge simply assuming that the claimant had been  exercising
treaty rights during the relevant periods on the basis of  his  relationship
with a Polish national, it is apparent that documentary  evidence  had  been
provided for the purposes of the appeal, addressing her exercise  of  treaty
rights as a qualified person within the  meaning  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
What the judge had to say about all of this was exceptionally  brief  but  I
have concluded that in the face of such evidence being offered  and  in  the
face of there not having been any specific challenge to the  status  of  her
as a qualified person or him as  a  person  exercising  treaty  rights  (and
there is nothing in the judge's decision to suggest that there was any  such
dispute despite the presence of a Presenting Officer) the  judge's  approach
was permissible. Further, I do not accept that  the  judge  treated  an  EEA
residence  rights  and  the  concept   of   leave   to   remain   as   being
interchangeable. What he did was simply apply the relevant policy. I  cannot
seem that he misconstrued the policy and it has not been properly  explained
how he might have done.

12.   In the circumstances, therefore, I have concluded  that  none  of  the
grounds  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State  have  been  made  out.
Accordingly, the judge's decision shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law.
That decision shall, therefore, stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

                             Signed
                                                   M R Hemingway
                                                    Judge   of   the   Upper
Tribunal
                              Dated                                       26
May 2017


To the Secretary of State: Fee award

I make no fee award.


                             Signed
                                                   M R Hemingway
                                                    Judge   of   the   Upper
Tribunal
                              Dated                                       26
May 2017

