
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18981/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2018                           |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD MIRAZUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. M. Islam of counsel, instructed by
Chancery                   Solicitors
For the Respondent:                   Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.    The  Appellant  was  born  on  1  November  1988,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh. On 5 January 2015 he applied for a residence  card  as  the
    extended family member of  Sunny  Mostofa,  an  EEA  national  who  was
    exercising a Treaty right in the United Kingdom.  His  application  was
    refused on 29 April 2015 and he appealed.

2.   In a decision promulgated on 4 February 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Samimi found that she had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  his  appeal.  He
    appealed and on 25 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Colyer  granted
    him permission to appeal. Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hill  GC  found
    that the First-tier Tribunal did have  jurisdiction  and  remitted  the
    appeal to that Tribunal.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  on  5  May
    2017 and in a decision, promulgated on  19  May  2017,  he  found  that
    following Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2006]  UKUT  00411  (IAC),  the
    Appellant did not have a right of appeal.  The Appellant appealed again
    and on 29 November 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted  him
    permission to appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made very brief oral submissions and I have referred to the content  of
    these submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In her Rule 24 Response, the Respondent requested  the  Upper  Tribunal
    to adjourn any substantive hearing until a decision was reached on  the
    renewed application to permission to the Supreme Court in the  case  of
    MK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755
    and judgment by the Supreme Court in the case of  SM  (Algeria),  which
    had been heard on 29 November 2017.

6.   Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the order made by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MK
    stayed the decision that  in  MK's  case  the  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal would be set aside and the appeal remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and also  stayed  the  costs  order  made  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant. However, it did not stay paragraph 1  of  the  order,  which
    stated that the appeal was allowed or paragraph 2 of the  order,  which
    said that permission to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused.

7.   Therefore, the substance of the decision stands, which  was  that  Sala
    was  wrongly  decided  and  that  extended  family  members  refused  a
    residence card are entitled to a right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations. As
    a consequence, I am bound by that decision as it was made by the  Court
    of Appeal.

8.   As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  did
    err in law in his decision.

9.   As the substance of the appeal has not yet been  re-considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I find that the appeal must be  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal. It will also be able  to  address  any  subsequent  decisions
    reached  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  referred  to  by  the
    Respondent.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Lawrence, Samimi or Colyer for a de novo  hearing.





Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 22 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


