
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 9th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                          UPPER Tribunal JUDGE GRAY


                                   Between

                                GEORGE OFORI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sharma, Counsel instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Ghana born on  9th  June  1980.   On
    24th September 2013 he applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of
    Attaa Awusu Antwi a citizen of the Netherlands  and  therefore  an  EEA
    citizen exercising Treaty rights  in  the  UK.   That  application  was
    refused on 31st March 2014  for  the  reasons  given  in  a  Notice  of
    Decision of that date.  The Appellant  appealed,  and  his  appeal  was
    decided by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cheales (the Judge) without
    a hearing on 12th June 2014.  The Judge decided to dismiss  the  appeal
    for the reasons given in  her  Decision  dated  26th  June  2014.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  2nd  September
    2014 such leave was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because she was  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence before her that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  were  lawfully
    and validly married for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   It  was  claimed  by  the
    Appellant that he and the Sponsor married by proxy  in  Ghana  on  27th
    January 2013, and produced  a  marriage  certificate  to  that  effect.
    However the Judge found that insufficient evidence had been produced to
    show  that  the  marriage  had  taken  place  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions   of   the   Ghanaian   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985.  In particular, the parties  to  the  marriage
    were  not  represented  at  the  ceremony  in  accordance  with   those
    provisions.  The Judge then went on to consider Regulation 8(5) of  the
    2006 Regulations but decided that there was insufficient evidence  that
    the Appellant and the Sponsor were in a durable relationship.

 4. At the hearing, Ms Sharma made a submission that the Judge had erred in
    law in  reaching  this  conclusion.   However,  she  acknowledged  that
    although there existed evidence which showed that the marriage  between
    the Appellant and the Sponsor was valid according to  Dutch  law,  that
    evidence had not been before the Judge.

 5. In response, Ms Savage pointed out that any error of law by  the  Judge
    in assessing whether this marriage was valid according to Ghanaian  law
    was immaterial because the Appellant had failed to prove to  the  Judge
    that the marriage was lawful according to Dutch law as required by  the
    decision in TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316
    (IAC).

 6. We find no material error of law in the decision of the Judge  for  the
    reasons given by Ms Savage in her submission.   Regardless  of  whether
    the Judge carried out the assessment of the validity  of  the  marriage
    according to Ghanaian law, this appeal could not have succeeded  before
    the Judge unless the Appellant had shown that the  marriage  was  valid
    according to Dutch law.  As conceded by Ms Sharma, this  the  Appellant
    failed to do.

 7. The decision that the Appellant and the Sponsor were not in  a  durable
    relationship was not challenged in the grounds of  application  nor  at
    the hearing before us.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no order for anonymity and we  find  no  reason
to do so.  .


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

