
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/18190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2014                              |On 10th April 2014           |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                 ms raminah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C H Bennett who, sitting at Taylor  House  on
    24 January 2014 and in a determination subsequently  promulgated  on  6
    February 2014 allowed the appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter  called
    the Claimant), a citizen of Indonesia, born on 3 December 1976, against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 13 May 2013  refusing  her
    application for variation of her leave to enter or remain in the United
    Kingdom.

2.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  the  decision,  the
    grounds  of  which  contended  that  First-tier   Judge   Bennett   was
    procedurally unfair in inter alia refusing  the  Secretary  of  State's
    adjournment request and in materially misdirecting himself  in  law  in
    finding  that  the  removal  directions  under  Section   47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, were unlawful.

3.   It would be as well for the sake of completeness, to set out  in  full,
    the grounds in support of that application:

         "The Judge notes that this case was listed as a  'float  case'  and
         the representative for the Secretary of State, Miss Carver, had  no
         papers in relation  to  this  case  and  was  without  instructions
         regarding why the decision to refuse  did  not  make  reference  to
         Immigration Rule 159 (paragraph  6  of  the  determination).   Miss
         Carver requested an adjournment in relation to whether  Immigration
         Rule 159 had been considered by the Secretary of State.


         The Judge sets out his reasons for refusing the adjournment request
         at paragraphs 7 to 9 of the determination.  The Judge finds he  was
         not satisfied that  the  appeal  could  not  be  justly  determined
         without there being an adjournment.  The Judge  then  proceeded  to
         hear the appeal on issues that he was  without  the  benefit  of  a
         substantive decision made by the Secretary of State and heard  oral
         evidence from two witnesses who had not produced witness statements
         for the hearing (paragraph 13 and paragraph 14).  It  is  submitted
         the failure to adjourn has  unjustly  precluded  the  Secretary  of
         State from putting her case forward.


         Furthermore  the  Judge  in  determining  the  appeal   under   the
         Immigration Rules placed himself in the  position  of  the  primary
         decision maker.  It is submitted that the Judge's role is not to be
         the primary decision maker under the Immigration Rules, EA (Section
         85(4) explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013 relied on.  It is clear
         from the determination that this was not a simple case.  The  Judge
         considered the substantive requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rule
         without the benefit of the Secretary of State's decision under  the
         Rules.  He  heard  evidence  that  had  not  been  put  before  the
         Secretary of State in the  form  of  witness  statements  and  made
         findings in relation to interpretation of 159A  (paragraphs  20  to
         24), resolved issues in favour of the Appellant in relation to  the
         failure to produce payslips and non-payment of  national  insurance
         contributions  (paragraph  16)  and  took  into  account   evidence
         submitted post hearing (paragraph 15).


         The Secretary of State refused the application to vary leave on  13
         May 2013 and at the same time made a removal decision under s47  of
         the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Judge  finds
         (paragraph 10 of the determination) that the decision under s47 was
         unlawful  following  Ahmadi  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  512.   However  the
         decision to remove under s47 was taken after  8  May  2013  and  by
         virtue of s51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013,  the  s47  decision
         made on 13 May 2013 is lawful."

4.   In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  had
    this, inter alia, to say:

         "The Judge did give careful  consideration  to  the  issue  of  the
         adjournment request and was placed in an unhelpful position by  the
         nature of the Refusal Letter that had been sent out and the absence
         of instructions from the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   That
         said, the application for an adjournment was justified in the  face
         of evidence that  was  produced  very  late  and  the  grounds  are
         arguable."

5.   Prior to the hearing, the Tribunal were advised by  the  claimant  that
    she could not afford  to  appoint  a  firm  of  solicitors  to  legally
    represent her and  that  she  wished  to  represent  herself  with  the
    assistance of her employer, her Sponsor,  Mr  Mohammad.   The  Tribunal
    also received her Rule 24 response in relation to  which,  and  mindful
    that she was not legally represented, contained in  large  part  a  re-
    statement of her case.  To the extent that the response was relevant to
    the basis upon  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted,  the
    claimant in summary, explained that as she was not legally  represented
    at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, she was not aware of the
    requirement to file witness statements and was not  notified  or  given
    directions to provide them.  Furthermore the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had the benefit of both the Claimant's and her Sponsor's oral evidence,
    although she accepted that neither she nor her employer had made copies
    of documentation upon which she relied for the purposes of the hearing.
     Nonetheless the Claimant maintained that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    had reached the correct conclusion on the evidence before  him  in  the
    appeal.

6.   Further, she maintained that the Judge had not  materially  misdirected
    herself in law in holding that the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    remove her under Section 47 was unlawful.

7.   In that latter regard I have had no difficulty in concluding  that  the
    Judge did indeed err in law for the reasons stated in  the  grounds  of
    application.

8.   It is quite clear that  the  decision  to  remove  the  claimant  under
    Section 47 was taken after 8 May 2013 and by virtue of  Section  51  of
    the Crime and Courts Act 2013 the Section 47 decision was lawful.

9.   Thus the appeal came before me on 31 March 2014 when my first task  was
    to determine whether the substantive determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge disclosed an error on a point of law such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

10.  The Tribunal Procedure Rules do not  prevent  individuals  from  acting
    both as a representative and as a witness in the same appeal,  so  long
    as that  person  is  not  in  the  business  of  providing  immigration
    services.  In that I was so satisfied as regards Mr  Mohammed.   I  was
    able to inform the Claimant that there was no objection  to  her  being
    represented by him for the purposes of this hearing.  However  for  the
    reasons that I will set out below the Sponsor's assistance was  in  the
    event, not required.

11.  In his determination, the Judge comprehensively set out the  provisions
    of Rule 21 of the Immigration, Asylum Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    which I do not have to repeat.  He made a detailed point of  explaining
    within paragraph 7 of his determination the  manner  in  which  he  had
    applied the  provisions  of  the  Rule  to  his  consideration  of  the
    Presenting Officer's adjournment request in concluding, as he proceeded
    to do over paragraphs 8 and 9  of  his  determination,  to  refuse  the
    request.

12.  I would only add to the Judge's observations, that although he made  no
    specific reference to the relevant case law, it is quite clear that the
    manner of his approach to  the  request  was  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance of the Court of Appeal in SH  (Afghanistan)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1284 in that he, in effect, asked himself what did fairness  demand  in
    that as stated by Moses LJ in SH: "the test and sole test  was  whether
    (the adjournment decision) was unfair".

13.  Indeed the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  comprehensively  explained  his
    reasons for refusing the request and it would be as  well  to  set  out
    those reasons below:

         "(a) The case was not one  of  any  real  difficulty.   I  had  the
             relevant Rules in front of me.  Miss R and Mr M  were  present
             at the hearing and able to give evidence as to  the  terms  on
             which Miss R was and had been employed - from  which  I  could
             determine whether the requirements  of  paragraph  159EA  were
             fulfilled.


         (b)  There was no basis for thinking that there was, or might  even
             have been some other document setting  out  the  Secretary  of
             State's reason for refusing the  application.   If  there  had
             been any other document, it ought to have been included in the
             bundle of documents submitted to the Tribunal.  It ought  also
             to have been sent to Miss R - in which case she could be asked
             to produce it."


14.  As I say, his decision insofar as  Section  47  of  the  2006  Act  was
    concerned was in error.  The Judge however  at  paragraph  9  proffered
    further reasons for refusing the request in that he stated as follows:

         "9.  As I  was  not  satisfied  the  appeal  could  not  be  justly
             determined without there being an adjournment, I was precluded
             by the mandatory provisions of  r.21(2)  from  adjourning  the
             hearing.  If I had thought that I had a discretion to grant an
             adjournment (despite the wording of r.21(2)),  I  should  have
             exercised it against the  grant  of  an  adjournment  for  the
             reasons which  I  have  given  in  paragraph  9  and  for  the
             following additional reasons:


             (a)  If there had been a regrettable  and  accidental  failure
                  either to consider Miss R's appeal under  paragraph  159EA
                  or simply a failure to give reasons for the decision,  the
                  Secretary of State has been on  notice  of  those  matters
                  since Miss R gave notice of appeal on  19  May  2013,  now
                  over 8 months ago.  There has been ample time to  consider
                  Miss R's notice of appeal and to rectify the omissions.


             (b)  I had,  earlier  in  the  day,  had  to  adjourn  another
                  comparatively simple appeal.  It was not,  in  that  case,
                  possible to give  that  (simple)  appeal  a  hearing  date
                  earlier than May 2014.  A delay of 4  months  is,  in  any
                  event,  unsatisfactory.   But  all  the  more  so  in  the
                  circumstances of this appeal because if  the  appeal  were
                  allowed, the  maximum  period  of  leave  which  could  be
                  granted to Miss R was 12  months  (see  paragraph  159EB).
                  Additionally, Miss R had indicated in her notice of appeal
                  that the family intended to leave the  United  Kingdom  on
                  the completion of Mr M's wife's  studies  at  the  end  of
                  2014.


             I  therefore  refused  Miss  Carver's   application   for   an
                  adjournment."

Assessment

15.  With that guidance in mind I turn to the present case.

16.  It is right to say that most helpfully Mr Melvin at the outset  of  the
    hearing before me, explained that mindful of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasons for refusing the adjournment request, his  position  was,  that
    whilst he could not invite me  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    application, he would fully understand  the  situation  if  in  fact  I
    decided that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision should stand.

17.  I have indeed decided that the challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision insofar as it relates to his refusal to grant the Secretary of
    State an adjournment, did not disclose an error on a point of law.

18.  It is apparent that the Judge, having set out the  relevant  provisions
    of Rule 21 proceeded to carefully consider in terms of the Secretary of
    State's adjournment request what fairness demanded and as I have quoted
    above, over paragraphs 8 and 9 of his determination, he comprehensively
    explained as to why he had concluded that the appeal  could  be  justly
    determined without their being an adjournment.

19.  I find that the Judge's observations  and  reasoning  in  refusing  the
    adjournment request were properly open to him and beyond reproach.

20.  I would add that the Judge's  observation  at  paragraph  9(a)  of  his
    determination  reflects  Rule  13  of  the  2005  Procedure  Rules,  in
    particular, that when the Respondent is  served  with  a  copy  of  the
    notice of appeal she must (if she has not already done  so)  file  with
    the Tribunal all her documents relevant to that  appeal  in  accordance
    with any directions given by the Tribunal or if no  such  direction  is
    given, as soon as is reasonably practical, in any event no  later  than
    2:00pm on the business day before the earliest day  appointed  for  any
    hearing in relation to the appeal.  Further, the Respondent must at the
    same time, file such documentation and serve it on the Appellant.

21.  It is apparent that in the circumstances of the  present  appeal  (that
    indeed support the reasons given by the First-tier  Judge  in  refusing
    the Secretary of State's adjournment request) the requirements of  Rule
    13 failed to meet with the Secretary of State's compliance.

22.  Notwithstanding that failure, the Claimant attended the hearing,  ready
    to proceed, and the fact that the appeal was in the float list  on  the
    day of the hearing, could not be regarded as absolving the Secretary of
    State from her responsibility to be in a state of readiness.

23.  Indeed I observe that even now, at the date of the hearing  before  me,
    the Secretary of State had still not produced what she described in her
    grounds of application as "the benefits of (her) substantive decision".



24.  Further, there is no  suggestion  in  the  grounds,  that  the  Judge's
    identification at paragraph 159A and those  of  paragraph  159A(i)  and
    (vi) of the Immigration Rules were  not  the  applicable  Rules  to  be
    applied  and  considered  in  determining  the  claimant's   particular
    circumstances as to whether or not she met those requirements.   Indeed
    no issue is taken in that regard with the reasoning  of  the  Judge  in
    concluding that those requirements were met in the present case.

25.  It is however contended in  the  grounds,  that  the  Judge  took  into
    account post-hearing evidence at paragraph 15 of the determination, but
    that I find, is to take  his  reasoning  out  of  context,  because  he
    pointed out that the copy of the contract between the claimant and  her
    Sponsor was in its terms "for all practical purposes the same as  those
    contained in a letter of 8 April 2013".  That was  of  course  evidence
    that predated the hearing.

26.  I also find that there is no merit in the ground that  the  Judge  took
    upon himself the role of "primary decision maker under the  Immigration
    Rules".  Further the reliance in the grounds on  the  decision  in  EA,
    overlook that part of the head note that states "the focus must  always
    be on the  decision  actually  made  in  response  to  the  Appellant's
    application".  In the  present  case  the  Judge's  focus  was  on  the
    decision actually made, namely that the decision under appeal, was  the
    refusal to vary the claimant's leave to remain and in that  regard  the
    First-tier Judge reached findings that were supported by  and  open  to
    him on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

27.  Whilst it is apparent  that  the  First-tier  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to recognise the decision to remove the claimant under  Section
    47 was lawful, such error was not in the circumstances material to  the
    outcome of the appeal, given that the Judge had allowed the Appellant's
    immigration appeal for sustainable reasons.


Conclusions

28.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse to vary her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom did not involve the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

29.  I do not set aside that decision.

30.  The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal against removal under Section 47  is  set  aside  for
    error of law, but in the circumstances makes no material difference  to
    the outcome, where, as here, the substantive immigration appeal remains
    allowed.



Signed                                  Date 7 April 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
