

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/19695/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
            Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th September 2015                               On 14th October 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               SHOMAILA RAMZAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson (Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, came to the UK from Ireland with
   her husband, the Sponsor, in February 2014. She applied for a residence
   card as a family member of an EEA national on the basis that her husband
   had been exercising treaty rights in Ireland and that she qualified under
   the terms of Directive 2004/38/EC and regulation 9 of the EEA
   Regulations.

2. The application was refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter
   of the 16th of April 2014. It was accepted that the Sponsor had been
   living and working in Ireland but he had only started work in the
   September and there was no evidence he had been received wages and he had
   not had sufficient time to immerse himself in the local community. It was
   not accepted that the Sponsor had shown he was worker within the meaning
   of regulation 9(2)(C) of the EEA Regulations. The letter went on to
   require a separate paid application if the Appellant wished to rely on
   the provisions of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
   Rules.

3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Bart-Stewart at Victory House
   on the 22nd of December 2014. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons
   given in the decision promulgated on the 3rd of February 2014. The
   evidence and submissions are set out at paragraphs 7 to 13 the findings
   and reasons are at paragraphs 14 to 20.

4. The Judge found that there was little reliable evidence that the Sponsor
   was in living in Ireland and exercising treaty rights. Having considered
   the documents submitted she found that there were discrepancies in the
   documents and that the Sponsor had not been shown to be exercising treaty
   rights in Ireland. In paragraph 18 the case of O [2014] EUECJ C-456/12
   was considered and focussed on the question of the genuineness of the
   residence and family life created. It was not accepted that the evidence
   showed genuine residence and the test in regulation 9(2)(c) that there
   should be a transfer of the centre of a person's life was consistent with
   the test of genuine residence.

5. Paragraphs 51 of the case of O it was observed that the residence of the
   Union Citizen in the hose member State would have to be sufficiently
   genuine so as to enable the citizen to create or strengthen family life
   there.

6. The grounds to the Upper Tribunal complain that the Judge effectively
   went behind the position of the Secretary of State as set out in the
   Refusal Letter and that it was unfair that findings had been made against
   the Appellant and Sponsor without their having been given the opportunity
   to address the departure from the Secretary of State's position in the
   Refusal Letter. The Secretary of State had not questioned the validity or
   genuineness of the documents that had been submitted. It was also
   submitted that the Appellant would only have to show that family life
   with the Sponsor had been created or strengthened while the Sponsor was
   exercising treaty rights.

7. In granting permission to appeal Judge Rintoul indicated that it was
   arguable that the Judge had erred in relation to the length of time the
   spouse needed to reside in another EEA state with the EEA national spouse
   and it was also arguable that she had erred in considering the genuine
   residence test is predicated on a transfer of the centre of a person's
   life. All the grounds were arguable.

8. The representatives made submissions in line with their respective
   positions. The Secretary of State also relied on the case of Maheshwaran
   [2002] EWCA Civ 173 and the observations that adjudicators could not be
   expected to be alive to all the issues before a case was heard and the
   relative importance of issues may change following the hearing and that
   adjudicators ought to be cautious about jumping into the arena. Failure
   to put a point can be grossly unfair especially if conceded by one party,
   if the Judge is minded to go against a concession he should say so.

9. The extent to which a Judge should be willing to enter the fray is not
   easy and depends entirely on the facts of the case and the manner of its
   presentation by the representatives. Clearly a Judge can ask questions if
   a particular point appears to be overlooked but that may be a deliberate
   tactic by the questioner. There is a danger of appearing to have
   prejudged an issue by asking questions or in not raising the issue
   risking the complaint that the Appellant was not able to deal with a
   concern which was considered in the decision.

10. The note of evidence recorded in the decision and confirmed by the
   Record of Proceedings show that the Sponsor was asked questions about his
   work in Ireland and the documents he had provided, when he had worked and
   how he was paid. It cannot be said that these had not been raised as
   issues before the Judge by the Home Office Presenting Officer.

11. Following the observations in paragraph 57 of O it was for the Judge to
   determine whether the Sponsor genuinely resided in Ireland and whether on
   account of living as a family during that period of genuine residence
   they enjoyed a right of residence there. The questions asked of the
   Appellant and Sponsor went to that issue which was squarely before the
   Judge arising out of the hearing and the Judge cannot be criticised for
   that. She did not enter the questioning of the witnesses and decided the
   case on the evidence that had been presented.

12. It was properly accepted by Mr Richardson that if there was no error in
   respect of the fact finding exercise by the Judge then the challenge to
   the compatibility of the regulations with the directive would not arise.
   Although I do not need to decide the point it appears to me that the use
   of the term "centre of life" is compatible with the genuine residence
   test.

13. In paragraph 18 of the decision the Judge found that the time that the
   Appellant and Sponsor had lived together in Ireland was evidence of the
   creation or strengthening of family life and that the evidence fell short
   of showing genuine residence. On that basis the appeal was dismissed.
   That was a conclusion that was open to the Judge on the evidence that had
   been presented by the Appellant and Sponsor and elicited in examination-
   in-chief and cross-examination.

14. Accordingly I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does
   not contain an error of law and so the decision stands as the disposal of
   the Appellant's appeal in this case.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 14th October 2015



