
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
                                             IA/19326/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 30 September 2014                  On 5 March 2015

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                           Mustafa Jafar Lightwala
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr G Cutting of Slough Immigration Aid Unit.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Manuell promulgated on  27  June  2014  dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 7  May
      2013 to refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove him from  the  UK
      pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
      2006.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of India  born  on  1  December  1986.  He
      entered the UK on 30 January 2011 with leave valid until  28  February
      2013 granted pursuant to entry clearance as a  spouse  (issued  on  30
      November 2010). The Appellant had married Ms Fatima  Trunkwala  on  29
      October 2010 in India. On 21 February 2013 by way of application  form
      FLR(O) the Appellant applied for further leave to remain on the  basis
      of his marriage. The application was refused for reasons set out in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 7 May 2013, essentially on
      the basis  that  the  Respondent  had  received  information  from  Ms
      Trunkwala that the Appellant's marriage had broken down. A decision to
      remove the  Appellant  was  made  in  consequence,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision, also dated 7 May 2013,  was  served  on  10  May
      2013.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. On appeal he did  not  dispute  the
      fact of the breakdown  of  the  marriage,  but  sought  to  rely  upon
      paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules on the basis that  he  claimed
      that the marital relationship was caused permanently to breakdown as a
      result of domestic violence.


   4. The Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal for reasons set out in his determination.


   5. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
      Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald on 18  July  2014.  The
      grant of permission to appeal, in so far as it is germane, is  in  the
      following terms:

"The grounds of application  indicate  that  it  was  very  clear  from  the
      evidence that the main perpetrator of the domestic abuse was  not  the
      appellant's wife but his mother-in-law. It is said, for reasons given,
      that the Judge did not properly consider the mother-in-law as the main
      perpetrator. Furthermore the judge made no findings on the credibility
      of the appellant, did not attach enough weight to the  evidence  of  2
      witnesses, speculated that the appellant was aware of  paragraph  289A
      and make confused findings.

In his determination the judge narrates  some  of  the  evidence  given  but
      arguably does not appear to make clear factual findings about why  the
      marriage broke  down  or  any  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant. For the reasons put forward the grounds are arguable."


   6. The Respondent has filed a Rule  24  response  dated  21  August  2014
      resisting the challenge to the decision of Judge Manuell.


Consideration: Error of Law

   7. In the premises, the Appellant claimed that his  marriage  had  broken
      down permanently because he was the  victim  of  emotional  abuse  and
      bullying orchestrated by his mother-in-law - albeit that in due course
      she also wore down his partner such that Ms Trunkwalla sided with  her
      mother against the Appellant. In this context I note  the  summary  of
      the situation provided by the Appellant in his witness statement of 21
      April 2014 at paragraphs 61 and 62:

"I still find it hard to believe the way I was treated when I  came  to  the
      UK. Fatima's mother was behind all the trouble, but  she  wore  Fatima
      down and emotionally blackmailed her and Fatima became more  and  more
      on her mother's side against me.

I was insulted, humiliated, degraded and falsely accused. I  was  controlled
      in my behaviour even down to the smallest details. I was isolated from
      friends and family. I wasn't allowed to go  out  and  talk  to  people
      without having to explain myself or be insulted. My  money  was  taken
      and I was not told any financial information. My family were  insulted
      and falsely accused. I never knew where I stood, I got very  depressed
      and had no self-confidence."


   8. In this context Mr Cutting directed my attention to  the  Respondent's
      IDIs on 'Victims of domestic violence' - which were before the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Appellant's bundle at pages 141-148). In particular  he
      identified passages whereby  controlling  behaviour  could  constitute
      domestic violence,  and  a  perpetrator  of  domestic  violence  might
      include an in-law. In  this  regard  I  note  the  similar  submission
      recorded in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  21,
      and the identification of the key issue by the Judge at paragraph  23:
      "...no  allegations  of  physical  violence...  Rather  the  Appellant
      asserts that he was subjected to a form  of  abuse  and  psychological
      cruelty".


   9. I am persuaded  that  a  combination  of  the  following  factors  are
      sufficient to render the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  flawed
      for inadequacy of fact-finding and reasoning.

(i) There are no clear findings in respect of the Appellant's  narrative  of
      events. Whilst it is not incumbent upon a judge to  make  findings  in
      respect of every aspect of a case, it is  appropriate  that  there  be
      clear findings  on  key  issues.  Although  the  Judge  has  stated  a
      conclusion in respect of the cause of the breakdown of the marriage  -
      which is a matter of secondary fact to be drawn from primary  facts  -
      there is no clear findings in respect of the primary facts asserted by
      the Appellant.

(ii) Related to this is an absence of any clear finding on credibility.  The
      Judge's conclusions in substantial part implicitly involve a rejection
      of the Appellant's account. For example, at paragraph 26 the Judge was
      dismissive of the Appellant's assertion that he was 'kept in the dark'
      about matrimonial/domestic financial arrangements on  the  basis  that
      the Appellant consented to a joint account and understood how a  joint
      account operated. In so far as this constitutes an implicit  rejection
      of the Appellant's  assertions  that  he  was  not  kept  informed  of
      expenditures and indeed was lied to in respect of the  amount  of  the
      monthly mortgage payments, there is no clear reasoning as to why  such
      aspects of the Appellant's testimony were rejected.  Similarly  it  is
      not discernible on what basis any  other  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
      account may have been rejected.

(iii) Further in this context, in so much as the Appellant's  testimony  may
      have been rejected in material part, circumstantial matters - such  as
      it being  an  arranged  marriage  (paragraph  24),  the  mother-in-law
      already residing with the  Appellant's  partner  (paragraph  24),  the
      Appellant having no experience of the UK (paragraph 24), the Appellant
      not  seeking  the  help  of  outside  agencies  (paragraph  28),   the
      supporting witnesses not being direct witnesses of  abusive  behaviour
      (paragraph 29) - whilst relevant to  an  overall  assessment  are  not
      reliable indicators of a lack of credibility, and do not form a proper
      basis for rejecting testimony. Absent these non-determinative factors,
      no clear reason is stated for rejecting the Appellant's evidence as to
      primary facts.

(iv) The concerns over the  adequacy  of  the  findings  and  reasoning  are
      particularly pertinent and material in the context of the key  finding
      stated by the Judge at paragraph 24: "...the Tribunal  concludes  that
      the events the Appellant describes are manifestations of  elements  of
      the breakdown of the relationship, not the cause of the breakdown". In
      the abstract, this is a very fine distinction to draw. On the facts of
      this particular case it is not, in  my  judgement,  apparent  on  what
      basis the distinction has been drawn.

(v) The Judge appears to place adverse weight on the Appellant's failure  to
      plead his case with reference to  paragraph  289A  in  the  letter  of
      representation dated 21 February 2013 (Appellant's bundle at pages 35-
      38). The Judge's conclusion based on the contents of that letter  that
      the Appellant "was aware that  he  was  not  the  victim  of  domestic
      violence" is not sustainably  supported  in  circumstances  where  the
      letter states in terms  that  the  Appellant  has  been  subjected  to
      domestic violence by his mother-in-law, and refers to  "mental  abuse"
      as "part of domestic violence". (I note  that  Mr  Duffy  acknowledged
      that in isolation this paragraph would warrant conceding the issue  of
      error of law, and only declined so to do because  he  maintained  that
      the reasoning in the rest  of  the  determination  was  adequate  -  a
      submission that I reject for the reasons already given.)


  10. Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I find  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge materially erred, and that the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal must be set aside.




Future Conduct of the Appeal

  11. Given the basis of the decision in respect of 'error of  law',  it  is
      not possible to preserve any aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's fact-
      finding. In such circumstances it is appropriate that the decision  in
      the appeal be remade before the First-tier Tribunal with all issues at
      large.


  12. No specific directions are required for  the  future  conduct  of  the
      appeal: standard directions will suffice. The parties are to file  and
      serve any further materials upon which they wish to rely  at  least  7
      days prior to the next rehearing date.


Notice of Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
      law and is set aside.


  14. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, before any judge other than Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Manuell, with all issues at large.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     3 March 2015




