

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/19595/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination promulgated            |
|On January 29, 2015                  |On February 4, 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS ESTHER ABERKAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shiliday (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Hashmi, Counsel, instructed by Nasim and Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana. The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2009 and came to visit her brother. On October 15, 2013
    she submitted an application for a residence card on  the  basis  of  a
    customary marriage to her partner, Kofu  Adu.  The  respondent  refused
    this application on December 18, 2013 as she did not except  the  proxy
    marriage was valid in Germany (her partner's  country  of  nationality)
    and she further found there  was  insufficient  evidence  submitted  to
    demonstrate a durable relationship.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the  immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Harris
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October 2,  2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on October 28, 2014 he allowed  the  appeal  under
    the 2006 Regulations and remitted the case back to  the  respondent  to
    consider the exercise of discretion.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  31,  2014.  She
    submitted the FtTJ erred by allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  without
    giving any reasons.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers granted permission to  appeal
    on December 9, 2014 stating there was an arguable error in law based on
    the grounds.

 7. The appellant, her partner and her brother were in attendance in  court
    and the appellant was represented as set out above.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Shiliday submitted the FtTJ had found there was  little  documentary
    evidence  to  support  their  claim  and  as  he  had  also  found  the
    appellant's partner  had  given  inconsistent  evidence  about  it  was
    incumbent upon him to give his reasons for allowing the appeal  and  he
    failed to do this in paragraph [15] of his determination.

 9. Ms Hashmi submitted that documentary evidence was not  needed  and  the
    FtTJ had allowed the  appeal  after  hearing  evidence.  The  FtTJ  was
    satisfied the relationship was durable and allowed the appeal and there
    was no error in law.

10. Mr Shiliday maintained the FtTJ applied the  wrong  standard  of  proof
    bearing in mind his findings  in  paragraphs  [12]  and  [14]  and  his
    conclusion in paragraph [15] was not sustainable.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The determination was brief and notably at paragraphs [12] and [14] the
    FtTJ  made  adverse  findings  about  evidence   that   supported   the
    appellant's case.  Whilst there was a letter from the pastor at page 57
    of the appellant's bundle this did not demonstrate  at  any  level  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship. The FtTJ  allowed  the  appeal
    finding at paragraph [15] of his determination

          "... I considered that overall  both  the  appellant  and  Mr  Adu
         demonstrated  sufficient  credibility  and  consistency  in   their
         evidence about their  claimed  relationship  that  I  could  attach
         weight to the claim each made about being  a  durable  relationship
         since 2011"

12. The FtTJ failed to give his reasons for reaching this conclusion and he
    also failed to make any reference to the evidence that  apparently  was
    given by  the  appellant's  brother-in-law  or  friend.  I  am  further
    persuaded there was a material error because in paragraph [16] the ftTJ
    further stated

          "Weighing up the oral and documentary  evidence  before  me  I  am
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  had
         been in a durable relationship as claimed....."

13. I therefore find there as an error in law. In noted that the directions
    provided for the matter being concluded and after a short recess I took
    oral evidence from both the appellant and her partner. The  appellant's
    brother was present but  was  not  required  to  give  evidence  by  Mr
    Shiliday.

    EVIDENCE

14. Both the appellant and her partner adopted  their  witness  statements.
    They both gave  consistent  evidence  about  when  they  met,  how  the
    appellant's partner proposed, when and where they presented  themselves
    in church for  their  marriage  to  be  recognised,  details  of  their
    respective families and where they  lived,  the  appellant's  partner's
    place and hours of work, details of their own home, last  night's  meal
    and in particular both  confirmed  they  read  Matthew  10  last  night
    together and their journey to court today.

15. At the conclusion of their evidence Mr Shiliday indicated that  he  had
    no questions for the appellant's brother and I agreed that his evidence
    would be admitted into evidence. I did not require any submissions from
    Ms Hashmi.

    FINDINGS

16. This was an application for  a  residence  card.  The  application  was
    originally before the Tribunal on the basis the  parties  were  married
    but when the matter came before the FtTJ Ms Hashmi indicated  that  the
    case was now to be argued on the basis of a durable relationship  only.
    The respondent did not raise any jurisdictional  issues  either  before
    the FtTJ or myself and I proceeded to hear the parties' evidence.

17. The standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities and the burden
    of proof is on the appellant  to  prove  that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.

18. There was a lack of documentary evidence but as already conceded by  Mr
    Shiliday the Regulations do not require such evidence. I had previously
    found there was an error in law because the FtTJ failed to give reasons
    why  he  found  the  appellant's  evidence  sufficiently  credible  and
    consistent.

19. I heard the parties' oral evidence and  have  set  out  the  consistent
    evidence they both gave above. I am  satisfied  they  have  been  in  a
    durable relationship.  Whilst  there  may  be  a  lack  of  documentary
    evidence I am satisfied their oral evidence was credible and  based  on
    the consistency of that evidence I am satisfied they are in  a  durable
    relationship.

20. The appellant is an extended family member as defined by  Regulation  8
    of the 2006 Regulations.

21. Regulation  17(4)  of  2006  Regulations  provides  discretion  to  the
    Secretary of State to issue a residence card  to  an  'extended  family
    member'. In the appellant's case the Secretary of  State  has  not  yet
    considered the exercise of such discretion because he did not have  the
    full  facts  available  due  to  the  failure  to  provide   sufficient
    information to her when the application was made. It is not open to  me
    to consider the exercise of discretion for myself, absent the Secretary
    of State first doing so: see FD (EEA  discretion  -  basis  of  appeal)
    Algeria [2007] UKAIT. In such circumstances I am constrained  to  allow
    the appellant's appeal on the basis that the respondent's decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did disclose an  error  in  law
    but having considered all of the evidence I allow  the  appeal  to  the
    extent set out above in paragraph [21].

23. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was not made in the First-tier and I see no reason to amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 4, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the original decision on fees.



Signed:     Dated: February 4, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
