
IAC-FH-CK-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2015                               |On 27 March 2015              |
|Determination prepared 9 March 2015           |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Aziz Bahaa Talib Al-Taie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Gayle, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and the Respondent is referred to as  the
    Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of  Iraq,  date  of  birth  6  November  1982,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision dated 11 April  2014
    to refuse an  application  for  permanent  residence  under  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

3.   The appeal against that decision was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Paul, (the judge), on 2 December 2014 on  the  basis  that  the
    Claimant met the relevant requirements of Regulation 6 of the 2006  EEA
    Regulations.

4.   On 24 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy gave  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had  failed  to
    properly consider Regulation 6 requirements so as to conclude that  the
    Claimant had remained a worker at the material times.

5.   The Secretary of State's objection to the decision is somewhat  tersely
    set out and essentially amounts to this, in the period between November
    2012 and March 2013 the Claimant whilst looking for work did not  "sign
    on" so as to be duly  recorded  in  involuntary  unemployment  and  had
    registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office.  Further
    the judge  did  not  go  on  to  consider  additional  requirements  of
    conditions A and B of Regulation 6.

6.   I note that the Claimant was not claiming to be a self-employed  person
    or a self-sufficient person or a student at the material time.

7.   Mr Gayle drew attention to a letter,  dated  7  January  2014,  from  a
    business known as Plumbing Town, by its director Mr H Ihsan  confirming
    an application made by the Appellant for a post of sales assistant  and
    offering an interview at the end of January.  This Mr  Gayle  said  was
    evidence that the Appellant was genuinely seeking a position  and  that
    the Appellant, with the skills he had, had  a  very  real  prospect  of
    obtaining such employment.

8.   Mr Clarke submits that quite simply without even  having  to  determine
    the issues of whether the Claimant met conditions A or B  the  fact  of
    the matter was that the Claimant had not been recorded  in  involuntary
    unemployment nor had the Claimant been registered as a  jobseeker  with
    the relevant employment office.

9.   The judge dealt with his consideration of the matter at paragraph 8  of
    the decision.  Mr Gayle's  submissions  were  plainly  addressing  that
    factual  position.   Mr  Clarke  submits  that  absent   of   the   due
    registration the Claimant could not  meet  the  requirements  to  be  a
    worker for the purposes of Regulation 6.  The fact that in this  period
    the Claimant  was  paying  his  way  without  recourse  to  jobseeker's
    allowance does not change his status nor was there any evidence to show
    he could be treated as either self-sufficient  or  as  a  self-employed
    person.

10.  Mr Gayle relied on  Regulation  6(7)  of  the  2006  Regulations  which
    states:

         "A person may not  retain  the  status  of  a  worker  pursuant  to
         paragraph (2)(b), ... for longer than  six  months  unless  he  can
         provide  compelling  evidence  that  he  is  continuing   to   seek
         employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged."

11.  It was submitted by Mr Gayle that there was no requirement to  register
    bearing in mind that the Claimant's period  of  unemployment  was  some
    five months between November 2012  and  March  2013.   Therefore,  even
    though he did not  register  his  involuntary  unemployment  nor  as  a
    jobseeker, it did not matter because he had  not  at  that  stage  been
    unemployed for a period longer than six months.

12.  I do not read Regulation 6(7) as in  effect  exempting  a  person  from
    having to record, for a  period  under  six  months  their  involuntary
    unemployment and/or being a registered jobseeker for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 6.  It may be  that  as  a  fact  a  self-sufficient  person
    meeting other  requirements  under  the  Regulations,  chooses  not  to
    register unemployed or claim jobseeker's allowance, even assuming  they
    would be entitled to do so but the Claimant was not such a  person.   I
    find Regulation 6(7) is intended to put an 'end point' on status  as  a
    worker unless the worker is able to show with compelling evidence  that
    they are still seeking employment and have a genuine prospect of  being
    engaged.

13.  I find that the judge's decision is in error of law because he did  not
    address the effect of non-registration by the Claimant as a  jobseeker.
    Accordingly the judge's findings in relation to  Regulation  6(4)  that
    the Claimant is a jobseeker was only half of the issue and  it  is  the
    requirements  to  meet  Regulation  6(2)(b)  that  are  the   important
    consideration which the judge has not addressed.

14.  In the circumstances it was agreed that I could remake  the  Tribunal's
    decision on the papers before me.   The  fact  that  the  Claimant  was
    providing some evidence that he was continuing to seek  employment  and
    had a genuine chance of being engaged does not answer the point that he
    had failed to be duly recorded  in  involuntary  unemployment  and  had
    registered  as  a  jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment   office.
    Accordingly the Claimant could not succeed under the 2006 Regulations.

15.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The following  decision
    is remade.

16.  The appeal on immigration grounds is dismissed.

17.  No anonymity order was sought or required.



Signed        Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and accordingly no award is appropriate.



Signed        Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
