
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19167/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th May 2014                                |On 04th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY



                                   Between

                              MS NAZISH SHAHEEN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shah
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan who  was  born  on  4th  February
    1962, has appealed to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grimshow) promulgated on 7th
    March 2014, dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    15th May 2013 refusing to vary leave to remain and deciding  to  remove
    her from the UK.

 2. The Appellant had entered the UK, on 16th March 2011, as a spouse.  She
    was given leave to enter on that basis.  She is married to one Ghulshan
    Jahangir who is a British citizen.  On 13th April 2013 she made  an  in
    time application for further leave as a spouse but  this  was  refused.
    The basis of the  refusal  appears  to  have  been  that  she  had  not
    completed 27 months in the UK having returned to Pakistan  for  several
    months in 2011 and 2012.

 3. There was an oral hearing before  Judge  Grimshow.   Having  heard  the
    evidence the judge accepted that the Appellant and her  husband  had  a
    genuine and  subsisting  relationship.   However,  she  considered  the
    provisions set  out  in  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    concluded that the Appellant did not meet them.  The  judge  concluded,
    further, that there were no exceptional or compassionate  circumstances
    such as to justify allowing the appeal under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    outside the Rules.

 4. The Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal takes a number of points.  One of those  points  is  that  the
    judge erred in considering the application  under  Appendix  FM  rather
    than under other Immigration Rules which relate  to  the  situation  of
    spouses.  It was also contended  that  the  Article  8  assessment  was
    flawed.   On  26th  March  2014  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft   granted
    permission to appeal because he thought it arguable that matters should
    have been considered under the Immigration Rules  relating  to  spouses
    other than those to be found in Appendix FM.

 5. The parties were notified of the grant of permission.  The  Respondent,
    in a "Rule 24 response" indicated that  the  application  made  by  the
    Appellant would not be opposed.  The Respondent observed;

         "It appears that the  Appellant  application  ought  to  have  been
         considered under part  8  of  the  Immigration  Rules  rather  than
         Appendix FM.  The provision is set out  in  A280(c)(b)(ii)  of  the
         Rules."

 6. Mr Diwnycz, for the Respondent, indicated that he would  stand  by  the
    order 24 reply.  In the circumstances it was effectively agreed between
    the parties that the judge had erred such that the  determination  fell
    to be set aside.  That is, therefore, the course of action which I have
    taken.

 7. There was then further discussion as to whether the decision  could  be
    re-made before me.  That was certainly my preferred  option  but  there
    were difficulties.  Mr Shah  explained  that  he  had  not  appreciated
    matters would proceed to re-making today.   He  had  not  received  any
    directions indicating that re-making might  be  undertaken  today.   Mr
    Diwnycz had not received any such  directions  either.   There  was  no
    evidence on file that the standard directions  regarding  such  matters
    had been issued in this case.  Even if they had I would  have  accepted
    Mr Shah's assurances that he had not received them.  Mr Shah, in  these
    circumstances, invited the Upper  Tribunal  to  simply  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to hold another hearing, in due
    course, when the decision might be re-made.  In this context,  said  Mr
    Shah, he did wish to obtain further evidence to seek to show  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  were,  at  least,  substantially
    complied with.  This would be relevant because, even if the Rules could
    not be  met  in  whole,  the  degree  to  which  they  were  met  could
    potentially impact on any future Article 8 assessment.  Mr Diwnycz  did
    not oppose Mr Shah's application and,  indeed,  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant should not be disadvantaged.

 8. In these circumstances I conclude that the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is to be set aside,  with  nothing  preserved,  and  that
    there shall be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal, on  a  date
    to be fixed, when the decision shall be re-made.

Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


