
[pic]




Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/19384/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham                         Decision Promulgated:
On: 21 July 2014
 On: 6 August 2014


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                          Faisal Abdul Ghaful Haji

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Vokes, instructed by Cartwright King Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Kenya and was born on 23 October 1986.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination promulgated  on
29 January 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge C J  Lloyd  which  refused  the
appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  10  May  2013
refusing further leave to remain.

The background to this matter is that the appellant was born in  Kenya.  His
immediate family lived as part of a larger family group of approximately  30
relatives occupying two  large  houses.  The  family  operated  a  transport
logistic business but later moved  the  operation  to  Dubai.  In  2002  the
appellant left Kenya and went to study in Dubai. He came to the UK  in  2006
as a student with leave until 31 January 2010.

The appellant's father came to the UK on 30  December  2008  with  leave  as
Tier 1 Entrepreneur and the appellant's mother and sister  were  dependents.
Their leave ran until 1 December 2011 and, after an  appeal,  further  leave
was granted to them until 22 August 2016.

The appellant was too old to benefit from the grant of further  leave  until
22 August 2016 but on 19 January 2011 he was granted discretionary leave  to
remain (DLR) until 1 December  2011  as  his  father  was  undergoing  heart
bypass surgery. His application of 22  March  2013  for  further  leave  was
refused and that refusal underpins the appeal before me.

The refusal of 22  March  2013  maintained  that  the  basis  on  which  the
appellant had been granted DLR  was  no  longer  in  existence  and  so  the
appellant did not qualify for further DLR. He  did  not  qualify  for  leave
under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd found at [27] that  the  appellant  did  not
qualify for further DLR under the  policy  relating  to  those  granted  DLR
prior to 9 July 2012.  She found that the grant of DLR had been made on  the
basis of the appellant's father's heart bypass operation in  2011  but  that
the evidence showed that his father had recovered and was working.

The evidence of the appellant's father in that regard is  recorded  at  [16]
and was that he was:

      "... the overall manager of his food business and responsible for the
      paperwork but that his son did the day-to-day hard work. He had  full-
      time staff and casual workers and was about to open a second shop  but
      would need to downsize if his son did not stay in the UK."

  This is materially the  same  evidence  given  by  other  members  of  the
family, including the appellant, in oral or written evidence.

The appellant challenges the factual finding as to his father's  health  and
the conclusion that he did not qualify for further DLR under the policy.

The specific challenge to the factual finding that his father was in  better
health than previously was that Judge Lloyd  erred  in  her  approach  to  a
letter dated 12  November  2013  from  the  father's  GP,  Dr  Walker.  This
document is at page 104 of the appellant's bundle.

Dr Walker states that the appellant's father  had  "Chronic  Kidney  Disease
stage 5" and that "his kidney function has deteriorated furthering the  last
eight months and he is likely to require renal dialysis  fairly  soon."  The
letter goes on to state that the father also suffers from diabetes which  is
treated with insulin,  has  a  slip  disc  and  confirms  the  heart  bypass
operation in 2010.

The letter from Dr Walker concludes thus:

      "In recent times unfortunately  Mr  Haji's  health  has  declined  and
      because of this he suffers from the symptoms I  describe  above.  This
      could have considerable impact on his ability to work."

It was not my view that Judge Lloyd's decision  erred  in  its  approach  to
this letter. It was specifically noted at [17]. If the  appellant's  father,
consistent with the remainder of the family's evidence, as of  the  date  of
the hearing in January 2014 was more positive than that given by the GP,  it
seems to be that it was open to the judge to  prefer  the  more  recent  and
consistent evidence of the family.  That  evidence  manifestly  supported  a
conclusion that the  father  was  able  to  work.  He  stated  that  he  was
intending to set up a second shop and confirmed that he  would  continue  to
work and run the business, albeit in a smaller way, even  if  the  appellant
did were not able to assist him. The First-tier Tribunal was not obliged  to
place more weight on the GP letter in the face of other,  notably  different
evidence from the appellant and his family.

Further, the GP letter does not, in my view, support  the  appellant's  case
that his father remained as unwell as  in  2010  when  DLR  was  granted  or
unable to run his business such that  it  could  have  lead  the  First-tier
Tribunal  to conclude that the appellant  qualified  for  further  leave  to
remain under the policy or on any other basis.

According to Dr Walker, the  father  did  not  yet  need  dialysis.  Nothing
before the First-tier Tribunal suggested that the situation had  changed  as
of January 2014.  The  GP  specifically  states  that  the  father's  health
problems "could" impact on his ability to work, not that  they  did  so.  As
above, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  they  did  not
impact so as prevent the father from working,  expanding  his  business  and
expecting to continue to do so even if the appellant was not in the UK.

The "deterioration" referred to by Dr Walker was  "recent"  as  of  November
2013. This was not an indication that the father's health  had  deteriorated
still further from the very serious circumstances  pertaining  in  2010  and
2011 when he underwent heart bypass surgery. For the  reasons  given  above,
the "recent" deterioration was  not,  even  on  the  basis  of  Dr  Walker's
letter, let alone the evidence of the family, to a  level  that  could  show
that the father was critically ill such that  he  could  not  work  and  the
appellant had to run the family business, as in 2011.

For those reasons, I did not find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
finding that the appellant's circumstances had changed since  the  grant  of
DLR as a result of his father's  heart  bypass  surgery  and  need  for  the
appellant to run his business.  The evidence  clearly  supported  a  finding
that, even if the father, sadly, still has health  problems,  the  situation
had changed to the extent that the respondent acted  lawfully  in  declining
to exercise her policy regarding further DLR to those granted DLR  prior  to
9 July 2012.

Where that is so, the appellant's other grounds which turn on  the  question
of the health of the appellant's  father  and  need  for  the  appellant  to
assist in the family  business  cannot  found  a  successful  error  of  law
challenge.

It was open to Judge Lloyd to find at [32] that the appellant had not  shown
a relationship of such dependency with his father that family life  for  the
purposes of Article 8 was established. It was open to her to  find  at  [35]
that there were not sufficiently compelling or  compassionate  circumstances
here such that the decision  amounted  to  a  disproportionate  interference
even  after  a  free-standing  Article  8  proportionality  assessment   was
conducted at [33] to [35].

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 5 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



