
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19476/2014
     ia/19480/2014
         ia/19483/2014
     ia/19488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 1 July 2015                         |                On 14 July 2015      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                CE (NIGERIA)
                                DBE (NIGERIA
                                EVGE (nigeria
                                DORE (nigeria
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Matthias Ume-Ezeoke, Solicitor, The Legal
                    Resource Partnership
For the Respondent:   Mr S Kandola, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State to make removal directions under Section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity direction, in view  of  the  age  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, and I consider it is appropriate for that reason  that  the
    appellants should be accorded anonymity for these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission

 2. On 24 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for the following
    reasons:

         "1.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  dismissed  these  appeals
             against removal to Nigeria in a decision of 30 December 2014.

         2.   The appellants are  a  Nigerian  family  who  have  been  here
             without leave.  The first and second appellants came in  early
             2005.  The third and fourth appellants were born here in  2005
             and 2009 and have been here ever since.   The  judge  did  not
             accept that the family's removal breached article 8.

         3.   The grounds of the application are poorly drawn.

         4.    Ground  1  contends  that  in   rejecting   the   appellant's
             "generalised" claim that cultural and other  ties  to  Nigeria
             had been lost, the judge erred because, amongst other  things,
             the judge did not explain why he did not accept  the  cultural
             and other ties were lost.

         5.   The first and second appellant's witness statements  contended
             that contact with family in Nigeria had been lost.  The  judge
             did not explain why that evidence was  rejected.   That  would
             not  assist  the  first  and  second  appellants,  so  far  as
             paragraph 276ADE of the rules is concerned, if, as  the  judge
             indicated at paragraph 3, it was not suggested that  they  met
             any category of the immigration  rules.   However,  it  was  a
             relevant issue when determining whether  the  third  appellant
             could reasonably be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom  to
             return to Nigeria.

         6.   Ground 2 is disjointed but it infers, if  nothing  else,  that
             the judge erred when considering the  best  interests  of  the
             children because the judge failed to consider that  the  elder
             child in particular had formed a life of her own  outside  the
             family home and the judge did not  take  into  account  issues
             relating to her education.

         7.   In EV  (Philippines)  2014  EWCA  874,  the  Court  of  Appeal
             identified a number of factors to consider in the context of a
             child's best interests including how long the child  has  been
             in education and the stage  that  the  child's  education  has
             reached.  Although the judge made a passing  reference  to  EV
             (Philippines) it is not  apparent  that  he  considered  these
             factors.

         8.   The judge had to determine for the purposes of section 117B(6)
             whether it was reasonable for the eldest child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.  Although the child's best interest  were  not
             determinative of that issue, they were certainly an  important
             factor to be considered in the determination  of  that  issue.
             It is arguable that the third appellant's best interests  were
             not properly considered and in those circumstances, permission
             to appeal is granted on ground 2.  I do not refuse  permission
             on the ground 1, although whether  it  takes  the  matter  any
             further is questionable."

The Background

 3. The first appellant is the lead appellant, and  so  I  shall  hereafter
    refer to her simply as the appellant, save where the context  otherwise
    requires.  She was born in Nigeria on 6 July 1966, and her husband  was
    born in Nigeria on 27 August 1961.  Their two children were born in the
    UK on  1  August  2005  (third  appellant)  and  9  June  2009  (fourth
    appellant) respectively.

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK in March 2005 with her  husband.   Both
    of them had  entry  clearance  from  Lagos  as  visitors.   The  couple
    overstayed.  On  27  September  2012  the  appellants'  representatives
    applied to the UK Border Agency for leave to  remain,  with  the  other
    appellants being dependants on the first appellant's application.   The
    representatives relied on the fact that  the  two  children  had  spent
    their formative lives in the UK, and that the older child V was in full-
    time education and had lived in the  UK  for  over  seven  years.   The
    application was refused on 27 September 2013 with no right  of  appeal.
    The appellant threatened judicial review proceedings, and eventually on
    10 March 2014 she was served with a form IS15A  notice.   On  11  April
    2014 the respondent gave her  reasons  for  being  satisfied  that  her
    removal did not breach the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The appellant was not eligible for leave to remain under  Appendix  FM,
    as her partner was neither a British citizen nor had  he  been  granted
    refugee leave or humanitarian  protection.   He  had  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom after expiry of his leave to enter as a visitor.

 6. The appellant also did not meet the eligibility requirements for  leave
    to remain as a parent of her son D, as he had not accrued seven  years'
    residence.  It  was  accepted  that  paragraph  EX.1  applied  to   her
    relationship with her  daughter  V.   She  was  8  years  old  and  was
    currently attending primary school.  But it was reasonable to expect  V
    to leave the UK as she was still young and adaptable and she was not in
    a critical state of her education.  She  was  not  in  the  process  of
    taking important examinations.  V and her family would depart  together
    as a family, so she would have the support of her  parents.   According
    to the Nigeria Country of  Origin  Information  Report  of  June  2013,
    English was an official language in Nigeria, so communication would not
    be a problem.  According to the application  form  dated  29  September
    2012 at question 6.4, the appellant had her mother in Nigeria who could
    assist the family to settle on return.

 7. The respondent returned to the topic of best interests in  the  context
    of a discussion of the impact of Section 55.  In respect of V's private
    life, she would be able to continue  her  education  in  Nigeria.   The
    objective country information indicated that children would have access
    to education in schools upon return to Nigeria.  The respondent went on
    to quote extensively from the country  of  origin  report  for  Nigeria
    dated June 2013 on the topic of access to education and  schools.   The
    standard of education may not be of an equal standard to that available
    in the United Kingdom, but it was clear (the respondent asserted)  that
    education was accessible and would be available to the children.   They
    would be able to benefit for  such  education,  and  therefore  make  a
    positive contribution.  Both parents and the wider family could support
    the children in Nigeria.  The appellant and her family would be removed
    together as a family unit.  The children's social  wellbeing  would  be
    protected within that family unit.  No evidence had been put forward to
    suggest that their health would be affected in Nigeria.  They would  be
    living with both parents, and in the absence of  any  evidence  to  the
    contrary, it is presumed that they would therefore  be  safe  and  well
    cared for.  With the support of their parents, there was no  indication
    they would not achieve at school.  No evidence had been put forward  to
    suggest that the appellant and her  husband  could  not  support  their
    family.  It was therefore considered the best interests of the children
    had been regarded as a primary consideration, and that the Secretary of
    State's duty under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizen  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 had been duly considered and discharged.

 8. Exceptional circumstances had also been considered.  The appellant  had
    not made any attempt to normalise her immigration  status  until  2012.
    She had made no attempt  to  depart  the  United  Kingdom  voluntarily,
    despite the refusal of her application  to  remain  in  2013.   In  her
    application form of 29 September 2012 at  question  6.5  the  appellant
    said she was scared for her children's safety,  as  there  were  tribal
    wars and unrest in Nigeria to which they were  not  accustomed.   As  a
    result of this statement, the Home Office had  written  to  her  on  24
    March 2014 to make her aware that this statement amounted  to  a  claim
    for humanitarian protection, and that she  would  have  to  attend  the
    Asylum Screening Unit to register such a  claim.   But  the  letter  of
    response dated 31 March  2014  stated  that  the  appellant  instructed
    categorically that she did not wish to apply for political asylum.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Davey,  only  the   appellants   were
    represented.  In his  subsequent  decision,  Judge  Davey  referred  at
    paragraph 9 to a recent statement of the husband.   He  asserted  there
    was danger in the Delta State and that they  were  concerned  with  the
    risk of kidnapping and ill-treatment, and the UK was a safer  place  to
    be.  Thus they preferred to bring their children up here.

10. At paragraph 10, the judge referred to a  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant which essentially said the same thing, except that she raised
    additional fears concerning the Ebola virus, female circumcision (FGM),
    and how she was afraid of what might happen  to  her  daughter  in  the
    event of marriage.  The judge's findings were set out in paragraphs  11
    onwards:

         "11. The Appellants have the burden of proof of showing  that  they
             met the requirements of the Immigration Rules or alternatively
             that they engaged with the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR
             outside of the Rules.  In considering these  matters  I  apply
             the case of Huang [2007] UKHL 11, MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ
             985 and the analysis in Ganesabalan [2014]  EWHC  2712,  Aliyu
             [2014] EWHC 3919 as well as EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             874.  It seems to me that on the face of the evidence and  the
             submissions made the  Appellants  do  not  succeed  under  the
             Immigration Rules.  I do not accept the generalised claim that
             cultural and other ties have been lost with Nigeria.

         12.  Plainly for the children those ties  have  not  directly  been
             established but they have grown up in a family  which,  absent
             of contrary evidence, is essentially founded  upon  the  First
             and Second Appellants Nigerian identity  background.   In  the
             context that they are still of an age within the family to  be
             dependent upon their parents.  It seems to me  the  likelihood
             is even if the children at some stage do not particularly like
             some of the Nigerian food cooked  in  the  traditionally  way,
             that they are being exposed to Nigerian  culture.   Whilst  in
             the Untied Kingdom the Third Appellant may prefer not to  wear
             more traditional Nigerian dress, as her mother indicated,  and
             would  prefer  to  be  in  Western   clothing   that   is   an
             understandable position but is by no means an immutable one.

         13.  I find that the Appellants are not UK  nationals  and  do  not
             meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, save  for  the
             Third Appellant under paragraph 276ADE, given I see no  reason
             why she cannot establish herself in her home country nor would
             there be significant hardship in doing so.

         14.  I see nothing of removal depriving her of something  to  which
             she would otherwise be entitled.  There are  no  rights  under
             Article 8 to pick the country where you would wish to bring up
             your children and prefer it.  I look at this matter  from  the
             standpoint of the parents are bearing  in  mind  the  guidance
             contained in ZH (Tanzania).  It is plain that just because the
             children may benefit from being in the United Kingdom  and  it
             is the country of choice for the parents that does  not  avoid
             the fact that the parents have only established themselves  in
             the circumstances where they have not had a  right  to  remain
             and now seek to take the benefit of the  children  growing  up
             here.  It seems to me that EV (Philippines) is a case of  some
             assistance in analysing what is the correct approach  to  this
             matter.   Just  as  the  sins  of  the  parents   should   not
             necessarily be visited up their children who had no say in the
             matter similarly the fact  that  the  children  have  achieved
             certain benefits which they would otherwise  never  have  been
             entitled to can not be given undue  weight  particularly  when
             assessing the public interest.  I have considered the  claimed
             employment, housing and  social  difficulties  of  the  family
             relocating and possible consequences for the children but  the
             parents views are born of their determine wishes to remain  in
             the  UK  and  I  do  not  accept  their  perceptions  of   the
             difficulties to be faced.

         15.  Having carefully reviewed this matter I am satisfied that  the
             Appellants have, as  a  family,  family  life  in  the  United
             Kingdom and they have as far as the family forms  part  of  it
             each lived here enjoying certain private life rights.  Be that
             as it may I find the Respondent's decision lawful and directed
             at Article 8(2)  considerations.   I  take  into  account  the
             provisions of  Section  117A  and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the  2014
             Immigration Act.  It seems to me that this is a case where  as
             reflected considerable  importance  should  be  given  to  the
             public interest bearing in mind none of the  Appellants,  even
             with English language abilities, has been able to work in  the
             United Kingdom and are not contributors to the UK community.

         16.  In the circumstances I find the  public  interest  in  removal
             should prevail that removal is  a  proportionate  step  to  be
             taken."

The Error of Law Hearing

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Ume-Ezeoke developed the arguments raised  in  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  On behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
    Kandola adopted the position taken in the Rule  24  response  dated  18
    March 2015, where a colleague argued that there was no  material  error
    of law in the judge's decision.

Discussion

12. Ground 1 has no merit.  The judge explained why he did not  accept  the
    generalised claim that cultural and other  ties  have  been  lost  with
    Nigeria.  He gave his reasons for not accepting this generalised  claim
    in paragraph 12.

13. In oral argument, Mr Ume-Ezeoke took a different point, which was  that
    the judge ought to have applied the version of  Rule  276ADE(vi)  which
    was in force at the time of the hearing, rather than the version  which
    was in force at the date of decision.  The judge was not  dealing  with
    the deportation Rules, and so he was right to follow the normal  course
    of applying the Rules as they stood at the date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, following the House of  Lords  decision  in  Odelola.
    Moreover it was not the appellant's case that she could  bring  herself
    within the new version of Rule 276ADE(vi), which  is  no  less  onerous
    than the old version of Rules as construed and  applied  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ogundimu.

14. As noted by Judge Nicholson when granting permission, the judge did not
    specifically address the contention  in  the  witness  statements  that
    contact with family in Nigeria had been lost.  But the  judge  was  not
    required to address every aspect of the evidence.  The  assertion  made
    in the refusal letter that the family could lead  an  adequate  private
    and family life in Nigeria was not predicated on the family being  able
    to access support from other family members  who  continued  to  reside
    there.  Similarly, it was not necessary  for  Judge  Davey  to  make  a
    finding one way or the other as  to  whether  contact  with  family  in
    Nigeria had been lost or not.  Even if it had been lost, the  appellant
    had not sought to discharge the burden of proving  that  contact  could
    not be revived once she  had  got  back  to  Nigeria,  and  made  local
    enquiries.  But the main consideration  is  that  the  family  were  an
    independent unit, and the judge was entitled to proceed on the  premise
    that they were fully  capable  of  looking  after  themselves  and  the
    children in Nigeria without external support.

15. For the purposes of evaluating ground 2, it is helpful to consider  the
    two different  approaches  to  the  resolution  of  the  best  interest
    question  which  were  sanctioned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal   in   EV
    (Philippines).  Clarke LJ endorsed the orthodox approach whose  lineage
    can be traced back to MK (India), which is to consider the child's best
    interests from an ideal world perspective and without  any  immigration
    control  overtones,  before  going  to  consider  whether  "the   wider
    proportionality assessment" prevails over the  ideal  outcome  for  the
    child. Lewison LJ championed the real world approach, whose lineage can
    be traced back to Zoumbas, in  which  the  immigration  status  of  the
    parents informs the assessment of where the best interests of the child
    lie.

16. On analysis, Judge Davies' approach is broadly in line  with  the  real
    world approach championed  by  Lewison  LJ  in  EV  (Philippines).   At
    paragraph 13, Judge Davey acknowledges that child V meets  the  gateway
    requirement of the sub-rule in Rule 276ADE which corresponds to Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  This was never in dispute.  The  question  in
    controversy was whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  the  qualifying
    child (namely V), to leave the country with the  rest  of  her  family.
    This is a question which the judge only needed to answer once.   As  he
    answered it under the Rule, he did not need to answer it separately  by
    reference to the statute; or under the  heading  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's duty under Section 55; or as part of a best interest assessment
    at stage 5 of  the  Razgar  test.   For,  under  whatever  heading  the
    question was considered, the same considerations had to be  taken  into
    account.

17.  Having  regard  to  the  established  case  law,  in   particular   EV
    (Philippines) to which the judge makes express reference  in  paragraph
    14, I consider that the judge has given adequate  reasons  for  finding
    that it was reasonable to expect  the  third  appellant  to  settle  in
    Nigeria with her family, notwithstanding the fact that she had  accrued
    over eight years' residence in the UK and was  in  the  middle  of  her
    primary school education.

18. In paragraph 14 the judge  made  no  express  reference  to  the  third
    appellant's  academic  achievements  (which  are  acknowledged  in  the
    refusal letter) and he made no finding as to  precisely  how  long  the
    third appellant had been attending  primary  school.   But  it  is  not
    suggested that the judge did not fairly summarise the broad  thrust  of
    her parents'  case  in  paragraphs  9  and  10  of  his  decision,  and
    accordingly the disruption to the third appellant's education  was  not
    something upon which heavy reliance was placed  as  militating  against
    the family's removal.  In any event, in the light  of  the  established
    jurisprudence, disruption to the third appellant's education was not  a
    matter  which  could  realistically  tip  the  scales  in   the   third
    appellant's favour, or in favour of  the  family  as  a  whole,  having
    regard to  the  family's  illegal  status  and  the  parents'  lack  of
    entitlement to have their children educated in the UK  at  the  UK  tax
    payers' expense when they were all here illegally, and when the parents
    were not making any financial contribution to the UK.

19. Judge Davey's finding in paragraph 13 that there was no reason why  the
    third appellant could not establish herself  in  her  own  country  nor
    would there be significant hardship in her doing so finds  an  echo  in
    the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in AM (Section  117B)  [2015]  UKUT
    260 (IAC) at paragraph 39:

         "There was  no  reason  to  infer  that  any  interruption  to  the
         education of the elder child upon return to  Malawi  would  be  any
         more significant than that faced by any child forced to  move  from
         one country to another by virtue of the careers of  their  parents.
         Nor should the difficulties of a move from one  school  to  another
         become unduly exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for a  child
         in the UK to complete the entirety of their  education  within  one
         school.  The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new classmates
         and new teachers is an integral part of growing up.   In  too  many
         appeals the FtT is presented with arguments whose basic premise  is
         that to change a school is to submit a child to a cruel and  unduly
         harsh experience.  Indeed, as if to illustrate the point,  we  note
         the eldest child of this family has been required to move  schools,
         and move from one end of the UK to the other, as the result of  the
         decisions of her  parents.   The  evidence  does  not  suggest  she
         suffered any hardship or ill-effect from so doing."

20. In conclusion,  I  find  the  judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals of all four appellants, and no error of  law  is
    made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
