








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19206/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              Mr Joseph Marodza
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 23 December 1993.  His
    appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  8  April  2014
    refusing his application for permanent residence pursuant to Regulation
    20(1)  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)   Regulations   2006   ("the   2006
    Regulations") and human rights was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge in a decision promulgated on 24 February 2015.

 2. On 6 July  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal. She noted that the appellant was already  subject
    to a deportation order. The earlier appeal against the making  of  that
    order did not address his status as the dependant of  an  EEA  national
    during his childhood. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  aware
    that the appellant's  case  was  that  he  was  entitled  to  permanent
    residence having lived in the UK as the dependant of  an  EEA  national
    between 2003 and 2008, it  was  arguable  that  at  no  point  did  the
    determination show  whether  he  assessed  the  question  of  permanent
    residence and  the  higher  "serious"  level  of  threat  required  for
    exclusion of an individual with EEA permanent residence.

 3. At the  error  of  law  hearing,  Mr  Khubber  relied  on  his  written
    submissions dated 6 November 2015 and his grounds seeking permission to
    appeal.

 4. He noted that the chronology provided to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the application for  a  permanent  residence  card  asserted  that  the
    appellant had been in the UK "pursuant to his rights under EU law"  for
    a number of years prior to his  conviction  which  led  to  deportation
    action against him. He had been granted leave to remain under EU law by
    the Home Office for the period between 2 October 2003 and  13  November
    2008.

 5. Had the appellant established permanent residence  previously,  by  the
    time the appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  correct
    threshold for his right not to be removed by the deportation order  was
    the higher one, namely the second level, requiring  the  respondent  to
    establish "serious grounds of public policy" pursuant to Regulation  21
    (3) of the 2006 Regulations.

 6. The Judge however failed to address that important issue  and  appeared
    to have proceeded on the assumption that the general lower, first level
    test, applied in this case. However, there was no explanation as to why
    the Tribunal started from this position. There had been no explicit  or
    proper reference to the threshold under Regulation 21(3).  Accordingly,
    the question of the level of protection that he  was  entitled  to  was
    relevant to whether he should have been refused a  permanent  residence
    card.

 7. He submitted that the reality of this case, however, was that  although
    it was formally for a permanent  residence  card,  what  needed  to  be
    considered was whether the deportation order should have  been  revoked
    such that the appellant was entitled to a permanent residence  card  at
    the date of his application in February 2014 as the relevant  threshold
    justifying his removal pursuant to the extant  deportation  order,  had
    not been satisfied.

 8. He submitted that  the  criminal  history  of  the  appellant  and  his
    subsequent  conduct  did  not  show  that  the  higher  (second  level)
    threshold set out in LG and CC v SSHD  [2009]  UKAIT  00024,  had  been
    established. What was required was a carefully  structured  examination
    of the criteria which the First-tier Tribunal did not undertake.

 9. He also referred to  the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Sullivan  in  BR
    (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923 at [3] where he referred  to  the
    decision  in  MG  and  VC  [2006]  UKAIT  00053  which   stressed   the
    introduction of the word "serious" into the regulations.

10. Mr Khubber submitted that the second level threshold was not satisfied.
    In any event, even if the first level  threshold  was  applicable,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in concluding that  the  threshold  had
    been satisfied in this case.

11. There was also a related risk of compromising  rehabilitation  in  this
    case as the appellant would not be  being  removed  to  another  member
    state - MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520.

12. He also made submissions relating to alleged misdirections with  regard
    to Article 8, ECHR.

13. In his further written 'outline submissions' produced at  the  hearing,
    he submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's error in his approach to  a
    case where there are "dual  grounds  of  appeal",  namely  EU  law  and
    Article 8 ECHR is reinforced by the Upper Tribunal's emphasis in Badewa
    (SS117AD and EEA Regs)  [2015]  UKUT  329  of  the  the  importance  of
    appreciating the distinction between the two systems of protection.

14. He accordingly submitted that the decision  is  materially  flawed  and
    must be set aside and remade.  This was an appropriate  case  to  remit
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Wilcocks-Briscoe  accepted  that  there
    had been an error of law regarding the appropriate threshold which  had
    to be applied.

16. She nevertheless relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24  response  and
    contended that the appellant had several convictions including  one  of
    "knife point" robbery. That type of offence  is  enough  to  reach  the
    "serious  grounds"   threshold   in   any   event.   Accordingly,   the
    proportionality test within the Regulations is unlikely to result in  a
    different outcome in this case.

    Assessment

17. It is correctly accepted by the respondent that  the  second  level  of
    protection is applicable  in  the  appellant's  case.  However,  it  is
    contended that the error is not material, because when regard is had to
    the offences committed, the second level threshold was satisfied in his
    case.

18. It is however not clearly the case  that  the  second  level  threshold
    would inevitably be satisfied. In making the assessment  required,  the
    Tribunal would have to consider the  fact  that  the  appellant's  most
    recent conviction concerned a burglary resulting in a  sentence  of  12
    months in prison. Although serious, it was  not,  as  submitted  by  Mr
    Khubber, at the most serious level of offending.

19. In addition, the appellant has been at liberty and has not  re-offended
    for a period of 18 months. Accordingly,  the  Tribunal  would  have  to
    assess  whether  in  the  light  of  the  current  clean   record,   he
    nevertheless constitutes a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat as required by Regulation 21(5).

20. Moreover, the Tribunal would have to factor  into  the  assessment  the
    asserted potential risk  of  compromising  his  future  rehabilitation,
    despite previous failures in that respect, if the appellant were to  be
    removed to Zimbabwe and whether any comparable support that he  has  in
    the UK would be available on return to Zimbabwe: Batista v SSHD  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 896 at [27].

21. In any event, the appellant was entitled to expect that the Judge would
    direct himself appropriately and assess the appeal in  accordance  with
    the correct threshold. It is not obvious that even if he  had  directed
    himself appropriately, the Judge would inevitably have reached the same
    conclusion.

22. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there was a material error of
    law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is accordingly  set  aside
    and will have to be re-made.

23. Ms Wilcocks-Briscoe did  not  seek  to  argue  that  this  was  not  an
    appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

24. The appellant has not had the benefit of having his case  assessed  and
    decided on the basis of the applicable  removal  provisions  under  the
    2006 Regulations. Having regard to the  overriding  objective,  I  find
    that it would accordingly be in the interests of justice  and  fairness
    to remit the case.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set  aside.  The  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Birmingham) for a fresh decision to be made.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 22 November 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
