
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19321/2013
                                                               IA/19322/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 14th November 2014                  |On the 9th December 2014        |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                            Mr Mohammad Mohiuddin
                               Mr Abdur Rahman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss O Momoh, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mohammad Mohiuddin and Abdur Rahman against the
    decision of Tribunal Judge Bird promulgated on the 30th June 2014 when
    their appeals against the Secretary of State's refusal of their Tier 1
    (Entrepreneur) applications were dismissed.  The basis of the dismissal
    is that they had failed to provide relevant documents with the
    application and essentially that the date at which the documents should
    have been provided was the date on which the application was made.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was initially refused but
    then granted by Judge Kopieczek on the 8th October of this year and he
    noted that this may involve consideration of when an application is
    made, with reference to paragraph 34G of the Immigration Rules and the
    decisions of Khatel and others (s85A; effect of continuing application)
    [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) and Nasim & Ors (Raju: reasons not to follow?)
    [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC).

 3. The case which binds me is the case of Raju.  That is a Court of Appeal
    case decided on the 25th June 2013 with the citation [2013] EWCA Civ
    754, having quoted paragraph 34G, which for these purposes states as
    follows:

         "For the purposes of these rules, the date on which an application
         or claim (or a variation in accordance with paragraph 34E) is made
         is as follows:

         (i)  where the application form is sent by post, the date of
             posting."

 4. Relying on that paragraph, at paragraph 24 the Court of Appeal said
    this:

         "An application is made when paragraph 34G says it is made.  The
         Secretary of State at the date of her decision assesses the
         evidence which determines whether the applicant for leave to remain
         as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant has accumulated 75 points."

 5. There was a discussion of how that works but they conclude as follows:

         "AQ does not assist these Respondents.  It is not authority for the
         proposition on which the Upper Tribunal relied, that the
         applications were 'made' throughout the period starting with the
         date of their submission and finishing with the date of the
         decisions."

 6. By making that decision the Court of Appeal have overruled as well the
    decision in Khatel, another Upper Tribunal decision with the same panel
    as in Raju, an earlier decision in 2013 that applications were to be
    treated as continuing until such time as they were decided.  I am
    satisfied that the law is now clear.  The application was made when it
    was submitted, the evidence that was required had to be submitted with
    the application and it is accepted that the evidence submitted in the
    form of the contract relied upon did not contain the specified
    information.  On that basis the decision of Judge Bird was correct and
    there is no error of law.

 7. Reliance has been placed by Miss Momoh on paragraph 245AA of the
    Immigration Rules relating to evidential flexibility.  That does not
    assist the Appellants either.  The Secretary of State is not obliged to
    follow the evidence that has been submitted and to point out errors
    that are made.  The rule permits a Secretary of State or an Immigration
    Officer to do so.  The word used is "may".  It is permissive, it is not
    mandatory, and a failure to do so is not an error of law.

 8. Accordingly I am satisfied that the determination of Judge Bird is
    entirely correct.  There is no error of law and the Appellants' appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes






