
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19129/2014
                                                               IA/19128/2014
                                                             & IA/19204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RASHID ALI
                                 SADIA AHMED
                               MUDASIR MEHMOOD
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S McWilliams, of Morton Fraser, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Martins, promulgated on 13  February  2015,  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals against refusal of applications as tier 1 entrepreneur migrants
    (first and third appellants) and as a dependant (second appellant).

 3. The first ground of appeal is that the judge erred by taking account of
    evidence which had not been before the respondent, contrary to  section
    85A of the 2002 Act.  In a response, the appellants accept  that  there
    was such an error, but say that it was not material.

 4. The second ground of appeal is inadequacy of reasoning, through failure
    to deal with the issues raised by the respondent.  In  their  response,
    the appellants say that adequate reasons appear at paragraphs 60 and 61
    of the determination.

 5. Mr Mullen accepted that the second ground was not a strong one, as  the
    judge had set out clearly the oral evidence given by the appellants and
    said why she found them to be reliable witnesses.  In my view that  was
    a correct concession.

 6. Mr Mullen argued that paragraph 62 made it plain that the decision took
    into account evidence which ought not to have been considered, and  the
    final conclusion at paragraph 63 was  expressly  reached  "on  all  the
    evidence".  He said that the evidence wrongly admitted was set  out  in
    some detail earlier in the determination, so the  error  could  not  be
    disentangled from the rest, and it could not  be  said  that  the  same
    outcome would have been reached.

 7. Mr McWilliams submitted that although the concluding  paragraphs  60-62
    did mention the documents wrongly admitted, and the findings  did  bear
    to be reached "on all the evidence",  the  specific  points  which  the
    judge recorded were  that  she  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  and
    observing  the  appellants  give   evidence;   they   did   so   in   a
    straightforward, helpful and impressive manner; they were confident and
    gave clear explanations of what their business involved; and so on.  It
    was not disputed that the judge was entitled to take that oral evidence
    into account.  In contrast, she said nothing specific  about  what  she
    derived from the additional documents.    The oral evidence was plainly
    the critical factor in discharging the burden  of  proof.   The  result
    would have been the same.

 8. I indicated that I preferred the submissions for  the  respondent,  for
    the reasons given.  The error was not material.

 9. I record one point, although it does  not  affect  the  outcome.   Just
    prior to the hearing I referred to section  85A  and  noticed  that  it
    appears to have been repealed on 20 October 2014, prior to the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  There are saving provisions  but  they  do
    not apparently bear on this case.  Neither party had any submission  to
    make  on  the  significance  of  this  point.   It  appears  that   any
    restrictions on the evidence for the judge to consider were not  to  be
    derived from section 85A.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
