
[pic]
IAC-MD-BFD-V1

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number: IA/19578/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd October 2014                         |On 5th November 2014          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                           mr ahmed gul haleemzai
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Marshall
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is an Afghan citizen whose date of birth is disputed  but
    appears to be either 1989  or  1995.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Gordon) against a decision of the Respondent dated 17th
    April 2014 refusing him leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
    reference to paragraph 298(i) and (vi) and 322(ii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It was said he had made false representations to obtain leave to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom in a previous application made in
    2008. The false representations related to his claimed to date of birth
    and his fingerprints.

 2. Judge Gordon dismissed the appellant's appeal,  although  by  the  same
    determination, she allowed  the  related  appeals  of  the  Appellant's
    mother and brother. Following the dismissal of his appeal the Appellant
    now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. I find that the determination of the FtT should be set aside.  I  reach
    that conclusion for the following reasons.

 4.  The  basis  of  the  claim  that  the   Appellant   had   made   false
    representations, centred around an application made in 2008 wherein the
    Respondent claimed that the Appellant had applied for entry  clearance.
    It was asserted by the  Respondent  that  there  was  fingerprints  and
    photographic  evidence  confirming  this  application   made   by   the
    Appellant.  Therefore, it was claimed false  representations  had  been
    made in the present application because the 2008 application  showed  a
    different date of birth for the Appellant.

 5. At the appeal  hearing  before  Judge  Gordon,  there  was  produced  a
    determination  by  UTJ  Reeds.  This  dealt  with  an  entry  clearance
    application by the Appellant in 2010 when the Appellant had applied for
    entry as the dependent of his father. Judge Reeds  made  a  finding  in
    that determination that the Appellant's date of birth was 1995. Nowhere
    in the proceedings before UTJ Reeds had any mention been  made  of  the
    Appellant having made an  application  (or  false  representations)  in
    2008. The Appellant therefore specifically raised  this  point  in  the
    hearing  before  Judge  Gordon.  Suffice  to  say  the  Appellant   has
    throughout denied that he ever made any application for entry clearance
    in 2008 and disputes the photographic and fingerprint evidence.

 6. It seems there was no evidence in the documents served on the  Tribunal
    to support the Respondent's claim that the biometrics obtained  in  the
    2008 "false application" match the biometrics obtained  in  respect  of
    the Appellant in the 2010 other than a bare assertion. It was incumbent
    on the Judge therefore to engage with this point and give full  reasons
    for reaching the conclusion which  she  did  in  paragraph  11  of  her
    determination which is set out here.

         "I consider that the respondent has satisfactorily  evidenced  that
         the third appellant made a false representation  in  2008  when  he
         applied for a student visa to the UK, in that he falsely stated his
         date of birth as being in 1989 and he failed to disclose  his  full
         name. I find that he failed to disclose this  relevant  information
         and the fact of the refusal in his current application and  I  find
         that he repeated his false statements at the hearing by  continuing
         to deny  knowledge  of  the  2008  application.  I  find  that  the
         immigration rules paragraph 322 is discharged".

 7. As I said earlier the Appellant's case was linked to that of his mother
    and brother. The Judge found for the other two Appellants but failed to
    recognise that the grounds of appeal included a claim under  Article  8
    ECHR. In the circumstances of finding in favour of the  related  family
    members, it was incumbent upon the Judge to deal  with  the  Article  8
    claim in the light of her dismissal of  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    failure to give full reasons and the failure to  deal  with  Article  8
    ECHR, renders the determination legally unsustainable.

 8. So far as disposal is concerned both representatives agreed  that  none
    of the findings made by Judge Gordon can stand. The matter needs to  be
    heard afresh with new findings of fact  made.  The  appropriate  course
    therefore is for this matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Gordon), for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the FtT is set aside and the matter is remitted to
    the FtT (not Judge Gordon) for the decision to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Judge C Roberts

Judge of the Upper Tribunal             22nd October 2014


