
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/19658/2013
                                                               IA/19661/2013
                                                               IA/19666/2013
                                                               IA/19673/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        Ume Kalsoom (first appellant)
                    Mubashar Khurshid (second appellant)
                      Fatima Mubashar (third appellant)
                       Murraad Arif (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Ahmed, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is  the
    wife of the second appellant and the third and  fourth  appellants  are
    their children.  I shall hereafter refer to the  "first  appellant"  as
    "the appellant" as it is her application for leave to remain as a  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant which is the  subject  of  this  appeal.   The
    other appellants are her dependants.

 2. The appellant's application was refused by the Secretary of State in  a
    decision which is dated 7 May 2013.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Napthine) which, in a determination promulgated  on  17
    March 2014, dismissed the appeals.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The first hearing of this appeal at Field House took place on  24  June
    2014 before His Honour Judge Haddon-Cave and Upper Tribunal Judge Clive
    Lane.  On that occasion, the hearing was adjourned.  It was then listed
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane alone on 30 April 2015.  At  the
    first hearing, Mr Naseem of Counsel appeared for  the  appellants.   At
    the hearing on 30 April 2015, the appellants were represented by  Mr  S
    Ahmed of Counsel.  Miss  A  Brocklesby-Weller,  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent on the second occasion.



 4. Following the hearing on 30 April 2015, I invited the parties to submit
    further submissions in  writing  regarding  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance for entrepreneur migrant applicants.  I did  not  receive  any
    submissions from the appellants and Miss Brocklesby-Weller informed  me
    by email that she did not, in  the  circumstances,  seek  to  make  any
    further representations.  I have therefore determined the appeal.

 5. The appellant made an application and supported  this  with  documents.
    She was subsequently invited to  an  interview  on  18  April  2013  at
    Folkestone.  Following that interview, the respondent issued a  refusal
    having not been satisfied that, on the balance  of  probabilities,  the
    appellant was genuinely intending and able  to  establish  takeover  or
    become a director of one or more businesses within the next six months.
     The reasons for refusal  are  lengthy.  However,  the  appellant  only
    scored the required 10 points for  Maintenance  and  English  Language.
    She was otherwise not awarded any points.

 6. The grounds of appeal assert, in essence, that Judge Napthine failed to
    have proper regard to oral and documentary evidence put before  him  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  It is asserted, inter alia, that  the
    judge failed to understand that funds had already been invested in  the
    business prior to the application  but  he  wrongly  found  that  funds
    should have been kept in a specific  account  (which  is  not  required
    under the Rules).  It is asserted that at [26],  the  judge  failed  to
    understand and have regard  to  bank  statements  for  2012  which  had
    confirmed the source of the funds which had been deposited.

 7. Having heard the submissions of Mr Ahmed, it seems to  me  likely  that
    Judge Napthine (in a determination which is not entirely clear  in  all
    its parts) may have misunderstood some of the evidence put  before  him
    by the appellant regarding the financing of her business.  I also agree
    with the appellant that the judge at [24] erred in law by finding  that
    "the claimed sale price for a five year old 5 Series BMW  with  a  high
    mileage" was not credible.  It is entirely unclear to me how the  judge
    may have  come  to  that  conclusion  other  than  by  taking  judicial
    knowledge (and not informing the parties that he was so doing)  of  the
    likely resale value of such a BMW motorcar.

 8. The problem for the appellant, however, is that  I  have  a  discretion
    whether or not to set aside a  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   It  is
    unlikely that I shall exercise that discretion in the case of an appeal
    which was bound to fail in any event, albeit not for the reasons  given
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I have decided not  to  exercise  my
    discretion in this instance for the following reasons.

 9. The appellant was required  to  satisfy  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    245DD(l) of the Immigration Rules:

         "245DD.  Requirements for leave to remain

                  To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
                  Migrant under  this  rule,  an  applicant  must  meet  the
                  requirements listed below.  If the applicant  meets  these
                  requirements, leave to remain will  be  granted.   If  the
                  applicant  does   not   meet   these   requirements,   the
                  application will be refused.

                  (l)  In making the assessment in  (k),  the  Secretary  of
                      State will assess the balance of probabilities.   The
                      Secretary  of  State  may  take  into   account   the
                      following factors:

                      (i)  the evidence the applicant has submitted;

                      (ii) the viability and credibility of the  source  of
                           the money referred to in Table 5 of Appendix A;

                      (iii)    the credibility of the financial accounts of
                           the business or businesses;

                      (iv) the  credibility  of  the  applicant's  business
                           activity in the UK, including when he  had  leave
                           as   a   Tier   1   (Entrepreneur)   Migrant,   a
                           Businessperson or an Innovator;

                      (v)  the credibility of the job  creation  for  which
                           the applicant is claiming points in  Table  5  of
                           Appendix A;

                      (vii)    if  the  nature  of  the  business  requires
                           mandatory  accreditation,   registration   and/or
                           insurance,    whether     that     accreditation,
                           registration and/or insurance has been  obtained;
                           and

                      (viii)   any other relevant information.

10. As regards the "viability and credibility of [the appellant's] business
    plans and  market  research  into  her  chosen  business  sector",  the
    respondent noted:

         'Effective market research would involve assessing the risk of your
         business start up highlighting competitors and developing ideas for
         ways to differentiate yourself in the market, among other  factors,
         and this information would be backed up by statistical analysis.  I
         have seen no evidence of in  depth  research  into  your  potential
         market and your explanation leads me to doubt  the  credibility  of
         your business.'

11. The transcript of the interview is in the papers before  the  Tribunal.
    The appellant had indicated at [17] that her market research  had  been
    evidenced in her business plan but at [57] the appellant indicated that
    her  business  plan  had  been  "provided  with  the  application"  but
    immediately went on to say, "no I haven't provided this at  all".   The
    refusal letter noted that "you claim to have submitted a business  plan
    in your application however this was not  received  initially  and  you
    have not supplied a business plan at any point since".  I can  find  no
    evidence before either Tribunal which would indicate that the appellant
    had prepared a thorough business plan or,  more  particularly,  carried
    out any effective  market  research.   The  appellant  had  answered  a
    question about her market research  by  stating,  "the  customers  want
    something unique gift possession and something with value"  (sic).   It
    is apparent that the appellant had not carried out any  or  any  market
    research of the kind detailed in the refusal letter.  As we have  seen,
    a failure  to  supply  a  credible  and  viable  business  plan  and/or
    particulars of market research may constitute a legitimate  reason  for
    the respondent to doubt the genuineness of the application to become an
    entrepreneur under the terms of paragraph 245DD.

12. In the refusal letter it is also noted that:

         'You studied in the UK between  2006  and  2010  attending  private
         colleges in London and the surrounding area.  You were  awarded  an
         Advanced and Postgraduate Diploma in  Educational  Management  from
         West London College of Business and  Management  Sciences,  however
         these qualifications are not relevant to the job  title  sales  and
         marketing director which you have stated on your application form.'

13. Once again, "previous educational  and  business  experience  (or  lack
    thereof)" may be relevant in an assessment  of  genuineness  under  the
    Rules.  The appellant has provided no evidence to show  that,  contrary
    to what is said in the refusal letter, her  educational  qualifications
    and experience are likely to equip her to work effectively as  a  sales
    and marketing director of her business.

14. The various matters detailed at  paragraph  245DD(l)(i)-(vii)  are  not
    simply to be taken into account in a general way or  assessed  on  some
    cumulative basis.  The failure of an applicant to show that he  or  she
    has carried out market research or assessed the likely viability  of  a
    business  and  a  deficiency  in  relevant  educational   or   business
    experience may be sufficient to justify a refusal on  the  basis  of  a
    lack of genuineness.  In this appeal, whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has concentrated on financial matters (and has possibly erred  in
    his  assessment  of  those  matters),  there  are   elements   of   the
    respondent's refusal to which the appellant has been able to provide no
    satisfactory response at all.  I find that, even if I were to set aside
    the First-tier Tribunal determination and to remake the decision in the
    Upper Tribunal I would be bound, for the reasons I have given above, to
    dismiss  the  appeal  against  the  immigration  decision.   For  those
    reasons, I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

