
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 14 April 2015                     |On 28 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                            Mrs VICTORIA OLATUNDE
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Cooke of  Counsel  instructed  by  Chris  &  Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. She is married to Mr Moses Cole,
    a national of Sierra Leone who came to the UK as an  asylum  seeker  in
    2002 and has been living in the  UK  lawfully  since.  The  appellant's
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    her family and private life was refused  by  the  respondent  and  that
    decision on appeal was upheld by Judge Naphtine, a Judge of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal for reasons given in the determination promulgated  on  4
    December 2014.

 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Judge Pooler, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal. In giving reasons for
    the decision to grant permission to appeal, Judge Pooler took the  view
    that in the light of some of the positive findings made relating to the
    genuine and subsisting relationship between her and her husband who  is
    present and settled in  the  UK,  the  grounds  of  appeal  upon  which
    permission to appeal was being sought raised arguable issues of law  on
    findings relating to relocation and proportionality.

 3. After hearing arguments from Counsel and Mr Nath, I  decided  that  the
    decision of Judge Napthine, is in material error  of  law  for  reasons
    identified in the grounds of the application and also the  contents  of
    paragraph 59 of the decision where the Judge said that the couple could
    re-locate to Sierra Leone, not realising that the sponsor is a  refugee
    from Sierra Leone. The decision of Judge Napthine  is  accordingly  set
    aside.

 4. For administrative reasons  and  at  the  request  of  the  parties,  I
    directed that the appeal be re-heard at Hatton Cross by a  Judge  other
    than Judge Napthine and that in the re-hearing all issues  will  be  at
    large.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Date:     22 May 2015




Anonymity Direction:

On the facts of this case anonymity direction is neither necessary nor
appropriate.

The direction made by Judge Napthine on fees is retained.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Date:     22 May 2015

