
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/19300/2014
                                                               ia/19305/2014
                                                               ia/19308/2014
                                                               ia/19314/2014
                                                               IA/19318/2014
                                                               IA/19322/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                            MR A K M ARIFUL ISLAM
                          MRS NUSRAT SULTANA TANIA
                                     SIT
                                     GTI
                           MRS UMMEA KULSUM AKTER
                           MR TWOHIDUL GOLAM ISLAM
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:   Mr T Shah instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing their appeal against the respondent's  refusal
    to grant them leave to remain as Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  and
    dependants pursuant to paragraphs 245DD, 319C  and  319H  of  HC395  as
    amended.  It is right to note that no application for leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules or within the Rules on Article  8  grounds  has  been
    made by these parties.

 2. The appellants are two married couples and their minor children.    All
    of the adult and child appellants are citizens of Bangladesh  and  none
    of the children is a British citizen.

 3. The third appellant, the son of the first and second appellant was born
    in the United Kingdom on 27 June  2010  and  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 5 years.  He will just have begun to go to school.

 4. The fourth appellant, the son of the sixth and  fifth  appellants,  was
    born in 2005 and came to the United Kingdom as a young child  in  2007.
    He is now 10 years old, almost 11 and has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for 8 years.  He will have been in education for about 5 years.   There
    is a further child born to the fifth and sixth appellants  on  18  July
    2012 who is not an appellant in these proceedings  and  in  respect  of
    whom no application at all has been made.  That  child  also  has  only
    Bangladeshi citizenship.

 5. The grounds of appeal contain no challenge to the decision in  relation
    to the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) applications.   They  rely  on  Article  8
    family and private life and the best interests  of  the  children.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered Section 55 of the  2009  Act  (see
    [52]-[57]) as follows:

         "52. I also bear  in  mind  my  duty  under  Section  117B  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which requires me
             to  accord  weight  to  the  respondent's   public   duty   of
             maintaining an effective system of immigration control.  I  am
             also cognisant of Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009.

         53.  Applying Lord Bingham's five step test laid down in  Razgar  I
             accept  that  the  appellants  have  established  family  life
             together.  However, both families will be removed together  so
             I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent's  decisions  do   not
             represent an interference  with  their  family  life  or  that
             Article 8 is engaged.

         54.  The main issue relates to private life.  Mr Franco  relied  on
             an undated letter from Barts Health Trust  (C12)  relating  to
             the sixth appellant's child.  I note that she is not  a  party
             to these appeals.  As Ms Deshraj rightly submitted, the letter
             does not provide any basis upon which I could conclude that it
             would be unduly harsh for her  to  accompany  her  parents  on
             return to Bangladesh.  It simply  states  that  she  has  been
             under the consultant's care since her birth on  18  July  2012
             and has four daily medications  in  addition  to  an  infusion
             every eight  weeks.  I  am  not  satisfied  on  a  balance  of
             probabilities that the respondent's decisions  breach  Section
             55.

         55.  I accept that each of the appellants has established a  degree
             of  private  life  in  the  UK  over  their  relatively   long
             residence.   Mr Franco submitted  that  the  first  and  sixth
             appellants had set up  a  flourishing  business  but  for  the
             reasons given above, I do not find their account credible.  If
             they are able  to  provide  cogent  evidence  to  counter  the
             respondent's concerns and to show the business is  succeeding,
             they could submit a new application.   On  the  basis  of  the
             evidence before me I do not  consider  that  the  respondent's
             decisions  represent  a  significant  interference  with   the
             appellants' right to respect for their private life.

         56.  I have concluded  that  the  respondent's  decisions  were  in
             accordance with the law.

         57.  If there were any interference  with  Article  8  it  must  be
             balanced  against  the  important  public   duty,   which   is
             reinforced  by  Section   117B,   of   maintaining   effective
             immigration control.   I  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the
             appellants were always aware that their leave  to  remain  was
             only temporary and would be extended only  if  they  submitted
             valid applications for further leave."

 6. That was the basis on which the judge dealt with Article 8, Section  55
    and considerations outside the Rules generally.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his decision at paragraph 50  in
    relation to the standard of proof, applying the lower standard of proof
    applicable to protection cases,  rather  than  the  civil  standard  of
    balance of probabilities, which is the correct standard of  proof  when
    dealing with immigration and  Article  8  cases.   Such  error  is  not
    material: if the decision appellants' case were to  be  remade  to  the
    higher standard, a case which failed at the  lower  standard  would  be
    certain to fail at any higher standard.

 8. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the Judge dealt with these matters robustly.
     I consider that he was entitled to do so:  his record  of  proceedings
    records no submissions made at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  on  the
    appellants' behalf regarding Article 8 or paragraph 276ADE.

 9. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr  Shah  accepted  on  the  appellants'
    behalf that in relation to Article 8 ECHR, both within and outwith  the
    Immigration Rules, and section 55 of the 2009 Act, very little evidence
    had been placed before the First-tier Tribunal, and that such  evidence
    was not sufficient for the appellants to succeed on family and  private
    life or the best interests of  the  children.  The  appellants  had  an
    opportunity to file further evidence pursuant to the  directions  which
    accompanied the Upper Tribunal notice of hearing on 29  November  2015,
    but failed to do so.  No application has been made to adduce additional
    evidence under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  The position remains that the evidence of the  family  and
    private life of  these  families,  and  the  best  interests  of  their
    children, is the  same  as  that  which  Mr  Shah  for  the  appellants
    acknowledged was inadequate before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt  properly  with
    the limited evidence before him and that  the  conclusions  he  reached
    thereon were open to him.

11. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 12 January 2016
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
