
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19666/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 12 January 2017                  |On 6 February 2017                      |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                            Teddy Musonda Machina
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zambia, born on 26 November 1971.  On  11
    November 2003 he arrived with entry clearance as a student which  leave
    was subsequently extended so as to expire on 31 March 2009.  He made  a
    further application in the same capacity in time which on 20 July  2009
    was refused with no right of appeal.

 2. On 29 January 2010 the Appellant applied for leave as a Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) migrant which on 10 March 2010 was refused with no right of
    appeal.  On 8 November 2014 he made another application for indefinite
    leave on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. On 8 May 2015 the Respondent refused the Appellant indefinite leave  on
    the basis of long residence.  She set out his immigration  history  and
    noted the periods when the Appellant did not have leave  to  remain  as
    indicated from the  immigration  history  already  recited.   She  then
    considered his application under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and concluded that he did not meet  any  of  the  time  sensitive
    requirements  of  any  of  the  sub-paragraphs.   She  considered  sub-
    paragraph (vi) and whether there were very significant obstacles to his
    integration into Zambia.  She concluded there were  not.   She  briefly
    considered whether the Appellant had any  material  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  and
    decided that the degree of disruption to his private life on removal to
    Zambia would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of the  maintenance
    of proper immigration control.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. On 22 May the Appellant through his then solicitors  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are entirely  generic  and
    formulaic, relying on Article 8.

 5. By a decision promulgated on 3 August  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Turquet dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds outside the Rules.  On 17 August 2016
    the Appellant through his then solicitors sought permission to  appeal.
    Essentially the  grounds  challenge  the  Judge's  application  of  the
    learning in Basnet (validity of application - respondent) [2012]  UKUT
    00113 (IAC) and allege there was a historical  injustice  which  should
    have been taken into account by the Judge when she considered his claim
    under Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   The  grounds  also  assert  that
    contrary to the Judge's findings the  Appellant  had  not  shown  utter
    disregard for the Immigration Rules.  The final ground takes issue with
    the Judge's assessment of the factors mentioned in Section 117B of  the
    2002 Act.

 6. On 9 December 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  granted
    permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant attended the hearing with his partner and  his  aunt.   I
    explained to him the purpose of the hearing and  the  procedure  to  be
    adopted.  I inquired whether the parties had had an opportunity to  see
    if the issues could be narrowed.  They confirmed to me they had  had  a
    discussion and agreed that the Basnet point about payment of  fees  was
    historic  and  went  only   and   directly   to   the   assessment   of
    proportionality.  The  Respondent  would  not  oppose  the  Appellant's
    request to amend the grounds to challenge the finding of the  Judge  at
    paragraph 38 of her decision that the  Respondent's  decision  did  not
    engage the State's obligations under Article 8.  It was further  agreed
    that the issue of the failure to pay fees on certain  applications  and
    the subsequent learning in Basnet was relevant to an assessment of  the
    proportionality of the decision, but in any event it could not be  used
    to rectify the gaps in the Appellant's lawful residence  which  damaged
    his claim under the long residence provisions of the Immigration Rules.
     It was further agreed the appeal should proceed on the basis that  the
    Appellant had not shown utter disregard for the  Immigration  Rules  as
    mentioned by the Judge.

 8. It was also accepted the Appellant had given evidence before the  Judge
    of his involvement with the community and that  there  was  substantial
    documentary evidence to support this in the  Appellant's  bundle  which
    was before the Judge but which she had not addressed in paragraph 40 of
    her decision.

Submissions for the Appellant

 9. Mr Bonavero for the Appellant submitted that these matters amounted  to
    material errors of law. Further, the Judge had not addressed the Basnet
    point.  The decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

10. Mr Whitwell took the view that the Appellant had  effectively  conceded
    the long residence claim under the Immigration Rules although what  the
    Appellant had termed "an historical injustice" might be relevant to the
    assessment of the proportionality of the decision under Article 8.  The
    Appellant's leave had expired in March 2009  and  subsequently  he  had
    never had any status.

11. At paragraph 29 of her decision the Judge  had  dealt  fully  with  the
    issue with the problems the Appellant claimed to have experienced  with
    regard to payment of fees.  He referred to the  letter  of  3  November
    2009 from the Appellant's bank at page 165 of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    which confirmed that no payments or attempts to obtain payment had been
    made by the Respondent between 23 March  and  3  April  2009  from  the
    Appellant's account ***5892.

12. The Appellant had not pursued the issue promptly, raising it only  when
    the Respondent refused a later application.  In view of the passage  of
    time and the consequent deletion and disruption of records,  a  nuanced
    approach would be needed in  any  consideration  of  the  Basnet  issue
    because the Respondent could no  longer  rebut  an  approach  based  on
    Basnet principles.

13. The findings made by Judge Lobo nevertheless had to  be  considered  as
    the starting point following Devaseelan* [2002] UKAIT 00702.

14. The Appellant had had no leave since 2009 and the Judge had taken  this
    into account at paragraph 40-42 of her decision and that whatever leave
    he may have had was precarious.  If the  expression  "utter  disregard"
    was considered too strong to pejorative a description, it certainly did
    not amount to a material error of law.

15. The relevance of the  Appellant's  work  in  the  community  was  fully
    explained at paragraphs 38-41 of the judgment in R (Oludoyi and Others)
    v SSHD IJR  [2014]  UKUT  00539  (IAC)  applying  the  judgment  in  UE
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ.975.  Even if less weight was given to
    the finding about the Appellant's lack of regard  for  the  Immigration
    Rules than the Judge gave and more weight was given to the work he  had
    done for the benefit of the community the  decision  would  remain  the
    same.

16. The Appellant on his own admission was not living with his partner  and
    so the claim would have to fail under Section EX of Appendix FM even if
    the other requirements of the Immigration  Rules  had  been  met.   The
    Judge had properly and adequately dealt with the claim under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Rules and there were no compelling reasons to consider
    the claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The  decision
    should stand.

Response for the Appellant

17. Mr Bonavero responded that it had not been disputed that the  Appellant
    had been disadvantaged in the  light  of  the  later  determination  in
    Basnet and the Judge had  dealt  with  this  at  paragraph  29  of  her
    decision.  The evidence was that the Home Office had not  attempted  to
    obtain payment.

18. The use of the expression "utter disregard for the  Immigration  Rules"
    was not an issue of weight but was a finding of  fact,  inaccurate  its
    entirety.  The Judge had not considered the Appellant's evidence  about
    payment of  fees  to  the  Respondent  and  his  integration  into  and
    involvement with the community. These were material omissions  and  not
    just an issue of whether the Judge had given appropriate weight to  it.
    The decision could not stand and should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

19. The passage of time has  placed  the  parties  and  in  particular  the
    Respondent in a position where the relevant documentation  which  would
    be needed as evidence to determine the issue is  no  longer  available.
    In addition, the decision in Basnet was promulgated on 29 February 2012
    sometime after the fee payments by the Appellant should have been  made
    or taken.  Effectively,  as  was  submitted  for  the  Respondent,  the
    Appellant had accepted this point by  adopting  and  using  the  phrase
    "historical injustice" to describe the position in which he was placed.
     I find these matters,  so  far  as  they  may  be  evidenced  by  what
    documentation there is and oral testimony, can  and  should  have  been
    taken into account in any assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    Respondent's decision  to  the  need  to  maintain  proper  immigration
    control under the law relating to Article 8 of the European Convention.



20. Until the Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  last  application  for
    further leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) migrant under  the  Points-
    Based System on 10 March  2010,  the  Appellant's  immigration  history
    could not be described as showing "utter disregard for the  Immigration
    Rules".  A cursory look at his immigration history will show this.   He
    exercised his rights of appeal against that refusal  and  I  note  that
    those rights were not exhausted until October  2014.   The  application
    leading to this appeal was made on 8 November 2014.

21. The Judge drew an adverse inference from the fact that the  Appellant's
    partner did not attend the  hearing  and  her  failure  to  supply  any
    evidence why she was unable to obtain time off from work. However,  the
    Judge had a statement before her, albeit not a lengthy or detailed one,
    from the partner. She gave no express reason to support her  conclusion
    that decision would not sufficiently  interfere  with  the  Appellant's
    private and family life so as to engage the State's  obligations  under
    Article 8: see paragraph 38 of her decision.

22. The facts that the Appellant, when permitted to  work,  may  have  been
    financially self-sufficient and that  he  spoke  English  were  factors
    required to be taken into account in any assessment  of  an  Article  8
    claim under Part VA of  the  2002  Act  may  not  have  been  expressly
    considered by the  Judge.  However,  these  matters  are  not  so  much
    positive factors in favour of the Appellant but an absence of  negative
    factors: see paragraph 18 of the decision in AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT
    0260.

23. The grounds for appeal assert the Judge failed to take into account the
    Appellant's work in the community.  The Judge did not mention this  and
    although there  was  a  considerable  amount  of  documentary  evidence
    relating to this in the Appellant's bundle under the misleading heading
    in the index of "Support letters", the Appellant  failed  to  make  any
    mention of it in his first statement of 18 April 2016 but did refer  to
    it at paragraph 5 of his second statement of 7 July 2016.  There is  no
    record of any submissions on this aspect  of  the  Appellant's  private
    life made to the Judge.  In these circumstances it would not appear the
    Appellant was requiring the Judge to give substantial  weight  to  such
    activities.

24. Given the background to the fees issue  in  this  case  and  the  later
    jurisprudence in Basnet, the Judge's treatment of the previous decision
    by Mr Adjudicator  Lobo  at  paragraphs  32  and  33  of  her  decision
    discloses an error of law in that there had been a material development
    since then, namely the learning in Basnet.  That determination was  the
    starting point and its conclusion needed to be considered in the  light
    of Basnet.  This  coupled  with  the  description  of  the  Appellant's
    immigration history as showing that he had had an "utter disregard  for
    the Immigration Rules" which was  inappropriate,  particularly  in  the
    light of what I have said earlier, together with the Judge's  error  in
    failing to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  interference
    which would be caused by the decision to the Appellant's  private  life
    was not sufficiently serious to engage the state's  obligations  amount
    to a material error of law.

25. These errors are sufficiently material to infect the  Judge's  findings
    of fact which in turn feed into  the  proportionality  assessment.  The
    decision cannot  stand  and  a  fresh  fact-finding  exercise  will  be
    necessary to enable a fair and just proportionality assessment  of  the
    Respondent's decision to be made.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand and the case is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing afresh  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 10 February 2010 (as amended).

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    fresh.
    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
03. ii. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


