

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 May 2015                       |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMED AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mannan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He has appealed against
         a decision of the SSHD dated 11 April 2014 to remove him  from  the
         UK.

      2. The appellant appealed against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  In a decision dated  30  October  2014  Judge  J  S  Law
         dismissed his appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article  8  of
         the ECHR.

      3. The appellant appeals with permission  from  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Warr.  In granting permission, Judge  Warr  made  reference  to  an
         English   language   certificate    and    uncertainty    regarding
         jurisdiction.

      4. In refusing permission to  appeal  initially,  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge J M Holmes observed that it  is  'beyond  dispute'  that  the
         appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules.  He could not do  so
         because he  simply  did  not  meet  the  requirement  to  have  the
         requisite English language certificate.

      5. Mr Mannan, who appeared  before  me  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
         confirmed that Judge Holmes is correct.   Both  Mr  Mannan  and  Mr
         McVeety agreed that there are no concerns about jurisdiction as  an
         appeal has  been  submitted  against  an  immigration  decision  to
         remove.  Both representatives also confirmed that the only issue in
         dispute relates to Article 8.

      6. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the Judge's reasoning  for  dismissing
         the appeal under Article 8 is insufficient.  He was correct  to  do
         so.  Judge Law has said that the decision  'cannot  stand'  outside
         the Rules under Article 8 and referred to two cases (without giving
         any  citations)  as  not  being  supportive  of   the   appellant's
         application [21].  The Judge has failed to offer any  reasoning  as
         to why the Article 8 appeal is unsuccessful.  In the  circumstances
         Mr McVeety conceded that the  appropriate  course  was  to  find  a
         material error of law  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      7. I agree that this is the most fair and proportionate way  in  which
         to deal with this case having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
         President's Practice Statements and given the nature and extent  of
         the factual findings already made  and  required  in  remaking  the
         decision.

Decision

      8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law in
         relation to Article 8 only.  I set aside that part of the  decision
         only.

      9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision to
         be re-made on Article 8 of the ECHR.

Directions

1.    Article 8 only shall be considered on the first available date  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  TE: 2 hrs.

2.    Before Friday 10 July 2015 the  appellant  shall  file  and  serve  an
    indexed and paginated bundle of all relevant documents relied upon.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 15 May 2015
