
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19680/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 September 2015                  |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O O
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jahi, Counsel, instructed by Nathan Aaron
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The present appeal is brought by the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department against the decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Behan) dated 17.3.15 allowing OO's appeal,  on  human  rights  grounds,
    against the  Respondent's  decision  of  10.14.14  to  administratively
    remove him to Nigeria. In this decision, I shall refer to  the  parties
    as they were identified before the First tier, that is that OO  is  the
    Appellant, and the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    Respondent.

2     The Appellant had made an application for leave to  remain  on  family
    life grounds, being in a  relationship  with  TO  (n�e  A),  a  British
    national, and being married to her since 15.7.11.  In  his  application
    for leave to remain, he had also argued that his removal  would  amount
    to a breach of his rights under Article 3  ECHR  on  the  grounds  that
    there would be inadequate treatment available for him  in  Nigeria  for
    his HIV infection and kidney disease.

3     Findings made by the Judge include the following:

    (i)    although the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  entered  the  United
           Kingdom in 2002, the Appellant was lying about the circumstances
           of his arrival, and the earliest that the  Judge  was  satisfied
           the Appellant was present in  the  UK  was  in  2005  (based  on
           medical records) [30] and [46];

    (ii)   the Appellant has several serious medical conditions [32];

    (iii)  the Respondent accepted that the  Appellant  and  TO  are  in  a
           genuine and subsisting relationship [33],

    (iv)   their relationship was started at a time when the Appellant  was
           in the UK illegally [35];

    (v)    the evidence of the Appellant and TO was not entirely  frank  in
           all matters and they both exaggerated the  claimed  position  of
           having no relatives in Nigeria to help them; the Appellant would
           be able to stay with his sister or his mother-in-law temporarily
           whilst he found other accommodation [35];

    (vi)   the Appellant did not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  leave  to
           remain under paragraph 276ADE (private life) [37];

    (vii)  under Appendix FM, there  were  a  number  of  reasons  why  the
           Appellant would need  to  satisfy  the  requirement  of  Section
           Ex1(b) to demonstrate that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
           to family life with his partner continuing outside the  UK:  the
           Appellant was an  overstayer  (and  thereby  did  not  meet  the
           immigration  status   requirement   E-LTRP.2.2(c))   [13];   the
           Appellant had not provided evidence as to  his  satisfaction  of
           the financial eligibility criteria which met the requirements of
           Appendix FM-SE [44];  and  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  a
           relevant English language certificate [45];

    (viii) TO (who is also from  Nigeria)  has  considerable  knowledge  of
           Nigerian culture, having lived there for many years, has  family
           there and she has two properties in the UK that she  could  sell
           or rent out to provide an income; there were  no  insurmountable
           obstacles to the Appellant continuing his family life  with  his
           wife outside the UK [38]; it  would  be  reasonable  for  TO  to
           return to Nigeria with the Appellant [47];

    (ix)   any interference caused to the family life existing between TO's
           adult son, the  Appellant  and  TO  caused  by  the  Appellant's
           removal would not be disproportionate [47];

    (x)    in respect of the Appellant's claim that his removal would be in
           breach of Article 3 ECHR on health grounds, the Judge noted that
           the Appellant no longer pursued that argument before her [17];

    (xi)   further, in relation to the claim that the  Appellant's  removal
           would breach Article 8 ECHR on health grounds,  the  Judge  held
           that the Appellant had not provided  any  detailed  evidence  to
           support his claim that, even with the help of his wife, he would
           not be able to obtain treatment in Nigeria [43];  neither  party
           had produced any detailed evidence about what moving to  Nigeria
           would really mean for the Appellant's treatment [49];

    (xii)  in any event, a high test applies to appeals  based  on  medical
           conditions alone both as regards Article 3 and  Article  8,  and
           even if the Appellant could not access treatment in Nigeria  and
           thus his life would be considerably shortened, he would not meet
           the test [43] (NB both parties before me agreed  that  the  word
           'not' had been  inadvertently  omitted  by  the  Judge  in  that
           sentence before 'meet the test', and that it was clear, contrary
           to an observation made by Judge Levin in granting permission  to
           appeal, that the Judge had not  intended  to  allow  the  appeal
           under Article 3 ECHR);

    (xiii) the weight to be given to the Appellant's family  life  with  TO
           was substantially reduced by the fact that the relationship  was
           entered into at a time when the Appellant had no leave to remain
           in the UK [46];

    (xiv)  the Appellant's removal has the potential to separate  him  from
           his family for an indeterminate period or require his family  to
           move to Nigeria to be with him [41];

    (xv)   the Appellant ought to have produced evidence about how long  it
           takes for spousal entry clearance applications from  Nigeria  to
           be processed - no such evidence had been provided [49];

    (xvi)  some matters set out  in  s.117B  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002') reduce the weight to be  given  to
           the Appellant's family life; some of them reduce the  weight  to
           be given to the need for immigration control [42];

    (xvii) a factor that was  significant  was  the  extent  to  which  the
           Appellant meets the criteria in the rules for leave to remain as
           a spouse; although the relevant evidential requirements were not
           met, the Appellant would have little  difficulty  in  satisfying
           the maintenance criteria in Appendix FM [44];

    (xviii)      the Appellant speaks English -  this  factor  reduces  the
           weight the Judge was require do give to the need for immigration
           control [45];

    (xix)  it was reasonable to suppose that the removal of  the  Appellant
           had the potential to  interrupt  his  treatment  and  monitoring
           [49];

    (xx)   any interruption to the Appellant's medical treatment  may  have
           potentially serious effects [50];

    (xxi)  it was reasonable to suppose that entry  clearance  applications
           in Nigeria may take some weeks [49].

4     The Judge's ultimate reason for allowing the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds [52] is contained in the following passage at [50]:

         "Having balanced the factors in this case I find the combination of
         the fact that the substance of  the  criteria  in  the  immigration
         rules are met, which has  the  effect  of  reducing  the  need  for
         immigration control, and that any interruption to  the  appellant's
         medical treatment has potentially serious effects leads  me  to  be
         satisfied that the need for immigration control  is  outweighed  by
         the effect of removal on the appellant's family and private life."

5     The Respondent sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the Judge's decision on grounds, in summary, that:

    (i)    it was for the Appellant to demonstrate that there would be some
         lengthy delay in obtaining entry clearance and that he would not be
         able to obtain the medication he requires in Nigeria, or  would  be
         unable to purchase a sufficient supply in the UK  before  returning
         to Nigeria; there was a paucity of evidence as to whether any short
         or long term stay in Nigeria would in  fact  adversely  affect  the
         Appellant's health;

    (ii)   the Judge could not assume that there would be such a detriment,
         and had not given proper or adequate reasons as why there would  be
         an adverse affect on the Appellant's health.

6     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Levin on 19.5.15. It is  now
    common ground (and contrary to Judge Levin's  reading  of  the  Judge's
    decision) that the Judge did not intend to,  and  did  not,  allow  the
    appeal under Article 3 ECHR at [43]. However, Judge Levin  observed  at
    [3]:

         "It is arguable that the Judge's  conclusion  in  para  49  of  her
         decision to the affect that the Appellant's  HIV  condition  tipped
         the balance of proportionality in his favour was irrational  as  it
         runs counter to the Judge's earlier finding  at  para  38  that  it
         would not be unreasonable to expect his wife to return  to  Nigeria
         with him and to her observations and findings between paras 39  and
         47 with reference to Article 8 generally."

7     I heard submissions from both  parties.  These  are  recorded  in  the
    record of proceeding.  There is no Rule 24 response from the  Appellant
    and no appeal brought by him, for example,  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Judge erred in law in dismissing the appeal  under  immigration  rules.
    The findings of fact made by the Judge are unchallenged.

    Discussion

8     I find that there is a material error of law in the Judge's  decision.
    There is no actual finding at [50] that the Appellant's  removal  would
    on a  balance  of  probabilities  result  in  an  interruption  of  the
    Appellant's treatment for his HIV infection and kidney disease. At [49]
    the Judge merely finds that the Appellant's removal has the 'potential'
    to  interrupt  his  treatment  and  monitoring,  without  any   further
    assessment as to likelihood of that potential scenario  arising.  There
    was therefore no finding of fact as to  what  (with  reference  to  the
    issue set out by the Judge in the last sentence of [50]), the effect of
    removal would be on the Appellant's family and private life, so  as  to
    outweigh the need for immigration control.

9     There was therefore no adequate finding of fact supporting one of  the
    two factors which combined to result in the  appeal  being  allowed  at
    [50] (the other being the Judge's apparent finding that  the  substance
    of the criteria in the immigration rules being met had  the  effect  of
    reducing the need for immigration control).

10    If the Judge is deemed to  have  held  that  the  mere  potential  (of
    unknown probability) of the  Appellant's  treatment  being  interrupted
    represented an adequate basis (in combination with  the  second  factor
    mentioned above) for finding removal to be disproportionate,  this  was
    an error of law. The merely hypothetical occurrence of an event is  not
    an adequate basis for such a finding, especially given the Judge's  own
    observations at [43] that the Appellant had not provided  any  detailed
    evidence to support his claim that, even with the help of his wife,  he
    would not be able to obtain treatment in Nigeria; at [49] that  neither
    party had produced any detailed evidence about what moving  to  Nigeria
    would really mean for the Appellant's treatment [49]; and also at  [49]
    that the Appellant ought to have produced evidence about  how  long  it
    takes for spousal entry  clearance  applications  from  Nigeria  to  be
    processed, but had not done so.

11    I find that the making of the Judge's decision involved the making  of
    a material error of law; that there was no  relevant  finding  of  fact
    supporting one of the two reasons advanced by the  Judge  for  allowing
    the appeal.

12    I set the decision aside. The error identified above is  a  sufficient
    basis to do so; one of two reasons for allowing the appeal involved the
    making of an error of law. I also doubt that the judge was entitled  to
    treat the importance of maintaining immigration control  as  diminished
    merely on the basis that the Appellant appeared to  meet  some  of  the
    eligibility criteria for leave to enter under Appendix  FM  (the  other
    issue identified at [50]). However, having already had grounds  to  set
    the decision aside, it is  not  necessary  for  me  to  rule  that  her
    approach to that issue involved the making of an error of  law,  but  I
    will re-visit that issue when re-making the decision, below.

    Re-making

13    At the hearing, I heard submissions from the parties as  to  re-making
    the decision. I re-make the decision as follows.

14    I apply the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 3(i)-(xiii) above, none of which are challenged  or  vitiated
    by any error of law.

15    Although there was no Rule 15(2A) application from  the  Appellant,  I
    take into account two documents submitted at the hearing before me:

    (i)    A  discharge  summary  from  Newham  University  Hospital  dated
         12.8.15 indicating that TO had attended at the emergency department
         that day complaining of a numb sensation to her upper  lip  on  the
         right side which had subsided over 30 minutes to  an  hour,  and  a
         mild headache. She had had a  similar  episode  in  July.  She  was
         assessed, and discharged the same  day  with  advice  that  her  GP
         consider medication for migraine.

    (ii)   An appointment letter dated 17.8.15 for TO to see a  Dr  O'S  of
         Newham University  Hospital  at  the  'Health  Central  (Outpatient
         Department)'.  No  other  details  were  given  as  to   what   the
         appointment was for.

16    I am entitled, indeed obliged, when  determining  the  proportionality
    of the proposed removal, to consider the extent to which the  Appellant
    fails to meet the immigration rules for leave to remain  as  a  Partner
    under Appendix FM. There are four reasons:

    (i)    the Appellant is an overstayer (and thereby does  not  meet  the
         immigration status requirement at E-LTRP.2.2(c));

    (ii)   the Appellant has not provided evidence as to  his  satisfaction
         of the financial eligibility criteria meeting the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM-SE;

    (iii)  the Appellant has  not  provided  a  relevant  English  language
         certificate;

    (iv)   there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
         outside the UK.

17     The  fact  that  TO  had,  shortly  before  the  hearing  before  me,
    experienced two episodes of symptoms which appear to be suspected to be
    migraine, makes no material difference to the assessment that there are
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK.
    Although migraine, if serious and frequent, can  be  debilitating,  the
    evidence I  have  been  shown  does  not  establish  that  TO  has  any
    significant problem with that condition, if she has it at all.

18     Where  the  immigration   rules   are   not   satisfied,   compelling
    circumstances must  exist  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control: SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA
    Civ 387,  paras  33  and  40.  Further,  I  must  have  regard  to  the
    considerations in s.117B NIAA 2002. Also in the  present  case,  it  is
    suggested that the requirement for the Appellant to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom  to   apply   for   entry   clearance   is   unreasonable   and
    disproportionate. Both parties referred me to paragraph 24 of Agyarko &
    Ors, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440, in which the
    Court of Appeal accepted when considering  Section  EX.1(b)  under  the
    Rules, that the 'insurmountable obstacle' criterion  is  not  merely  a
    factor to be taken into account;  however, in the context of  making  a
    wider Article 8 assessment outside the rules, it  is  a  factor  to  be
    taken into account,  not an absolute requirement. Also, in Chen, R  (on
    the application of)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC), I note  that
    "There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family  life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  UK.  but  where   temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance may be disproportionate."

19    Applying s.117B NIAA 2002 in the present case, I find that:

    (i)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest (s.117B(1)).

    (ii)   Even if the  Appellant  can  speak  English  and  is  (by  being
         supported  by  his  wife)  financially  independent,  he  does  not
         therefore gain a positive right to a grant of leave to remain  from
         either s117B (2) or (3) (AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC)).  Also,
         Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT  412  (IAC)  provides
         that "The public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not
         diluted by the consideration that a person pursuing a  claim  under
         Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the  state
         or is self-sufficient or is likely to remain so  indefinitely.  The
         significance of these factors is that where they  are  not  present
         the public interest is fortified."

    (iii)  Little weight is to be given  to  the  Appellant's  relationship
         formed with his wife, as it was established  at  a  time  when  the
         Appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully (s.117B(4)).

20    Further, although the First tier Judge held at [44] that:

         "This appeal cannot be granted on the basis the appellant meet  the
         immigration rules and a near-miss principle does not apply  to  the
         assessment of article 8 claims, but the extent to  which  he  meets
         the rules is relevant to the weight to be  given  to  he  need  for
         immigration control"

    I fear that the second  part  of  that  sentence  offends  against  the
    authority of the Supreme Court in Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72  at
    [56]:

         "Although  the  context  of  the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that this
         cannot be equated with a formalised "near-miss" or "sliding  scale"
         principle, as argued for by Mr Malik. That approach is  unsupported
         by Strasbourg authority, or by a proper reading of  Lord  Bingham's
         words. Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside the  rules
         did not turn on how close she had come to compliance with rule 317,
         but on the application of the family  values  which  underlie  that
         rule and are at the heart also of article 8.  Conversely,  a  near-
         miss under the rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
         case which is otherwise lacking in merit."

21    I do not find the fact that the Appellant might, if he  organises  his
    paperwork  appropriately,  satisfy  the  substantive   and   evidential
    requirements regarding financial eligibility and English  language  for
    an application for entry clearance or leave remain as a  partner  under
    Appendix FM is  a  factor  which,  by  itself,  militates  against  the
    importance of maintenance of immigration control.

22    As to the issue of whether the  Appellant  ought  to  be  expected  to
    leave the UK to make an application for entry clearance from Nigeria, I
    refer to Chen, para 39:

         "In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual (the burden being
         upon him or her) that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his or her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained,  it
         will be easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was "precarious". In other words, in the former case,  it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
         case. However, it all depends on the facts." (Emphasis added)

    And the headnote of that decision provides:

         "1. ... In all cases, it will be for the individual to place before
         the Secretary of State evidence that such temporary separation will
         interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It will not  be
         enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD
         [2008] UKHL 40."

23    I return to the issue of what evidence  there  was  before  the  First
    tier (there being no difference in that  evidence  before  me)  of  the
    likelihood of a significant interference with family  life  (or  indeed
    any  other  protected  right)  arising  from  a  requirement  that  the
    Appellant leave the United Kingdom to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance. The Respondent referred to evidence in  her  refusal  letter
    dated 10.4.14 that all the  medications  that  the  Appellant  requires
    (listed  in  a  letter  from  Kings  College  Hospital  discussing  the
    Appellant's HIV infection and kidney disease) are available in Nigeria.
    The Appellant, as noted by the  Judge,  did  not  provide  any  country
    information seeking to contradict that proposition. The  only  document
    in the Appellant's  bundle  on  that  issue,  at  page  [63],  entitled
    'Vanguard: Nigeria: HIV/AIDS - Stigma, Discrimination and  Helplessness
    of Victims' does not discuss the availability of medication  at  all  -
    but discusses in rather general terms that stigma exists in Nigeria for
    those known to be infected with HIV. The Appellant's skeleton  argument
    prepared for the First tier accepts at paragraph  7  that  '...  it  is
    accepted that there may be treatments available in Nigeria for HIV, but
    likewise there is also a huge stigma attached to HIV."

24    The Appellant has known for at least 10 years that  he  has  HIV.  His
    wife is aware of his illness.  He  is  well  accustomed  to  being  HIV
    positive. There is stigma attached to being HIV positive in the UK. The
    Appellant asked that the First tier decision be anonymised so that  his
    HIV status would not become widely known. I find that the existence  of
    stigma attached to persons with HIV in Nigeria is not  a  factor  which
    results in it being unreasonable to require the Appellant to return  to
    Nigeria for the purpose of making an application for entry clearance.

25    As observed by the Judge, the Appellant has not provided any  detailed
    evidence to support his claim that, even with the help of his wife,  he
    would not be able to obtain treatment in Nigeria; there is no  detailed
    evidence about what  moving  to  Nigeria  would  really  mean  for  the
    Appellant's treatment; there is no evidence about how long it takes for
    spousal entry clearance applications  from  Nigeria  to  be  processed.
    Applying  the  FtT's  unchallenged  findings,  he   has   accommodation
    available to him on arrival in Nigeria.

26    Applying Chen, I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  provide
    adequate  evidence  that  a   temporary   separation   will   interfere
    disproportionately with his protected rights. There are  no  compelling
    circumstances outweighing the public interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control. The Appellant's removal  would  not  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with his rights under Article 8 ECHR.

    Decision

27    (i)   The decision of the First tier involved the making of  an  error
    of law

    (ii)   I set aside the decision of the First tier.

    (iii)  I remake the decision,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
         human rights grounds.

28    The direction for anonymity made by the First tier Tribunal  continues
    to apply. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly
    identify the Appellant or any member  of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to both the Appellant and the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 24.1.16

