
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19589/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th June 2015                              |On 14th August 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        MRS ANNE RENEE VALERY le MEME
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 25th September 1933.
     The Appellant first arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  9th  September
    2012 in possession of a visa conferring leave to enter until 8th  March
    2013 subject to a condition  prohibiting  employment  and  recourse  to
    public funds.  On 7th March 2013 application was made on her behalf for
    leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  her  private  life.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 14th May 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Hindson  sitting  at  Richmond  on  26th  August  2014.   In   a
    determination promulgated on 16th September 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 24th September 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 4th November 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Foudy
    refused permission to appeal.  On 25th November 2014 renewed grounds of
    permission to appeal were made to the Upper Tribunal.  On 27th February
    2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted  permission  to  appeal.   In
    granting permission Judge Rintoul considered that it was arguable  that
    the judge had misdirected himself as to the approach to Article  8  and
    given his findings with respect to the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
    her Sponsors it was arguable that this error  may  have  been  material
    given that the Appellant would arguably appear to meet the requirements
    of the Immigration  Rules  but  for  the  requirement  of  prior  entry
    clearance.

 4. On 10th March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response submits that  the  judge  provided
    cogent reasons to support the conclusion that there  were  no  arguably
    good  grounds  for  considering  the  Appellant's  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and it was submitted that the Appellant had a  remedy
    available to her to make the relevant entry clearance  application  and
    that  therefore  there  was  no  arguable  basis  to  depart  from  the
    requirements of the Rules.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  The Appellant appears
    by her instructed Counsel Mr Wilford.  The Secretary of  State  appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Walker.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Wilford submits that the Immigration Judge failed to  make  relevant
    findings pursuant to Article 8  having  found  all  who  gave  evidence
    before him had provided truthful accounts and that  the  facts  of  the
    case are as claimed.  However he considered the  Rules  prohibited  so-
    called switching and that it was clear that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under the Rules as they related to an adult dependent relative.
     At paragraph 18 Mr Wilford points out that the judge expressed a great
    deal of sympathy for the predicament of  the  Appellant  and  that  the
    correct approach the judge had adopted was that  the  Appellant  should
    return to South Africa and make an out of country appeal.

 7. Mr Wilford notes that the judge had  given  due  consideration  to  the
    authority of Gulshan but had not gone any further.  He had not  applied
    Razgar;  had  not  given  due  consideration  as  to  whether  it   was
    proportionate in the current circumstances to expect an 81-year-old  to
    return to South Africa where there was no family upon which  she  could
    rely.  He acknowledged that the Immigration  Rules  might  not  contain
    within them an exception for Article 8 compliance for  adult  dependent
    relatives but that the judge had  properly  gone  on  to  consider  the
    position outside the Rules and that there are compelling  circumstances
    for allowing this appeal.

 8. Mr Walker says no more than merely relying on the Grounds of Appeal and
    indicates that he agrees that  the  grounds  do  have  force  and  that
    compelling circumstances should have been considered.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. I am greatly assisted by the approach adopted by Mr Walker on behalf of
    the Secretary of State.  He has indicated to me that he  is  not  in  a
    position to make any concessions but is not raising any further grounds
    nor objections in opposition to this appeal and his comments  that  the
    grounds have force are ones with which I concur.

12. So far as the prospective error of law is concerned I agree that  there
    is a material error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has gone  on
    very briefly to consider the authority within Gulshan at  paragraph  19
    of  his  determination.   He  has  not  gone  on  to  consider  general
    principles nor other case law.  He has certainly failed  to  go  on  to
    consider the issue of compelling circumstances for this Appellant.   In
    such circumstances I find there is a material error of law  and  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking of the Decision

13. Paragraphs 26 to 29 of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
    are accepted and unchallenged by the Secretary of State.  I adopt  them
    within this determination.  They show that the Appellant is aged 81 and
    unfortunately not in the best of health.   She  was  previously  living
    alone in South Africa whilst  two  of  her  children  are  now  British
    citizens  and  her  grandchildren  all  reside  in  the  UK.   She  had
    previously visited the UK regularly and now wished to remain in the  UK
    with her children and grandchildren.  She gave up her accommodation  in
    South Africa before coming to the UK on  the  basis  that  it  was  her
    intention to apply to stay here permanently believing  that  it  was  a
    requirement  of  the  Rules  that  she  be  in  the  UK  to  make  that
    application.  As set out at paragraph 15 she notes the  change  in  the
    Rules that would now require her  to  make  such  an  application  from
    overseas.

14. In any consideration of an Article 8 claim the starting  point  is  the
    law itself.  Article 8 states:

    (a)  everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence;

    (b)  there should be no interference by a public body with the exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of  the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

15. The general approach to Article 8 cases is that in Nhundu  and  Chiwera
    (01/TH/00613).  In those cases the  Tribunal  said  that,  in  deciding
    claims under Article 8, there is  a  five  stage  test  which  must  be
    applied in order to determine whether a breach has occurred:

      i) does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
         the meaning of Article 8;

     ii) if so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

    iii) if so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

     iv) if so, was the interference in pursuit of  one  of  the  legitimate
         aims set out in Article 8(2); and

      v) if so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
         legitimate aim?

    Those were essentially the five questions  endorsed  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

16. It is of course, well-established that, where the Appellant is  in  the
    UK and removal will interfere with the family life /private  life  that
    he or she already enjoys in the UK, then Article 8 can be engaged.

17. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 31:

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

18. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

19. In Haleemudeen v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558 Beatson LJ held at paragraph 17 that where the  Article  8
    ECHR element of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  met,  refusal  would
    normally  be  appropriate,  "but  that  leave  can  be  granted   where
    exceptional  circumstances,  in  the  result  of  'unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences' for the individual, would result".

20. There is a requirement to look at the  evidence  to  see  if  there  is
    anything which has not already been adequately  considered  within  the
    context of the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.
    The further intermediary test as a preliminary to a consideration of an
    Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion based  Rules  is  now  no
    longer appropriate and in Ganesabalan, R (on the application of) v SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there was no prior threshold  which  dictates
    whether the exercise of discretion should  be  considered;  rather  the
    nature of the assessment and the reasoning which were called  for  were
    informed by threshold considerations.

21. I acknowledge that the guidance given in the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  was  not
    available  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   That  case  gave
    definitive guidance for the consideration of leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  I follow the approach adopted by the  Court  of
    Appeal.  Firstly it is necessary to consider the  individual  interests
    of the Appellant and her family's Article 8  rights  and  balance  them
    against the public interest in order to make an assessment whether  the
    refusal to grant leave to remain is disproportionate and hence unlawful
    by virtue of Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act read with Article  8.
    As I have indicated above these are  exceptional  circumstances  of  an
    elderly lady entitled to make her  application  should  she  return  to
    South Africa but came to this country with it very much  in  mind  that
    she would be making her application here.  I do  not  find  bearing  in
    mind the findings of fact that are preserved and the  approach  adopted
    very  helpfully   by   Mr   Walker   that   such   considerations   are
    disproportionate.

22. At paragraph 49 of SS (Congo) the Court of Appeal gives  guidance  with
    regard to the approach to be adopted for  granting  leave  outside  the
    Rules with reference to the phrase  "exceptional  circumstances".   The
    Court of Appeal indicated that the text of  the  instruction  makes  it
    clear that the term "exceptional circumstances" is given a wide meaning
    in the context of the instructions covering any case in which on proper
    analysis  under  Article  8  at  the   second   stage   it   would   be
    disproportionate to refuse leave.

23. It is factually accepted in  this  matter  that  whilst  the  Appellant
    cannot meet the requirement of paragraph  317  of  HC  395  (read  with
    Appendix FM), by virtue of the fact that  such  application  cannot  be
    made whilst the Appellant is in the UK it is  accepted  on  her  behalf
    that but for her presence in  the  UK  she  would  otherwise  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 317 and Appendix FM.   It  is  common  ground
    that she cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

24. Consequently this is an Appellant who if she were to  return  to  South
    Africa and make the appropriate application would, it  is  acknowledged
    by Mr Walker, succeed.  In Zhang v SSSHD [2013] EWHC  891  (Admin)  the
    court endorsed the view adopted by the  House  of  Lords  in  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40 that it will not normally be appropriate  to  require  a
    person to leave the United Kingdom in order to  fulfil  the  procedural
    requirement of entry clearance.  That case I acknowledge dealt with the
    issue of children but authorities thereafter show  that  the  situation
    does not only apply to cases involving children and certainly  in  this
    instant case it could easily be  applicable  to  a  case  involving  an
    elderly relative.

25. For all the  above  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate nor in  the  public  interest  to  return  the  Appellant
    bearing in mind her age and circumstances to South  Africa  to  make  a
    fresh application and that this is  an  Appellant  who  has  compelling
    circumstances which are supported by relevant case law for  the  appeal
    to be allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  In such  circumstances  I
    remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article
    8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
