
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19308/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2013                                |On 24 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr K B

                                                                  Respondent
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Fransman and Mr S Sayeed, Counsel, instructed
                    by Gherson & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter "the claimant"), a  citizen  of  India,  last
    entered the UK on 2 March 2011 on a multiple entry visit visa.  Several
    weeks before this was due to expire he applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the representative of an overseas  business.   On
    23 August a decision was made to refuse to vary leave to remain and  to
    remove him by way of directions under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The claimant's appeal was heard by Designated Judge Peart and  Judge  A
    R Williams ("the panel").  On  26  February  2013  they  promulgated  a
    decision dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowing
    it under Article  8  ECHR.   (They  also  found  the  decision  of  the
    appellant (hereafter "the SSHD") under s.47 of the 2006 Act to be  "not
    in accordance with the  law"  but  the  respondent  does  not  seek  to
    challenge that aspect of the panel's decision.)  The panel hearing  was
    heard  in  camera  and  subject  to  anonymity  directions.   With  the
    agreement of both parties we have maintained the  anonymity  directions
    and likewise heard the case in camera.

3.   The panel's decision on Article 8 is challenged vigorously by the  SSHD
    on two grounds, the second seen by the judge who granted permission  to
    appeal to split into two.

4.   At the  outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Parkinson  sought  to  renew  the
    application of the SSHD for an adjournment which had been  made  on  14
    and 27 June 2013.  Reminding the panel that the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer who had represented before the First-tier Tribunal (Mr Wilding)
    had already sought an adjournment on the basis  that  he  had  a  long-
    standing holiday booked for the date fixed for  hearing,  Mr  Parkinson
    submitted that the bundles in the case were voluminous and that he  had
    had less than one day to prepare.  Fairness dictated that the  Tribunal
    should adjourn so that there was adequate time for him to prepare.   Mr
    Fransman  opposed  this  application.    Having   heard   both   sides'
    submissions, we ruled that  the  hearing  would  proceed.   The  SSHD's
    initial application for an adjournment, based on her wish for the  case
    to be presented by the same Presenting Officer who had appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Mr Wilding), had been refused on 14  June  and
    she would have been fully aware by then at the latest of  the  need  to
    make  alternative  plans  for  representation.   Yet  even  though   Mr
    Parkinson confirmed that Mr Wilding remained at work up until  the  day
    before the hearing, the SSHD had not even produced a skeleton argument.
     Further, as will become apparent from what we say  below,  the  SSHD's
    grounds of appeal were narrowly drawn and did not challenge the panel's
    primary finding of fact and hence detailed inspection of the background
    documents was unnecessary.  In such circumstances our decision was that
    it was not in the interests of  justice  that  the  hearing  should  be
    adjourned.  We explained that only if we decided  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law and that its decision should  be  set  aside,
    would we consider a possible need for the SSHD to be given more time to
    prepare the case,  for  then  the  background  documentation  could  be
    extremely relevant.

5.   Having been informed of the rejection of his  application  to  adjourn,
    Mr Parkinson served a detailed typed skeleton argument.  Although  late
    in the day we were grateful to receive it and, like that prepared by Mr
    Fransman (which was served in accordance with Tribunal directions),  it
    has assisted us in deliberating in this case.  We do not summarise  the
    oral submissions we received from Mr  Parkinson,  Mr  Fransman  and  Mr
    Sayeed but we would record our gratitude to all three for  the  clarity
    of their arguments.

6.   The SSHD's first ground alleged that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    have regard either to the relevant  sections  of  the  new  Immigration
    Rules or to those Rules as a detailed expression of  government  policy
    on controlling immigration and protecting the public.  In  relation  to
    the latter aspect, the grounds cited MF (Article 8 new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] which at [48] stated:

         "... in our view provisions in the new rules dealing with Article 8
         claims have two functions:


         (a)  They create new provisions which must be given  legal  effect,
             although it is left  as a matter for the tribunal  and  courts
             whether their application is contrary to a person's Article  8
             rights; and


         (b)  They operate to enhance judicial understanding of the  'public
             interest' side of the scales."

Discussion

7.   So far as concerns the alleged failure  to  have  regard  to  "relevant
    sections of the Immigration Rules", Mr  Parkinson  conceded  that  this
    ground had little traction because the claimant's application had  been
    made under Part 8 of the Rules and the new  Rules  had  not  sought  to
    incorporate any specific  Article  8  considerations  into  that  Part,
    certainly  not  in  relation  to   the   provisions   made   for   sole
    representatives of an overseas business.  The SSHD refusal  letter  had
    sought  to  rely  on  the  claimant's  failure  to  meet   either   the
    requirements of Appendix FM (dealing with family life) or  the  private
    life provisions of paragraph 276ADE, but the claimant  had  not  sought
    leave to remain under these provisions and they  were  not  applied  to
    applications under Part 8.  The lack of specific Article 8 provision in
    the Rules in relation to sole representatives of an  overseas  business
    was a clear demonstration of the finding made in MF that in relation to
    Article 8 the new Rules  were  not  a  "complete  code".   Finally,  as
    conceded by Mr Parkinson,  the  new  Rules  were  inapplicable  to  the
    claimant as his application was made before they came  into  force  and
    stood to be decided under pre-existing Rules.

8.   As regards the contention that the  panel  erred  in  failing  to  have
    judicial regard to the new Rules as a detailed expression of government
    policy on controlling immigration and protecting the public, we are not
    persuaded that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  evinces  any  such
    failure.  It is true that the panel makes no express mention of MF, but
    both parties had addressed this aspect of MF in their  submissions  and
    it cannot be suggested that the panel was not fully aware of  the  need
    to balance the claimant's Article 8 rights against what it described in
    [81] as "the wider rights and freedoms of others in the general  public
    interest".

9.   In any event, we doubt (although it is not necessary for us to reach  a
    definite conclusion on the matter) that MF intended that  the  enhanced
    judicial understanding of the "public  interest"  side  of  the  scales
    afforded by the new Rules was to be applied in cases falling under  the
    old Rules.  As correctly noted by  Mr  Sayeed,  the  panel  in  MF  was
    careful to qualify its attribution of such an enhanced understanding to
    cases falling under the new Rules: see [38] and [60] of MF.

Ground 2

10.  Turning to the second ground, the  SSHD  alleged  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that  the
    refusal decision was disproportionate.  The SSHD sought first of all to
    rely on what both parties have described as "the precariousness point",
    it  being  argued  that  established  case  law  had  identified   that
    "[k]nowledge on the part of one spouse at the time of the marriage that
    the rights of residence of the other were precarious militates  against
    a finding that an  order  excluding  the  latter  violates  Article  8"
    (Mahmood R (on the application of) v SSHD [2000] EWCA  Civ  315).   The
    claimant had entered as a visitor and had sought to apply for leave  to
    remain in full knowledge that his stay in the UK was limited  and  that
    he had not obtained the correct entry  clearance  for  making  such  an
    application.  His wife joined him in March 2011 and she had  a  limited
    basis of stay herself as a Tier 1 (Investor) Migrant and once her leave
    expires  she  may  be  required  to  return  to  India.   Further,  the
    appellant's son, who lives with the claimant and his  wife,  also  only
    has limited stay in the UK having been granted leave  to  remain  as  a
    student until July 2016.

11.  It was pointed out, secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  panel  had
    failed to provide reasons as to how the claimant's ties to his wife and
    her stepchildren went beyond  normal  emotional  ties.   Prior  to  his
    arrival in March 2011, the claimant had not resided in the UK on a full-
    time basis.  His stepdaughter had never been reliant upon  him  in  the
    past.

12.  It was pointed out, thirdly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  had
    failed to give adequate reasons why the claimant and his wife could not
    return to India and continue their relationship together  as  they  had
    done for many years or why the claimant could not return to  India  and
    seek to visit his wife in the UK or vice versa.   Whilst  at  [92]  the
    First-tier Tribunal had found that the claimant would still face a risk
    of difficulties in India, it had failed to provide adequate reasons  as
    to why this was so.  This was important because it had  found  that  in
    India no criminal charges had been levelled at the claimant  in  the  3
    years since he left India.  The Tribunal had failed to provide  reasons
    as to why the claimant could not continue his family life from  outside
    the UK.

13.  A similar point was advanced in  relation  to  the  claimant's  private
    life, it being emphasised that he had only  resided  in  the  UK  since
    March 2011; a period which was "neither lengthy nor significant".

Discussion

14.  Concerning the precariousness point, we would  accept  that  the  panel
    did not address it specifically, but they did record  submissions  they
    received regarding it: see [56] (Mr Wilding) and  [61]  (Mr  Fransman).
    We consider that in that context the panel's clear findings that:

    (i)  the claimant had come to the UK with genuine visitor intentions;


    (ii)     he had only been prevented from travelling to Dubai to make an
         entry clearance application from  there  by  the  decision  of  the
         Indian authorities on 3 March 2011 to formally  revoke  his  Indian
         passport; and


    (iii)    his wife had not misrepresented her  husband's  position  when
         she applied for and obtained leave to enter as a Tier 1 Investor,


     all fed into its finding at [66] that the claimant had been "in  effect
    stranded in the UK ever since" and at [89] that "he  has  not  been  in
    breach of immigration law and has behaved as a  perfect  citizen".   We
    note that the  respondent's  grounds  do  not  challenge  these  strong
    findings of fact and in our  view  these  findings  entailed  that  the
    "precariousness" point had limited application.   It  was  not  a  case
    where  an  applicant  had  entered  into   family   or   private   life
    relationships despite knowing his own immigration status was precarious
    (which was what Phillips LJ had in mind in Mahmood).  The panel clearly
    considered that the claimant's stay in the UK had not been contrived or
    manufactured: he was the victim of circumstances outside his control.

15.  The points made by the SSHD in relation to the claimant's  family  life
    ties are not entirely clear-cut.  It appears as drafted to argue that a
    man's relationship with his wife is not family life simply because they
    do not always live together for reasons of business.  That is  contrary
    to authority. That aside, the points founder on the plain fact that  at
    [82]-[87] the panel did provide reasons for finding that the claimant's
    relationship with his wife, his (student) son and his stepdaughter fell
    within the meaning of "family life".  The panel's emphatic  finding  at
    [87] is that the claimant's family  life  is  "indeed  centred  in  the
    United Kingdom and is of very great strength".  Such finding was in any
    event amply borne out by the supporting evidence.

16.  We are at a loss to understand the contention that the panel failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why the claimant and his wife could  not
    return to India or he return to India and apply to visit his wife.  The
    panel devoted considerable effort to setting out under the  heading  of
    "Our Findings" why it accepted the claimant's evidence that it would be
    unsafe for him to return to India.

17.  It was submitted by Mr Parkinson, with reference to [5] of the  written
    grounds of appeal, that the  panel  had  overlooked  that  no  criminal
    charges had been brought against the claimant by the Indian authorities
    in over 3  years  and  so  its  findings  about  lack  of  safety  were
    unreasoned.  It is true that  the  only  specific  conclusion  that  is
    stated on this issue is in brief terms: at [88] the panel refers to the
    "very real risk that he may well face in his  home  country".   But  at
    [62]-[66] the panel set out the state of the evidence as to these risks
    in considerable detail.

18.  It was further submitted by Mr  Parkinson  that  the  panel's  findings
    failed to take into account the evidence before it indicating that  the
    claimant  would  have  adequate  protection  in  India.   He  drew  our
    attention to the  judgment  of  the  High  Court  of  Delhi  which  had
    indicated that protection would be available.   In  our  judgment  this
    submission is ill-founded. Whilst it correctly highlights the fact that
    the evidence as to protection  was  not  all  one-way,  it  incorrectly
    overlooks that there was also considerable  evidence  going  the  other
    way. In our view it was within the remit of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    having looked at all of the evidence for and against, to have concluded
    there was a very real risk.  It was not challenged  by  the  respondent
    that the claimant had only made the decision to come to the UK  on  his
    visit visa when he had found out on his return to India on 13 May  2010
    that his police protection had been  reduced  to  two  policemen,  both
    unarmed (up to 11 May he had had eight fully armed police in two cars).
     The unchallenged evidence was that the claimant had been  the  subject
    of death threats from the  head  of  the  Mumbai  underworld  following
    unequivocal rejection by him of requests that he facilitate the  fixing
    of cricket matches.  As a result the Mumbai  police  had  provided  the
    claimant's son with 24 hour security whilst the claimant was  in  South
    Africa.  There was credible evidence of the  existence  of  a  plan  to
    assassinate the claimant and an attempt had in fact been  made  on  his
    life in December 2009 when he was in Thailand.  The continuing  dangers
    presented to the claimant's life, and the political background  to  why
    the  Indian  authorities  had  drastically  reduced  their   level   of
    protection of the claimant, were attested  to  by  credible  witnesses.
    The panel's assessment  of  risk  was  entirely  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses to the evidence.

19.  As regards the claimant's private life,  we  have  no  doubt  that  the
    panel fully took into account that it was of relatively short duration,
    although the claimant had a history of visiting the UK  previously  and
    had established ties and friendships here.   So  far  as  concerns  the
    SSHD's contention that the claimant's residence  was  "neither  lengthy
    nor significant", it seems to us that this fails to have regard to  the
    panel's  finding  that  the  claimant's  private  life,   although   of
    relatively brief duration, had  qualitative  significance  because  the
    claimant "through his business is able to help the economic  well-being
    of the country ... This [claimant] is a man of  considerable  substance
    and the potential economic benefits to this country are  legion".   The
    panel properly directed themselves  in  accordance  with  UE  (Nigeria)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 975 that an individual's  value  to  the  community  is
    relevant to the Article 8 balancing exercise.   As  noted  earlier  the
    panel did give adequate reasons why neither  family  life  nor  private
    life could be continued from India.




Ground 3

20.  We refer to the closing point made in the written grounds as  Ground  3
    because that is what the judge who granted permission  termed  it.   In
    his formulation the SSHD's  argument  is  that  the  panel  misdirected
    itself with regard to the application of the relevant Immigration Rule,
    specifying paragraph 147 of the  Immigration  Rules  whereas  the  SSHD
    considered that the only valid rule was paragraph 144.

21.  This ground concentrates on  what  the  panel  discussed  at  [71]-[73]
    wherein it said that paragraph 144 was the correct immigration rule and
    one that it could consider of its own motion.

22.  We think this ground misses the point. It was obvious  from  the  basis
    on which the claimant had made his application and the  respondent  had
    responded to it that there was no issue between the  parties  that  the
    claimant could not succeed under either paragraph 147 or paragraph 144,
    paragraph 147 because it was confined to extension of leave for persons
    who had already been granted leave as a representative of  an  overseas
    business and established  themselves  as  such  a  representative,  and
    paragraph 141 because its requirements included that of  possession  of
    entry clearance.  Hence the only basis for consideration of these Rules
    was as a relevant framework of consideration of how close  or  far  the
    claimant had come in terms of meeting the substantive  requirements  of
    the Rules.

23.  In our judgment this was all that the panel had in mind when it  stated
    that paragraph  144  was  the  "correct  Immigration  Rule  for  us  to
    consider".  Significantly, the panel's  specific  finding  -  that  the
    claimant met "all the substantive requirements of paragraph 144" -  was
    not challenged in any way by the SSHD.  To the  extent  that  the  SSHD
    seeks to submit that this finding was wrongly considered to be relevant
    to the Article 8 balancing  exercise,  we  strongly  disagree.   It  is
    apparent from the case  law  cited  by  the  panel  itself  at  [77]  -
    (Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40; MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA  Civ  953  and  SZ
    (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA 590) - that such  considerations  are  relevant.
    The consideration of the fact that the  claimant  met  the  substantive
    requirements of paragraph 144 and that he could not go abroad and claim
    entry clearance under paragraph 144  (because  his  passport  had  been
    revoked) lent considerable force to the  panel's  assessment  that  the
    decision constituted a disproportionate interference with his right  to
    respect of private and family life.  In our judgment Ground 3 is a damp
    squib.

24.  In our judgment this is a case in which the factual foundation  of  the
    claimant's case was extremely strong and the panel was amply  justified
    in making the findings which  it  did.   The  SSHD  did  not  challenge
    virtually any of the primary findings of fact and those limited aspects
    of the panel's decision she chose to challenge have  been found  to  be
    adequately reasoned.  In such circumstances it would be  wholly  unjust
    of us to interfere in those findings.

25.  For the above reasons:-

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the claimant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds shall stand.

     The decision of the same Tribunal to find  the  s.47  decision  not  in
    accordance with the law shall also stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
