
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19875/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 11 September 2015                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           Mr Ian Joseph Mcfarlane
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms R Akhter, counsel (instructed by MetroLaw
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born  on  31  August  1980.  He
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T Jones, who dismissed his appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse his application for a  derivative  residence  card
    pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  -  'the  2006
    Regulations'. The determination was promulgated on 16 March 2015.

 2. In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler
    found that the failure by the Judge to determine the appeal in  respect
    of Article 8 was arguable. However, the first ground relied on, namely,
    that he was entitled to succeed,  as  the  Judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant provided most of his mother's care as a  primary  carer,  was
    less likely to succeed, in the light of the  Judge's  observations  'at
    paragraph 11' of the determination.

 3. In paragraph 11 of the determination, Judge Jones  stated  that  at  no
    stage was it submitted that the appellant's mother would no  longer  be
    able to remain in the UK (or elsewhere in the EU) if her son was to  be
    no longer able to care for her. The presentation of the appeal and  the
    applications centred around his need to remain in order to care for his
    mother. That seemed to fail to address the regulations.

 4. Ms Akhter, who also represented the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, submitted in accordance with her grounds in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal, that once the Judge accepted that
    the appellant was the main carer, he was entitled to  succeed  on  this
    basis "and not on some hypothetical way that  would  completely  change
    the help, love and support his mother is currently receiving."

 5. She also contended in her grounds  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  that
    other family members may have to do more to help does  not  negate  the
    status quo. It is in fact the appellant who provides this care  and  as
    such, dependency not only arises  but  the  appellant  has  shown  that
    without him his mother would be unable to reside in  the  UK.  That  is
    supported by the fact that although he has  two  sisters,  one  is  not
    interested in being the carer for her mother, whilst the other daughter
    is a single mother and is trying to find a job. She also relied on  the
    report of Dr Rizak who stated that the appellant's removal would have a
    detrimental untoward effect on  her  general  medical  management.  Any
    stress may seriously affect her diabetes, her eyesight or even cause  a
    stroke.

 6. Ms Akhter also submitted that even though no  s.120  notice  under  the
    2002 Act  had  been  issued,  the  respondent  sent  a  letter  to  the
    appellant's solicitors  dated  12  November  2014  after  a  pre-action
    protocol for judicial review was served upon her. The respondent stated
    that as the appellant's appeal was scheduled for hearing on 15 December
    2014, judicial review would be inappropriate in  the  circumstances  as
    the Article 8 issues sought to be relied on may be raised and addressed
    in the course  of  his  current  appeal.  That  appeal  hearing  is  an
    effective remedy for the appellant to raise any relevant and applicable
    Article 8 issues.

 7. Ms Savage on behalf of the respondent referred to the Upper  Tribunals'
    decision in the appeal of Amirteymour and Others  (EEA  Appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) that where no notice under s.120 of the
    2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove  has  been
    made, an appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal  in
    an appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 8.  She  accordingly  contended  that  the  respondent  cannot  create   a
    jurisdiction in respect of a right of appeal where  none  exists  under
    the statutory scheme.

 9. Ms Savage submitted in any event that the  appeal  advanced  under  the
    2006 Regulations was "misconceived." Paragraph 15A of  the  Regulations
    provides that a person who satisfies the  criteria  in  paragraph  (2),
    (3), (4A) or (5) of the Regulations is entitled to a  derivative  right
    to reside in the UK for as long as he satisfies the relevant criteria.

10. Paragraph 4A sets out the potentially relevant criteria in  respect  of
    the appellant. He has to show that he is the primary carer of a British
    citizen who is residing in the UK and who would be unable to reside  in
    the UK or in another EEA state if the appellant were required to leave.

11. Sub paragraph 7 provides that a person is to be regarded as a  "primary
    carer" of another person if he is a direct relative of that person  and
    is the person who has primary responsibility for that person's care.

12. She submitted that in these circumstances, the "finding"  at  paragraph
    11 of the determination of Judge Jones was correct,  having  regard  to
    the circumstances then prevailing. Adequate reasons for that conclusion
    have been given.

13. She referred to the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MA  and  SM
    (Zambrano: EU Children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 0038 (IAC) at [41].
    The Tribunal stated that it is for the national courts to determine, as
    a question of fact on the evidence before it,  whether  an  EU  citizen
    would be compelled to leave the EU to follow a  non  EU  national  upon
    whom he is dependent.

14. Nothing less than such compulsion will engage Articles 20 and 21 of the
    TFEU. It further notes that EU law will not be  engaged  where  the  EU
    citizen is not compelled to leave  the  EU,  even  if  the  quality  or
    standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the non
    EU national upon whom she is dependent,  is  for  example,  removed  or
    prevented from working.

15. That is subject to the proviso that the diminution in  the  quality  of
    life might engage EU law if (and only if) it is sufficient in  practice
    to compel the relevant ascendant relative, and hence the  EU  dependent
    citizen, to leave, and such actions as removal or  prevention  of  work
    may result in an interference with some other right including the right
    to respect for  family  life  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

16. She submitted that it is clear on the  Judge's  finding  that  no  such
    "compulsion" will result in this case. There are other  family  members
    who can provide care.

    Assessment

17. Judge Jones had regard to the evidence of both the  appellant  and  his
    mother, Ms Julien. In summary, they both  confirmed  that  she  suffers
    from a number of  largely  age  related  health  conditions,  including
    diabetes, which causes her ongoing health concerns. Ms Julien  receives
    primary and secondary care from the NHS. She also said she  has  had  a
    heart attack. In January 2014, she had bypass surgery and is now taking
    more medication and has periodic reviews. She has further  appointments
    to attend concerning her diabetes and she told the  Tribunal  that  her
    sight is an ongoing health concern as well [6].

18. She has contact with social services which provide about an hour's care
    a day, five days a week; this provides her with some personal care  and
    hygiene which she might find difficult to have her son provide for her.
    [6]

19. Ms Julien also said that her two  daughters  were  nearby  but  one  is
    engaged fully with her own family needs and has little time  to  visit,
    let alone offer care for her mother. The other  is  "disinterested"  in
    caring for her mother suggesting that the State would  or  should  look
    after her if needs be [6].

20. Ms Julien confirmed that she gets Employment and Support Allowance  and
    is exempt from the need  to  undertake  work  related  activities.  She
    receives disability living allowance following a medical assessment for
    her care needs. She has few interests now,  watches  television,  reads
    and prefers to stay indoors. She keeps essential  appointments  and  is
    accompanied by the appellant [6].

21. Judge Jones accepted that the appellant provides her with most  of  her
    care, as a primary carer [10].

22. After applying the appropriate standard, he found that even  though  he
    has sympathy for the  appellant's  mother  given  her  ongoing  chronic
    health conditions, she does receive care from the NHS in  that  respect
    and also care from social services, albeit for one hour a day.

23. It is in that context that the Judge went on to state at [11]  that  at
    no stage was it submitted that the appellant's mother would  no  longer
    be able to remain in the UK or elsewhere in the EU if her son  were  no
    longer able to care for her.

24. At [12] Judge Jones stated that it may be the case that regrettably  in
    such circumstances, her other  family  members  may  need  to  consider
    helping more, and if they refuse to do so, social services and the  NHS
    will provide her, as is her right, with more help with  her  reasonable
    care needs.

25. She has the receipt of state benefits to assist her to  make  provision
    for carers who might also assist her. This the Judge found '... will be
    hard for the appellant and his mother to accept that the regulations in
    this matter have been properly cited and considered by the  respondent,
    insofar as the requirements of the EEA Regulations  are  concerned  ...
    and upon which the claim is based' [12].

26. I do not accept the contention by Ms  Akhter  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    grounds that once the Judge has accepted that the appellant is the main
    carer, he is entitled to succeed on that basis.

27. I have set out the relevant regulations where it is clear that there is
    a requirement not only that the appellant be the primary carer of an EU
    citizen who is residing in the UK but  that  she  would  be  unable  to
    reside here or in another EEA state if he were required to leave.

28.  Having  regard  to  the  findings  of  Judge  Jones  at  [10-12],  the
    appellant's mother is not compelled to leave the UK.

29. Insofar as the Article 8 claim  is  concerned,  I  accept  Ms  Savage's
    submission that in the absence of a s.120 notice and in the absence  of
    any decision to remove, the  appellant  cannot  bring  a  human  rights
    challenge to removal in an appeal under the EEA  Regulations.  None  of
    the preconditions apply in this case.

30. In any event, I do not  accept  that  the  respondent's  reply  to  the
    appellant's pre-action protocol assists the appellant in this  respect.
    It was contended by the respondent in the letter that the appellant had
    a current appeal listed where the Article 8 issues  he  seeks  to  rely
    upon may  be  raised  and  addressed  in  the  course  of  his  appeal.
    Accordingly it was asserted that the appeal hearing  is  the  effective
    remedy to raise any Article 8 issues.

31. I do not construe that as coming anywhere near granting  the  appellant
    some form of legitimate expectation that  Article  8  issues  could  be
    raised at his appeal. Moreover, the respondent's assertion was made  on
    the basis that such jurisdiction existed. However, as a matter of  law,
    the appellant was not entitled to advance an Article 8 appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Dated 10/9/2015


    Judge C R Mailer
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
