
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19909/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 May 2017                      |On 22 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                           mrs oluwayomi adeluola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel instructed by MA Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 13 October 2016, dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  11
    May 2015 to refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human
    rights basis.

 2. There is little dispute about the facts of this  case.   The  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom in 2003 with entry clearance as  a  visitor.
    She appears not to have obtained leave beyond that and has remained  in
    the United Kingdom since then.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  she  is
    married and that her husband is a British  citizen.   The  husband  has
    seven children in the United Kingdom, two of whom are under the age  of
    18 and are twins aged 12 whom he supports financially.  He is  also  in
    employment.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were met.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and her husband.   He  also
    had a number of documents put before him including  documents  relating
    to medical condition and it  appears  payment  of  maintenance  by  her
    husband although this was not in dispute.

 4. The judge at paragraph [30] does direct himself  properly  as  to  what
    needs to be taken into account and  also  that  having  considered  the
    matter under the Immigration Rules that there is a  possible  issue  of
    Article 8 over and above that.  The judge does not appear at any  stage
    to  have  considered  properly  the  Immigration   Rules   specifically
    paragraphs EX.1 and EX.2 of Appendix FM and the judge also at paragraph
    40 concluded that he did not find any particular circumstances  in  the
    appeal which would justify consideration of Article  8  directly.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal.

 5. The applicant sought permission to appeal on primarily the grounds that
    the judge had in reaching his decision failed  properly  to  take  into
    account material matters specifically (1) the husband's illness and the
    impact of his return to Nigeria given the medication; (2) that  he  had
    been here for 30 years and (3) the failure to  take  into  account  the
    impact there would be on the appellant's husband's two minor children.

 6. I am satisfied and Mr Duffy did not submit to the contrary  that  there
    has been a failure to take into account  the  children  in  any  event.
    That I consider is material.  Further I consider that  it  is  material
    that the judge appears not properly to have engaged with  the  position
    of the appellant's husband's illness or the length of time he has spent
    in the United Kingdom although the latter is perhaps  of  less  weight.
    The judge appears also not to have focused  his  findings  through  the
    prism of the Immigration Rules specifically EX.1 and EX.2 and erred  in
    his approach to failing to consider Article 8 over and above the  Rules
    albeit that there might not in this case have been much to  say  beyond
    consideration of whether there are insurmountable obstacles.  For these
    reasons I am satisfied that the  judge  made  an  error  of  law  which
    affected the outcome of the decision and I therefore set it aside.

 7. Given that there will need  to  be  a  further  extensive  fact-finding
    exercise specifically with regard to the children and for  this  to  be
    conducted properly through consideration of the Immigration Rules I  am
    satisfied that given the nature and extent of this exercise that it  is
    necessary to remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh
    decision on all issues.  None of the findings of fact made by the First-
    tier Tribunal are preserved.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside

 8. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues; none  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.

Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

