
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19806/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 5th September 2013                           |on 13th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                             Dave maurice ebanks
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Adophy, solicitor, Rana & Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 18th August  1973.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made on 23rd March 2010,
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom to  Jamaica,  following
    the refusal of his application to remain in the United Kingdom  outside
    the immigration rules, was dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    article 8 of the ECHR, after a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    T Jones, in a determination promulgated on 6th January 2011.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is that he arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  March  2000  and  was  subsequently  given
    permission to remain as a student, which expired in  June  2001,  after
    which he remained without leave.  He had begun a relationship  with  Ms
    Rosalind Rosemary Ebanks in 1994 and married in Jamaica in 1995.  There
    were two daughters of this relationship, the first of whom was born  on
    12th August 1994 in Jamaica and the second of whom  was  born  on  29th
    September 2003 in the United Kingdom.  The appellant separated from his
    wife in September 2007, when he went to live with another  woman.  This
    relationship subsequently came to an end, after which he went  to  live
    with his brother.  His wife obtained indefinite leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom together with her children, as  a  result  of  being  an
    unmarried partner of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which relationship came to an end in July 2010.

 3. At the date  of  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  the
    appellant's relationship with his wife was no longer  subsisting.   The
    appellant claimed to have contact with  his  two  daughters,  asserting
    that he took to school and collected from school his  younger  daughter
    and then supervised her homework  before  returning  to  his  brother's
    home.  The First-tier Tribunal judge did not believe that the appellant
    had any contact whatsoever with his daughters.  He was not satisfied of
    the authenticity of a letter purporting to come from the headmaster  of
    the  appellant's  younger  daughter's  school,  stating  that  she  was
    collected after school on a regular basis by the appellant and did  not
    believe that letters purporting to come from the appellant's  daughters
    as authentic expressions of  their  relationship  with  the  appellant.
    Accordingly  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was  not  satisfied  the
    appellant had family life in the United Kingdom and  decided  that  his
    removal would not amount to a disproportionate  interference  with  his
    right to respect for his private land family life under  article  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.   The
    first was that the First-tier Tribunal judge applied  the  usual  civil
    standard of proof, namely the balance of probabilities, whereas it  was
    asserted the standard of proof was a lower standard more  akin  to  the
    standard in asylum matters.  The second ground, in effect, was that the
    First-tier Tribunal judge approached the assessment of the evidence  in
    relation to family life incorrectly.   It  was  asserted  that  it  was
    inconceivable that the headmaster of the appellant's younger daughter's
    school was party to a contrivance to deceive.   The  third  ground  was
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to have regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children as required by section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The final ground  was  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge failed to balance the  article  8  claim  and
    form an opinion from the perspective of his daughters as the  appellant
    was not the sole victim of any proposed removal.

 5.  On  27th  January  2011  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Macleman  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "IJ dismissed this  appeal  against  refusal  of  leave  to  remain
         outside the Immigration Rules, argued only under Article 8 ECHR.

         This application points out that the IJ took the standard of  proof
         required of the appellant to be the balance of  probabilities,  not
         the "lower standard".  (This appears at paragraph 25  (not  23)  of
         the determination.)

         It is generally accepted that not only in Article 3,  but  also  in
         Article 8 and  other  ECHR  cases,  the  lower  standard  of  proof
         applies.

         Once it is shown that an ECHR right is interfered with, the  burden
         of justifying that is on the SSHD.  Although not mentioned  in  the
         application, the IJ appears also to have overlooked that.

         It may well be that in  the  final  assessment  of  proportionality
         little turned on the burden and standard of proof,  and  the  other
         points in the application might  not  have  attracted  a  grant  of
         permission, but a determination which mistakes  these  two  matters
         may be difficult to sustain.

         (There are documents on file sent in by  the  appellant  after  the
         hearing, with a covering letter saying that the  IJ  had  permitted
         this.  The documents seem to have arrived after  the  determination
         was promulgated.  The matter is not mentioned in the  determination
         or in this application, but should  be  kept  in  mind  in  further
         procedure.)"

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.  The  grounds  of  appeal  mentioned  a
    number of authorities but, contrary to the Senior President's  Practice
    Statements and the express directions of the Tribunal, dated 1st August
    2013, Mr Adophy, who had conducted the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, failed to provide the  Upper  Tribunal  with  copies  of  the
    authorities relied upon.  Initially he asserted that he  believed  that
    these authorities had  been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  no
    mention of them was made in the determination and there were no  copies
    in the file.  Subsequently he asserted that  no  authorities  had  been
    produced because it was trite law that the standard if proof in article
    8 cases was the same as in article 3 cases.

 7. I adjourned the hearing for a short time in order to provide copies  of
    the authorities referred to in the grounds of appeal to  both  parties'
    representatives.  The first authority mentioned was  LM  (Article  8  -
    married appellant - proportionality) Jamaica  [2010]  UKUT  379  (IAC).
    That was an appeal in which  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  in  her
    determination dated 29th December 2009 Senior  Immigration  Judge  Gill
    had concluded that there had been an  error  of  law  in  the  original
    determination  and  adjourned   the   appeal   for   a   second   stage
    reconsideration of the article 8 claim.  Senior Immigration Judge  Gill
    gave a number of reasons for finding there was an error of law  in  the
    determination, one of which was that  the  immigration  judge  directed
    himself that the appropriate standard  of  proof  was  the  balance  of
    probabilities, which she said was wrong.  In re-making the decision the
    Upper Tribunal made no observation as to whether this  was  correct  or
    not.

 8. The second authority referred to was AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ  407.   It  is  apparent  from
    reading that authority that it had nothing to do with the issue  before
    me.  The authority which Mr Adophy  should  have  referred  to  was  AG
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    801 in which in paragraph 28 of his judgment, giving  the  judgment  of
    the court, Sedley LJ said:

         "It follows, in our  judgment,  that  while  an  interference  with
         private or family life must be real if it is to engage  art.  8(1),
         the  threshold  of  engagement  (the  "minimum  level")  is  not  a
         specially high one. Once the article is engaged, the  focus  moves,
         as Lord Bingham's remaining questions indicate, to the  process  of
         justification under art. 8(2). It is this which, in all cases which
         engage article 8(1), will determine whether there has been a breach
         of the article."

 9. In BK (Kosovo - Subesh) Serbia and Montenegro [2005]  UKIAT  00001  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal said that it was difficult to see the scope
    for a standard of proof in the proportionality assessment itself, as it
    was  essentially  a  balancing  exercise.   In  paragraph  29  of   its
    determination, however, the Tribunal presided over  by  the  President,
    Ouseley J said this:

         "In finding the  facts,  in  a  non-risk  assessment  case,  it  is
         difficult to see why the standard of proof should be other than the
         normal civil standard of the balance of probabilities."

10. In EH (Palestinian, entry clearance, proportionality) Iraq [2005] UKIAT
    00062 the IAT,  again  presided  over  by  Ouseley  J,  held  that  the
    appropriate standard of proof where no risk was being assessed was  the
    balance of probability.   In  paragraph  7  of  the  determination  the
    Tribunal said:

         "Family relationships may or may not be a risk factor for asylum or
         Article 3 or 8 cases. Some Article 8 cases are concerned  with  the
         risk of a breach of human rights on return. But where the issue  is
         whether or not family life has been established in this country for
         the purposes of seeing whether the interests of immigration control
         outweigh it, the standard of proof for its establishment is that of
         the balance  of  probabilities  and  not  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood, let alone, as we have sometimes seen it,  a  real  risk
         that someone was married".

11.  A more recent illustration is the determination of the Tribunal in  Naz
    (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 40 (IAC)
    in which the Tribunal, presided over by the President,  Blake  J,  said
    that it was for a claimant to establish that  an  immigration  decision
    would be an interference with established family life and the  relevant
    standard for establishing the facts was the balance  of  probabilities.
    In paragraph 11 of its determination the tribunal said:

         "It is of course trite that the standard of proof  of  the  primary
         facts in entry clearance claims is the ordinary  civil  balance.  A
         similar standard applies in Article 8  cases,  where  the  claimant
         alleges that immigration action interferes with subsisting  private
         or family life."

    In that appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant's case just reached the low threshold.  In  paragraph  13  of
    its determination the Tribunal said it could not be sure what the judge
    meant by a relatively low standard of proof and a low  threshold.   The
    Tribunal said that the case was neither one for the application of  the
    criminal standard nor  the  lower  standard  or  reasonable  likelihood
    applied in asylum claims.  The judge should have asked  himself  simply
    whether it was more probable than not that the parties intended to live
    together as husband and wife and that the matrimonial relationship  was
    subsisting.

12.  In principle there is no reason why the position  should  be  different
    in in-country appeals. I take the view that Mr Adophy was confusing the
    low threshold which describes what is required to be shown in order  to
    engage article 8 with the standard of proof, which applies  to  proving
    the necessary elements.

13.  By way of  illustration  in  J  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629, where the Court of Appeal was concerned
    with the risk of suicide under article 3 of  the  ECHR,  the  Court  of
    Appeal said that the article 3 threshold was particularly  high  as  it
    was a foreign case and it was even higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
    treatment was not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the  public
    authorities or the receiving State but  resulted  from  some  naturally
    occurring  illness,  whether  physical  or  mental.   Nonetheless   the
    standard of proof remained whether there was a real risk of a breach of
    article 3.

14.  Similarly in medical cases such as in N v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] UKHL 31, in which the House of Lords  held  that
    article 3 imposed no 'medical care' obligation  on  contracting  states
    even where in the absence of medical treatment the life of the would-be
    immigrant  would  be  significantly   shortened,   absent   exceptional
    circumstances such as occurred in the case of D v United Kingdom (1997)
    24 EHRR 425, in which the  applicant  was  in  the  final  stage  of  a
    terminal illness and had no prospect of medical care or family  support
    on expulsion to St Kitts.  Notwithstanding that the threshold  for  the
    engagement of article 3 in such cases was extremely  high,  nonetheless
    the standard of proof remained that of a  reasonable  likelihood  or  a
    real risk.#

15.  In KR (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 514 the Court of Appeal expressed the view that for article 8 to be
    engaged in a risk  of  suicide  case  it  had  to  be  shown  that  the
    appellant's removal would exposed  him  to  a  real  risk  of  suicide.
    Mention of this led Mr Adophy to argue that this demonstrated that  the
    standard of proof in all article 8 cases was  the  lower  standard.   I
    take the view that where the same facts are relied upon in  seeking  to
    establish a breach of article 8 as are  or  could  be  relied  upon  to
    establish a breach of article 3, it would be  anomalous  for  different
    standards of proof to apply.  As pointed out  above  in  BK  Ouseley  J
    excluded risk assessment cases from those cases where the  standard  of
    proof was on a  balance  of  probabilities.  The  short  answer  to  Mr
    Adophy's point is that this was not a medical or risk of suicide case.

16.  In these circumstances in requiring  the  appellant  to  establish  the
    ingredients of the  family  life  that  he  claimed  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, the First-tier Tribunal judge did not make an error on a
    point of law.

17.  I raised with the parties' representatives the issue of whether or  not
    the fact that the appellant was the biological father of his  daughters
    was sufficient to establish family life between the appellant  and  his
    daughters.  In paragraph 32 of its judgment in  Gull  v  Switzerland  -
    23218/94 - Chamber Judgment [1996] ECHR 5 the Court said:

         "The Court reiterates that it follows from the concept of family on
         which Article 8 (art. 8) is based that a child born  of  a  marital
         union is ipso jure part  of  that  relationship;  hence,  from  the
         moment of the child's birth and by  the  very  fact  of  it,  there
         exists between him and his parents  a  bond  amounting  to  "family
         life" (see the Berrehab v. the  Netherlands  judgment  of  21  June
         1988, series A no. 138, p.  14,  para.  21,  and  the  Hokkanen  v.
         Finland judgment of 23 September 1994, Series A no. 299-A,  p.  19,
         para. 54) which subsequent events cannot break save in  exceptional
         circumstances."

18.  I take the view that the First-tier Tribunal judge was  wrong  to  find
    that family life did not exist between the appellant and his daughters.
     If it were the case, however, that the appellant ceased  to  have  any
    contact whatsoever  with  his  daughters  then  it  would  follow  that
    notwithstanding his biological relationship it could not be said by any
    reasonable  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  that   even   requiring   the
    respondent to establish that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be
    disproportionate  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  it  would  be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for his  family
    life or that of his daughters for the appellant to be removed from  the
    United Kingdom, having regard to the fact that he has  been  unlawfully
    in the United Kingdom since 2001, that on the finding of the First-tier
    Tribunal judge he has no family life other than biological ties to  his
    two daughters with whom he has no contact and the weight to be afforded
    to the public interest in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control, in order to safeguard the economic well being of  the  country
    and protect the rights and freedoms of others.

19.  In these circumstances the determining issue in this appeal relates  to
    the question of whether  or  not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had no relationship whatsoever with
    his daughters.  Mr Adophy's submissions before me, in effect, were that
    there was ample  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to
    satisfy himself that there was an  existing  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his daughters.  It is the case, however, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge gave reasons for disbelieving the  account  of  the
    appellant and his wife.  He gave reasons for not accepting  the  letter
    from the  head  teacher  of  the  school  which  was  attended  by  the
    appellant's younger daughter and gave reasons  for  not  accepting  the
    authenticity of the letters purporting to  come  from  the  appellant's
    daughters.  The real issue therefore is whether the First-tier Tribunal
    judge was perverse in refusing to accept the evidence  relied  upon  by
    the appellant or whether the reasons which he gave  were  incapable  of
    justifying the conclusions which he reached.

20.  In paragraph 29 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    said that understandably the respondent was  caused  concern,  given  a
    paucity of information provided with the  application  to  support  any
    form of relationship as between the appellant and his wife,  let  alone
    the children.  He said that at the hearing  the  appellant  claimed  he
    collected  his  younger  daughter  each  day,  taking  her  to  school,
    returning and living in his wife's property during the school  day  and
    then collecting this younger child at the end of the school day, seeing
    to it that she had done her homework before leaving for  his  brother's
    home.  In paragraph 30 he said he found that evidence was undermined by
    his wife's evidence.  She had alluded to the appellant being around  so
    as to see the children, seeing them sometimes  five  days  a  week  and
    taking the younger one sometimes to school and otherwise taking them to
    the park and fairground.  He went on to say that he did  not  find  the
    appellant or his wife credible and  that  the  claims  were  a  blatant
    attempt to mislead him at the hearing.

21.  He did not accept the appellant's wife  was  a  credible  witness.   He
    noted her account was very  vague  when  she  was  asked  what  further
    details she might have placed before him in writing.  She appeared very
    hesitant when it was explained to  her  that  in  the  absence  of  the
    Presenting Officer there would be a number of additional  questions  to
    be put to her at the hearing.  In paragraph 32 he said while  he  could
    accept that someone might be nervous, her evidence - to say the least -
    countermanded that which had gone before from the appellant.   She  was
    reluctant to allude to the circumstances in which she presently enjoyed
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom with her children.  It
    was put to him at one point initially and perhaps mistakenly that  they
    were British citizens, which was not the case.  He said even though she
    might have been a reluctant witness she had no viable explanation as to
    why the appellant's brother's name would be on one  of  the  children's
    birth  certificates.  This  was  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's brother was named as the father of the younger child on her
    birth certificate.  The First-tier Tribunal judge said that the brother
    personally attended on the Registrar  of  Births  Death  and  Marriages
    attesting to the accuracy of the document.  The appellant's wife had no
    basis of explanation.

22.  In paragraph 33 he said  it  was  clear  that  the  appellant's  wife's
    relationship which brought about the grant of  leave  would  appear  to
    have lasted for long after the  respondent's  decision  was  made.   He
    noted that she said that  the  relationship  had  ended  in  July  2010
    whereas the appellant, who told him he only knew what he had been  told
    by his wife, said that the relations ended in April 2010, the grant  of
    unlimited leave being made in March  2010.   He  found  that  a  rather
    surprising comment for the appellant to make, saying he was only  aware
    of what he had been told, since it had been his  evidence  up  to  that
    point that he was a regular visitor to the house, staying in the  house
    throughout the day while his younger daughter was at  school.   Equally
    he did not appear to be able to correctly recite the name of his wife's
    former partner, despite the appellant claiming to spend his days  there
    in their home, when taking his younger child to and  from  school.   He
    said if the appellant had any contact with the children,  applying  the
    appropriate standard, he would have expected him to have been aware  of
    more of what was going on within the household in  which  the  children
    lived.

23.  In paragraph 30 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    made reference to the letter from  the  head  teacher  of  the  younger
    daughter's school, dated 18th October  2010.   He  said  that  did  not
    allude to the child being taken to school  but  being  collected  after
    school on a regular basis by the appellant.  He said the writer of  the
    letter was not available as a witness to confirm any of the contents of
    it, or how he knew  the  appellant.   He  said  he  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible witness and did not accept  the  account  of
    how he had procured the letter from the school  principal  in  all  the
    circumstances.

24.  In the grounds of appeal Mr Adophy claimed that  it  was  inconceivable
    that the principal was part of a contrivance to deceive.  The appellant
    bore the burden of proof, however, of establishing the authenticity  of
    the letter in accordance with the  determination  of  the  Tribunal  in
    Tanveer Ahmed (document unreliable and forged) Pakistan*  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 and the finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge  that  he  could
    not rely upon the authenticity of the letter did  not  imply  that  the
    person said to be the writer was party to any conspiracy.

25.  In relation to the letters purporting to come from  the  two  children,
    in paragraph 34 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that there were two letters said to be from the  children.   They  were
    not addressed or dated.  He said one had the body of a note written and
    appeared to have then had a child's signature appended to it.  He  said
    having regard  to  the  ages  of  the  children  it  was  difficult  to
    understand why they were not able to attend the proceedings.  There was
    no evidence before him as to any ongoing  gifts,  cards,  telephone  or
    text communication, or  other  tokens  of  endearment  as  between  the
    appellant and his children.  Moreover he noted the  documentation  that
    the appellant otherwise relied upon, as regards supportive testimonials
    from two others, dated from 2008 - that indeed  remained  the  case  in
    respect of correspondence (2008) from his brother Matthew.  It was said
    that the appellant's relationship with  another  woman  from  September
    2007 came to an end in March 2010 when he had moved in once  more  with
    his brother.  He said he attached little weight to the letters from the
    children, given his credibility findings in relation to  the  appellant
    and his wife, the manner in which the letters  appeared  to  have  been
    written and the absence of the children and the absence  of  supportive
    witnesses.

26.  In my view these reasons were properly open to the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge.  I note the statement  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman,  in
    granting permission to appeal, that the other points in the application
    apart from the point about  the  standard  of  proof,  might  not  have
    attracted a grant of permission to appeal.  Had he been  aware  of  the
    authorities to which I have referred it is unlikely that he would  have
    granted permission.

27.  The position therefore is that the First-tier Tribunal judge found  the
    appellant and his wife to be wholly unreliable  witnesses,  leading  to
    the conclusion, expressed in paragraph 30 of his determination, that he
    did not accept the appellant's claim that he enjoyed  any  relationship
    with his children.  I take the view that it  cannot  be  said  that  no
    reasonable First-tier  Tribunal  judge  could  have  reached  the  same
    conclusions as the First-tier Tribunal judge in this appeal.

28.  So far as the best interests of  the  children  are  concerned  in  the
    absence of  any  contact  whatsoever  between  the  appellant  and  his
    children no question of consideration of  their  best  interests  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 arose.

29.  The final point made by Mr Adophy was in relation to paragraph 395C  of
    HC 395, which was not referred to in the grounds of appeal, namely that
    the Fist-tier Tribunal judge failed to deal with paragraph 395C.  It is
    apparent from reading the determination, however, that, as pointed  out
    by Mr Melvin, this submission is without foundation.  In  paragraph  12
    of the determination the First-tier Tribunal judge, in dealing with the
    letter of  refusal,  said  that  further  consideration  was  given  to
    paragraph 395C of HC 395, as amended.  In paragraph 26  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge said that he doubted the relevance of paragraph 395C, as
    the appellant had been present in the United Kingdom without any lawful
    leave but for the avoidance of doubt, if  he  were  in  error  in  that
    regard he would nonetheless, having heard the appeal, subscribe in  the
    round to the  reasons,  analysis  and  conclusions  of  the  respondent
    thereupon for like reasons himself.

30.  It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal judge did  consider  paragraph
    395C and decided that the discretion of the respondent should not  have
    been exercised differently.

31.  For the sake of completeness I  should  say  that  Mr  Adophy  made  no
    submissions in relation to any documents which may have  been  sent  to
    the First-tier Tribunal after the promulgation  of  the  determination,
    referred to in the grant of permission to appeal.

32.  The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make  an  error  of  law  in  his
    determination of the appeal and therefore his determination  dismissing
    the appeal on human rights grounds under article 8 of  the  ECHR  shall
    stand.


Signed                          Dated


P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

