

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/19438/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester            |Decision Promulgated             |
|On 23 May 2017                 |On 24 May 2017                   |
|                               |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                DANYAL SHARIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. In a decision dated  19  January  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          ('FTT') allowed Mr Sharif's appeal  against  the  SSHD's  decision
          dated 15 May 2015 to refuse his application for a  residence  card
          as confirmation of his right to reside in the UK  as  an  extended
          family member ('EFM') of an EEA  national  under  the  Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ('the  2006
          Regulations').  The FTT found the  parties  to  be  in  a  durable
          relationship.


       2. In a decision dated 8 November 2016, Upper Tribunal  ('UT')  Judge
          Chalkley  allowed  the  SSHD's  appeal  against   the   First-tier
          Tribunal's decision.  He concluded that the FTT failed to  provide
          adequate reasons for the positive factual  findings  reached.   In
          particular, Judge Chalkley was  concerned  that  the  SSHD  raised
          specific credibility issues in her decision  letter  but  the  FTT
          did not engage with these.  The matter was then  adjourned  to  be
          remade in the Upper Tribunal.

Issues arising

       3. In a decision dated 13 June 2016 FTT Judge JM Holmes  granted  the
          SSHD permission to appeal on two grounds:


                    i) the FTT should not have allowed the appeal  outright.
                       Regulation  17(4)  of   2006   Regulations   provides
                       discretion to the SSHD to issue a residence  card  to
                       an EFM.  In Mr Sharif's case the  SSHD  has  not  yet
                       considered the exercise of such discretion.


                   ii) The findings of fact relevant to the conclusion  that
                       the parties are in a durable  relationship  has  been
                       inadequately reasoned.


       4. As set out above, the UT found there to be  an  error  of  law  in
          relation to (ii) above and as such did not address (i).


       5. It appears that the representatives before the UT failed to  bring
          an important case to attention of UT Judge Chalkley - Sala  (EFMs:
          Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  411  (IAC),  19  August  2016.   The
          headnote of Sala states: "There is no statutory  right  of  appeal
          against the decision of the Secretary of  State  not  to  grant  a
          Residence Card to a person  claiming  to  be  an  Extended  Family
          Member."

       6. Mr Sharif applied for a residence  card  as  the  EFM  of  an  EEA
          national with whom he claimed to have a durable relationship.   As
          such, for the purposes of any appeal against the decision, he  was
          an  EFM  under  reg  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   In  these
          circumstances, Mr McVeety accepted  that  the  FTT  did  not  have
          jurisdiction to consider the appeal.  Indeed,  Mr  McVeety  raised
          the point at a previous hearing before the UT on 7 February  2017.
           On that occasion UT Judge Reeds granted Mr Sharif an  adjournment
          to address Sala.  There has been no appearance  before  me  by  Mr
          Sharif or his representatives, and Sala has not been addressed.


       7. Although this matter was not raised before UT Judge Chalkley,  the
          Sala point entirely relates to the jurisdiction of  the  FTT,  and
          indeed the UT.

Disposal

       8. Mr Sharif has no right of appeal. The FTT had no jurisdiction to
          hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.


       9. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a
          decision that there was not a valid appeal before the FTT.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 May 2017

