
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/19157/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2016                  | On 18 November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ANTHONY GABRIEL IYAKI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C H Bexson, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, although technically the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  The appellant's date  of  birth
    is 31 December 1987.  On 9 January  2015,  the  appellant's  solicitors
    applied on his behalf for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.   On  13  May  2015,  the  appellant's
    application was refused under Regulation 8  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The respondent refused  to  issue  the  appellant  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community Law on grounds that the appellant had not provided sufficient
    evidence of a dependency on his EEA sponsor.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in a determination promulgated on 3 June 2016  the  First-
    tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under the said Regulations.

4.   The respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    this was granted on 21 October 2016.

5.   The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was this:  had  the  appellant
    established  that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   he   satisfied
    Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  in  that  he
    had been in a durable relationship as an unmarried partner  of  an  EEA
    sponsor and therefore that he qualified as an extended family member of
    such person.

The Issue Before the Upper Tribunal

6.   On the matter coming before us the respondent  sought  leave  to  amend
    their grounds of appeal by making reference  to  the  determination  in
    Sala (EFMs: right of appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411.  In terms of the
    foregoing determination it was held:

         "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the
         Secretary of State not to  grant  a  residence  card  to  a  person
         claiming to be an extended family member."  (see: the headnote).

7.   No objection was taken on behalf of the appellant to the  amendment  of
    the grounds of appeal and we accordingly allowed the grounds of  appeal
    to be amended to include a ground of appeal based on  the  decision  in
    the above case.  The amendment having been  made  Mr  Melvin  submitted
    that given  the  decision  in  Sala  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  and  accordingly  its  determination
    should be set aside.

8.   With respect to Mr Melvin's position  based  on  the  determination  in
    Sala only a single argument was put forward on behalf of the  appellant
    which was this: the decision in Sala post-dated  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and should  not  for  that  reason  be  applied
    retrospectively to the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
    submissions were put forward on behalf of the appellant challenging the
    substance of the decision in Sala  and  arguing  that  it  was  wrongly
    decided in law.

    Discussion

9.   We are satisfied that there is no merit in the argument put  before  us
    on behalf of the appellant.  Sala, in the absence of a challenge to the
    effect that it is not properly decided in law, (and no  such  challenge
    was made here) is the appropriate law to apply  when  an  appeal  comes
    before this Tribunal raising the issue of the jurisdiction of the First-
    tier Tribunal to hear an appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State not to grant a residence card to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member.  It is clearly open to us to apply the  law  as
    set out in Sala  to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    although Sala post-dates the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    We accordingly reject the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant.



10.  There being no challenge to the substance of the decision  in  Sala  we
    find that there is a clear material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  from
    the respondent's decision.

Decision

11.  We accordingly set aside the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as it is void for want of jurisdiction.

12.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

