
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20038/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 11 September 2015                          | On 2 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                              MR WEI SHEN KHOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Buley of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Geoff Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer

              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Malaysian national born on  23  February  1993.   He
    appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Morris  (the
    Immigration Judge) who, on 23 February 2015,  decided  to  dismiss  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision that  the  appellant  did  not
    qualify either under the Immigration Rules  or  on  the  grounds  that,
    independent of the Rules, he had established a private or  family  life
    in the UK.  On 22  April  2015  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker decided that there was an arguable error of law in the  decision
    of the FTT because  the  judge  appeared  to  hold  that  the  case  of
    Chikwamba had been "vitiated" by the  provisions  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  Judge  Zucker  cited
    the more recent case of Chen [2015]  UKUT  00189  as  he  thought  that
    showed the Immigration Judge's view of Chikwamba  had,  arguably,  been
    incorrect.

Background

2.   The appellant came to the UK on 17 August 2011 with entry clearance  as
    a Tier 4 General Student valid from 17 August 2011 until  23  September
    2013.  On 31 August 2013 he applied for indefinite  leave  (ILR)  which
    was rejected on 2 December 2013.  The application which  gave  rise  to
    the appeal before the Immigration Judge was made on 14 January 2014.

3.   The respondent set out her reasons for refusal in  a  letter  dated  15
    April 2014.  The application was considered under paragraph 298(ii)  of
    the Immigration Rules which deals with leave to enter or remain with  a
    view to settlement under paragraph 302 or Appendix FM.  The  respondent
    also considered the appellant's right to a family or  private  life  in
    the UK and also considered her duty regarding the welfare  of  children
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.
    This was specifically by reference to  paragraph  276ADE,  which  deals
    with private life, and Appendix FM, which deals with family  life.   It
    was noted that to establish a private life in the UK the appellant must
    have been living continuously here for at least twenty years or, if  he
    is under the age of 18, for  seven  years  discounting  any  period  of
    imprisonment.  Given that the appellant entered the  UK  on  17  August
    2011 it seemed to  the  appellant  that  he  could  not  satisfy  these
    requirements.  The appellant had resided the majority of  his  life  in
    Malaysia and it was not accepted by the respondent that he had  severed
    all  ties,  social,  cultural  and  family,  with  that  country.   The
    application was therefore refused under paragraph 276CE with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE.  Although the appellant  does  not  seem  to  have
    raised this in his application for leave to  remain,  a  further  point
    related to his relationship with the  sponsor  (his  mother),  whom  he
    claimed had supported him for over twenty years (see question 3.7).  It
    seems that the appellant's mother married  a  British  national  called
    Howard Iverson in Malaysia in April 2004.  The family had moved to  the
    UK in July 2011.  They currently reside in Devon.

4.   It seems  (see  paragraph  5  of  the  skeleton  argument  before  this
    Tribunal) that the family originally believed that the appellant  could
    apply  for  ILR  as  an  adult  dependent  of  Mrs  Iverson  but   this
    subsequently transpired to be incorrect.

The Appeal Proceedings

5.   The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal took the point that  family  life
    was enjoyed between the appellant  and  his  sponsor  and  step-father.
    Therefore, the interference with his human  rights  was  of  sufficient
    gravity to engage Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (ECHR).  Having regard  to  the  case  law  the  interference  was  not
    proportionate and did not strike a fair balance between the  rights  to
    the respect for family  life  and  the  public  interest  in  enforcing
    immigration control.

6.   Both parties were represented before the Immigration Judge and  it  was
    argued on behalf of the appellant that it would be  wrong  to  penalise
    the appellant for the  mistaken  belief  of  his  family  that  he  was
    entitled to ILR.  Secondly, that it was disproportionate to remove  him
    and finally that it would be unreasonable having regard to his need  to
    finish his course of study as a student.  It appeared  that  his  leave
    having expired prevented an application "in-country" for  such  a  visa
    and that he would need to return to Malaysia.

7.   Having  assessed  his  private  life  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    consider  that  there  would  be  consequences  of  such   gravity   to
    potentially engage Article 8.  She also had regard to the provisions in
    the 2002 Act in Sections 117B-D and considered that the respondent  had
    considered the numerous factors at play but reached a  correct  balance
    that the public interest did outweigh the appellant's own  interest  in
    continuing family life with  the  sponsor  and  his  step-father.   She
    referred to Chikwamba in paragraph 32 but considered that requiring the
    appellant to make an application from abroad was in the public interest
    but in any event the amendments introduced by Sections  117A-D  of  the
    2002 Act were, on the particular facts,  determinative  of  the  public
    interest.  The  public  interest  outweighed  the  appellant's  private
    interest in a private or family life.

8.   The appellant appealed that  decision  by  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal
    dated  4  March  2015.   They  take  the  additional  point  that   the
    Immigration  Judge  failed  adequately  to  take   into   account   the
    appellant's family  life  and  the  holding  that  Chikwamba  had  been
    "overruled" by the sections of the 2002 Act referred to  was  wrong  in
    law.

9.   Judge Zucker, whilst not refusing permission on  any  of  the  grounds,
    appears to have thought that it was the  third  ground  (the  Chikwamba
    point) that was the most arguable of the three.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Buley whilst not  abandoning  it,  did  not
    effectively pursue the second ground but did pursue both grounds 1  and
    3.

11.  The respondent submitted a response under Rule 24  on  30  April  2015.
    She stated that it was accepted that the appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  had  made  positive
    findings on behalf of the appellant but weighed them up against factors
    which permitted the appellant's return to Malaysia.  The judge had been
    entitled  to  find  that  it  was  not  disproportionate  in  all   the
    circumstances to remove the appellant from the UK.  The appellant could
    make an appropriate entry clearance application if he wished to do so.

12.  I heard oral submissions by both representatives which  are  summarised
    in the Tribunal file.  Although  they  were  lengthy,  essentially,  Mr
    Buley said, the Immigration Judge had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the
    interference with private life had been justified  and  had  failed  to
    answer the question: was there a family  life  in  the  UK  with  which
    interference was justified?  I was then referred to a series of  cases.
    Mr Buley helpfully provided these in a ring binder file with an  index.



13.  I was referred to the case of Nazim [2014] UKUT 00025.

14.  Paragraph 29 of that case  states  that  an  immigrant  must  take  the
    Immigration Rules as he finds them at the time he makes his application
    and not in the state they were in when he first sought admission to the
    UK.  However, it was pointed out that Nazim did not deal with the issue
    of family life.

15.  Mr Buley's main points were under ground 3.  He stated that it was  not
    reasonable to require his client to return to Malaysia and it was wrong
    for the Immigration Judge to consider that the  Immigration  Rules,  as
    amended by Section 117 of the 2002 Act, had overruled Chikwamba.  I was
    then referred to the case of Chen before the Upper Tribunal.   In  that
    case the Judge Gill found that where an application for entry clearance
    from abroad was required it was necessary for the  respondent  to  show
    that the temporary interference with family life  was  justified.   The
    burden rested on the decision maker to consider the facts  and  on  the
    facts of that case the appellant did  not  have  a  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Nothing in Section 117B of the 2002  Act  overruled
    Chikwamba and Chen stated that Chikwamba remained good law, subject  to
    qualifications.  The judge had not dealt adequately with the  obstacles
    to return if  the  appellant  did  go  back  to  Malaysia  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance there.

16.  Mr Harrison simply relied on the Rule 24 response and stated  that  the
    appellant had not applied to stay in  the  UK  as  a  student  and  the
    application for indefinite leave to remain was  bound  to  fail  as  he
    could not fulfil the criteria for such a claim .The  Immigration  Judge
    sympathised with  the  appellant  but  this  did  not  justify  him  in
    interfering with the respondent's decision,  which  was  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules.

17.  Mr Buley said by way of reply that he accepted that his client had  not
    qualified under the Immigration Rules but that  the  Immigration  Judge
    had failed to embark on the correct analysis required under  the  ECHR.
    He did say he may have reached a different conclusion. Mr Buley  argued
    that he may have done so if he had properly analysed the appeal.  I was
    invited in the circumstances to interfere with the decision.

18.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law and if so what steps should be  taken
    to remedy that.

Discussion

19.  The appellant is presently 22, having been born on  23  February  1993.
    Therefore, there is a minor  error  in  the  decision  of  the  FTT  at
    paragraph      24(iii)      as      Mr      Harrison      acknowledged.



20.  The appellant has been studying in  the  UK  since  2011,  having  been
    admitted as a Tier 4 General Student.  However, on 31  August  2013  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain.  It appears that the  appellant
    was made aware that a Tier 4 General Student visa could not be used  as
    a "route to settlement."   Nevertheless,  the  application  before  the
    respondent which triggered the appeal to the  FTT  was  an  application
    made on 14 January 2014 for ILR as the child of a settled person.  This
    too was not a correct application to make and it was eventually refused
    on 15 April 2014.  The substance of the refusal was set out in a letter
    dated 15 April 2014 which triggered  removal  directions  on  28  April
    2014.  However, even though the appellant had not applied on the  basis
    of his private or family life being  unlawfully  interfered  with,  the
    respondent considered his application under both  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and paragraph 276ADE but found not to meet any of the
    requirements of  those  Rules.   The  case  was  presented  before  the
    Immigration Judge solely on the  basis  that  the  appellant  qualified
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (the  ECHR)
    because he claimed that his relationship  with  his  mother  and  step-
    father, who had moved to the UK in 2011, would be unlawfully interfered
    with if he were returned to Malaysia, where he had spent  most  of  his
    life. As I understand it, this was an application outside the Rules.

21.  It was conceded before me, as it had been  before  the  FTT,  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  An attempt to
    revive such a claim is contained in ground 2 of the grounds  of  appeal
    in the sense that an attempt was made to argue that  paragraph  320(7B)
    required the respondent to take into account that the  appellant  would
    not be able to make an application for entry clearance for at  least  a
    year.  However, this ground was not thought to have much merit by Judge
    Zucker and Mr Buley, sensibly, did not pursue it before me.

22.  The purpose of the ECHR is to protect fundamental rights  and  freedoms
    not to protect lifestyle choices  or  facilitate  long-term  settlement
    into the UK.  Substantial policy  considerations  must  be  taken  into
    account by the respondent when applications are made by  students,  and
    others,  who  are  admitted  to  the  UK  on  a  temporary  basis   but
    subsequently seek to remain here permanently.  The  circumstances  must
    be exceptional before such an application will succeed.   The  decision
    maker is expected to apply sufficient flexibility to  allow  exceptions
    where they are justified.

23.  The grounds pursued by Mr Buley were as follows:

       . Ground 1 -  it  is  argued  that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
         sufficiently consider the extent of the family life  the  appellant
         had formed in the UK and ask whether  the  interference  with  that
         family life was justified under Article 8.
       . Ground 3 -  by  which  the  appellant  sought  to  argue  that  the
         Immigration Judge  failed  to  apply  the  case  of  Chikwamba  and
         erroneously appeared to have considered it to have been altered  by
         Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.


24.  I will consider each of these grounds in turn.

Ground 1 - family life

25.  It is argued that the Immigration Judge did not apply the  same  rigour
    to the issue of family life that she applied to private life.  The  two
    issues are closely related and I do not accept this  criticism  of  the
    Immigration Judge.  Plainly her findings in relation  to  private  life
    were closely allied to those in relation to family life.  It is notable
    that she found the appellant to have established family life in the  UK
    with his mother and step-father in a close and emotional  relationship.
    She also found the appellant to be financially dependent on  the  older
    generation.  The appellant had a close relationship with other siblings
    living in the UK  and  abroad.   The  Immigration  Judge  gave  careful
    consideration to the extensive case law on Article 8 including the case
    of Nazim, which, as I was reminded,  is  a  case  relating  to  private
    rather than family life.  Mr Buley alleges that the  Immigration  Judge
    failed to consider the proportionality of removal but I find  that  the
    Immigration Judge fully considered this issue at paragraph  27  of  her
    determination where she made a "careful and informed evaluation" as she
    was required to.  In addition, I do not  necessarily  accept  that  the
    considerations in paragraph 29 relating to private life may be put in a
    separate compartment for they are, as I have stated,  closely  related.
    The Immigration Judge fully accepted that the appellant's  family  life
    did not automatically end at the  age  of  18,  that  he  had  a  close
    relationship with  his  mother  and  step-father  but  that  it  was  a
    proportionate and  necessary  decision  having  regard  to  the  public
    interest considerations  in  the  case.   It  is  noteworthy  that  the
    appellant is a well-qualified individual in his 20s who  is  relatively
    financially secure having regard, in part, to the financial  assistance
    of his mother and step-father.

Ground 2 - The Chikwamba Point

26.  Judge Zucker read the decision of the FTT as saying that Chikwamba  had
    been "vitiated by the provisions of Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act."
    With respect to Judge Zucker I do not necessarily read the decision  of
    the FTT in the same way.  Paragraph 32 of the  decision  simply  states
    that wider  considerations  in  relation  to  the  need  for  effective
    immigration control must be considered and that Sections 117A-D of  the
    2002 Act reinforce that.   The  Immigration  Judge  clearly  found  the
    decision to be proportionate and that was a conclusion she was entitled
    to come to.

27.  Insofar as the Immigration Judge did suggest that  Chikwamba  had  been
    "overruled" or "vitiated" by the sections of the  2002  Act  that  were
    amended in 2014, she would not have been correct to do so.  However the
    case of Chikwamba was very different on  its  facts  from  those  here.
    There  were,  "harsh  and  unpalatable"  consequences  of  removal   to
    Zimbabwe, which at that time was not considered safe by  the  Secretary
    of State leading to him  suspending  removals  to  that  country.   The
    consequences of requiring the appellant to return to Zimbabwe and  make
    an application for entry clearance in order to continue the family life
    she had formed in the UK were not considered justified in the  name  of
    the maintenance and enforcement of effective immigration  control.   As
    Lord Brown emphasised, Immigration Rules are not to be applied  rigidly
    and inflexibly. The respondent was  required  to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's circumstances including the  extent  to  which  there  were
    difficulties in return to the  country  of  origin  and  the  level  of
    security in that country.

28.  The Chikwamba argument can apply to a wide variety of  cases  including
    cases where the appellant could  not  apply  from  abroad  and  succeed
    because he would not qualify under  the  Immigration  Rules  for  entry
    clearance into the UK.  However, as the House of  Lords  emphasised  in
    Chikwamba in most cases the Entry Clearance Officer  abroad  is  better
    qualified to determine whether the Rules were satisfied than a court or
    tribunal in the UK.  In this case I have found  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant could not apply from Malaysia to come to the UK as a  student
    and no evidence was placed before the Tribunal that there would be  any
    lengthy delay in doing so.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to find,
    as she  appears  to  have  done,  that  the  appellant  could  make  an
    application and return  as  a  student  through  proper  channels.   No
    evidence appears to have been placed before her as to  any  significant
    obstacles in doing so.  She was therefore entitled to conclude that  in
    a case where the appellant plainly failed to  meet  the  exceptionality
    requirements of the Rules for family or private  life  in  the  UK,  he
    could, nevertheless, apply from abroad to re-enter the UK as a student.
     Were he to do so, he would be able to resume his family life.

29.  Mr Buley also argued that the  case  of  Chen  [2015]  UKUT  00189  had
    qualified the case of Chikwamba and I accept that.  Essentially,  where
    an application from abroad would be granted and there is a  significant
    interference with a family life formed in the UK the weight  to  attach
    to the need for effective immigration control tends to be reduced as it
    would not serve  any  valuable  purpose.   However,  this  particularly
    applies where there are children (see paragraph 39 of Chen).  The  need
    for a clear decision which considers all the  individual  circumstances
    of the case is obvious but it is by no means clear from Chen that there
    is any  error  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the  Immigration  Judge.




Conclusions

30.  The decision of the FTT appears well-reasoned and  thorough.   It  took
    fully into account the unusual  circumstances  of  this  case  but  the
    conclusion that the appellant did not qualify exceptionally outside the
    Immigration Rules was one the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  come
    to.  The appellant has not taken issue with  the  FTT's  conclusion  in
    relation  to  private  life  but  has  asserted  that  the   issue   of
    proportionality of the decision  on  family  life  was  not  adequately
    reasoned or considered.  In my view it was properly reasoned and  fully
    considered.  I agree with the respondent that the appellant could  have
    returned  to  Malaysia  and  that  this   would   not   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with his human rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material  error
of law and the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
refusal  for  further  leave  to  remain  is  dismissed.   Accordingly,  the
respondent's decision stands.

There is no challenge against the failure of the FTT to  make  an  anonymity
direction or a fee award.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

