
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20888/2014
                                                               AA/08366/2014
                                                               AA/08375/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                              mohiuddin hossain
                             rebeka sultana reba
                             anindya-taj jayita
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by Direct Access
Barrister
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wiseman promulgated  on  23  January  2015.  There  are  three
    appellants. The first  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  20
    October 2003 with leave to remain as a student until 31  October  2006.
    He made applications  for  further  leave  as  a  student,  which  were
    granted, and the last period of leave granted to him was to  expire  on
    15 January 2014. On 20 September 2007 the second appellant, who is  the
    spouse of the first  appellant,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  his
    dependant. They have two children, the third appellant being the oldest
    child who was born in the United Kingdom  on  20  September  2008.  The
    younger child was born in October 2014.

2.   On 12 March 2013 the  respondent  curtailed  the  leave  of  the  first
    appellant following the revocation of his  college's  licence.   On  22
    October 2013 the first appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis that he  had  completed  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence. This application was initially refused  on
    16 March 2014.  There  was  however  a  reconsideration  in  which  the
    Secretary of State considered the position  of  the  second  and  third
    appellants as well, but  the  applications  were  again  refused  on  1
    October 2014. The Secretary of State reasoned that the first  appellant
    had only accumulated nine years and seven months' lawful  residence  in
    the United Kingdom and so  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In her decision the Secretary  of  State  considered
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and made reference to  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in  respect  of  the
    children. The Secretary of State was not  however  satisfied  that  the
    appellants met the requirements of the Immigration Rules; nor  was  the
    Secretary of State satisfied that there  were  any  particular  factors
    outside of the Immigration Rules that could justify a grant of leave to
    remain under Article 8.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

3.   At the appeal hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  an  adjournment
    application was made to  obtain  a  consultant  clinical  psychological
    report in respect of the third appellant. She was 6  yeas  old  at  the
    time.  This  was  refused  by  the  judge.  At  paragraph  57  of   his
    determination the judge stated:

         "I would of course have considered such a report  had  it  actually
         been prepared and available and I do  understand  that  a  date  in
         January was being aimed at in that respect because it was initially
         thought that that was when the hearing was  going  to  take  place.
         Whilst no Tribunal would do anything other than consider  carefully
         such a report, it is difficult to see what assistance it would have
         given in this particular case and indeed the process might actually
         be counterproductive. I was not told that the child was even  aware
         of the appeal and its implications but I was certainly specifically
         and properly told by Mr Chipperfield that she has no psychiatric or
         psychological problems.  I suspect that she is  simply  getting  on
         with the life she has always known and any assessment of her  would
         describe her as well and happy in her life here and likely to  have
         some  difficulty  in  adjusting  to   life   in   another   country
         altogether."

    The judge refused the adjournment application. The judge  went  on  the
    hear evidence from the first and second appellant.

4.   In  dismissing  the  appeals  the  judge  was  of  the  view  that  the
    appellants' removal would not breach Article 8. The  judge  noted  that
    the  first  appellant  was  not  present  in  a  category  leading   to
    settlement. The judge found there were no very significant obstacles to
    reintegration of the appellants, this being a  reference  to  the  test
    contained in paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules even  though
    no specific  reference  was  made  to  this  paragraph  in  the  actual
    determination.  The judge  considered  that  the  third  appellant  had
    started primary school but was at an age where her  relationships  with
    her own family were more important  than  relationships  she  may  have
    established outside the family. The judge made reference to the case of
    Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT
    197 and stated:

         "It has been made clear that it is in  the  best  interest  of  the
         child to live with and be brought up by his or her parents; all the
         family would be returning to Bangladesh together and so  there  was
         no breach of family  life  rights  at  all  although  private  life
         obviously changes. Assisted by parents with the  full  and  lengthy
         knowledge of Bangladesh right  through  to  significant  adulthood,
         these children will have no real difficulty in that respect."

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

5.   The grounds to the Upper  Tribunal  are  twofold.   There  is  first  a
    challenge to the fact that the judge made no  reference  to  paragraphs
    117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

6.   The second basis of challenge to the decision is  the  refusal  of  the
    judge to adjourn to enable the clinical report to be obtained.  At  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing I received a copy  of  a  report  by  Dr  Rozmin
    Halari.  She is the same individual who was identified in  the  initial
    application to adjourn before the First-tier Tribunal as the expert who
    was going to be instructed.  The date of the report is 5 May 2015.

Paragraph 117B

7.   Paragraph 117B identifies a number of  public  interest  considerations
    that are mandatory  for  any  judge  to  consider  when  assessing  the
    proportionality of an appealable decision. It is argued with some force
    by Mr Turner that the failure by the judge  to  identify  or  make  any
    reference to  the  substantive  considerations  within  paragraph  117B
    constitutes an error of law. I fully accept that  the  judge  does  not
    mention paragraph 117B or the English language proficiency  of  any  of
    the appellants, although the judge does talk at length  in  respect  of
    the first appellant's hopes to become a barrister, he already  being  a
    qualified solicitor. I accept that there  was  a  legal  error  in  the
    decision.

8.   The question then arises as to  the  materiality  of  that  error.   Mr
    Turner submitted that it was such a fundamental error as to be fatal to
    the decision. I do not accept this submission. With respect to  section
    117B  the  first  appellant  was  relying  on  his  and  his   family's
    proficiency in English and  his  ability  to  financially  support  his
    family. I am assisted by the authority  of  AM  (Section  117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC). Headnote 2 of that authority reads thus:

         "An appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
         remain from either Section 117B(2) or (3) whatever  the  degree  of
         his fluency in English or the strength of his financial resources."

    I consider also head note 4 of the same authority which reads:

         "Those who at any given date held a precarious  immigration  status
         must have held at that stage an otherwise lawful grant of leave  to
         enter or remain. A person's immigration  status  is  precarious  if
         their continued presence in the UK will  be  dependent  upon  their
         obtaining a further grant of leave."

    Having regard to the clear principles enunciated in  AM  I  cannot  see
    how, had the judge made specific reference to all  of  the  factors  in
    117B material to this appeal, it would  have  materially  assisted  the
    appellants,  and  I  therefore  find  the  Judge's  omission  does  not
    constitute a material error of law.

The adjournment request

9.   In  relation  to  the  adjournment  request  Mr  Chipperfield,  Counsel
    representing the appellants at the First-tier Tribunal, indicated  that
    the third appellant had no psychological or psychiatric problems. There
    were various statements from  the  third  appellant's  parents  in  the
    bundles before the First-tier Tribunal. These  disclosed  no  issue  of
    concern with the third appellant's wellbeing or health. They stated, in
    effect, that she was settled and happy at school. The third appellant's
    school report of 2014 indicated that she was a pleasure to teach, had a
    great imagination, was a confident girl and a highly motivated learner,
    helped others, and was always full of enthusiasm.  In  respect  of  the
    various  areas  of  learning,  including   listening   and   attention,
    understanding, speaking, moving and handling, self-confidence, managing
    feelings and behaviour,  reading,  making  relationships,  numbers  and
    writing, she was exceeding expectations.  Nothing in the evidence  that
    was before the judge indicated that the third  appellant  was  anything
    other than a happy and healthy girl doing well  at  school.  The  paper
    adjournment request to the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  particularise
    why the report was specifically sought.

10.  The case law relied on by the First-tier judge, such  as  Azimi-Moayed,
    indicate that, from the age of about 4 onwards, any significant  period
    of residence by a child may generate  relationships  outside  of  their
    home potentially sufficient to resist removal.  I note that  the  third
    appellant was only just 6 at the date of  the  hearing  and  there  was
    nothing in the evidence before  the  judge  to  suggest  that  she  had
    established any significant relationships outside her own family.  I am
    very mindful of the case law relating to  adjournments.   I  take  into
    account the fact that the adjournment was for a relatively short period
    of time.  The question whether the judge's decision in relation to  the
    adjournment was lawful is not a question of reasonableness but  whether
    the refusal to grant the adjournment deprived the appellants of a  fair
    hearing. I have also considered the authorities on the  best  interests
    of the child, in particular JO (Section 55 duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
    00517. I am satisfied that the judge was properly informed of the third
    appellant's position.  I am  not  persuaded,  in  the  absence  of  any
    particular basis for  believing  that  the  third  appellant  would  be
    significantly adversely affected by  her  removal,  that  the  clinical
    psychological report would have been likely to have made  any  material
    difference to the Judge's conclusions. I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    did properly carry out his Section 55 duty and that he did not  err  in
    law in refusing the adjournment application.

Alternative consideration of the clinical psychologist's report

11.  However if I am wrong in the above assessment I will now consider  that
    clinical psychological report. It is my view, and for the reasons  that
    I will  give,  that  the  report  would  not  have  made  any  material
    difference to the judge's conclusions. I find that  no  judge  properly
    directing themselves on the appropriate Article 8 test, and taking full
    account of the expert's findings, could have arrived at  any  different
    conclusion.

12.  The expert report is the response to two particular questions posed  by
    the appellant's solicitors. (i) Were the best interests of the children
    best served in the United Kingdom or in Bangladesh, (ii)  what  impact,
    if any, would there be on the children if the family were to be removed
    from the United Kingdom? By way of relevant background the expert noted
    that the first and second appellant strongly believed that  the  family
    will have a better quality of life if they were to remain in the United
    Kingdom, that they felt settled in the UK and had  created  a  positive
    family life and they felt integrated within the community. It was noted
    by the expert that the children regularly visited  their  uncle,  aunts
    and cousins with whom they had developed good attachments.

13.  The expert noted that the third appellant was in year 1 of her  primary
    school. The third appellant indicated to  the  expert  that  she  loved
    school and described it as being very fun. She told the expert that she
    had lots of  friends  and  named  a  few.  The  third  appellant  spoke
    positively about different teachers, she indicated that she worked hard
    during the week and at weekends she  went  out  with  her  family.  The
    expert considered  the  school  reports  and  considered  the  parental
    relationship, finding that it was a close family.

14.  When assessing the impact of deportation the expert noted the claim  by
    the first and second appellants that removal would  be  devastating  to
    the family. The first and second appellants were  worried  about  their
    children and the disruption to their  education.  The  third  appellant
    indicated that she would feel very upset if removed because  she  would
    miss her friends and school.  She said that she was  very  worried,  if
    she left the UK, that she would not get  a  proper  education  and  she
    would miss out on  opportunities  such  as  entering  competitions  and
    having a chance to excel academically.  She  reported  that  everything
    would be different at another school and she  did  not  want  to  leave
    London because she described it as "our home".  The  first  and  second
    appellants stated that the political circumstances  in  Bangladesh  had
    become worse and that this may impact adversely on the children. I note
    however that no evidence was provided as to how, as  individuals,  they
    would be affected. I find this to be  a  highly  generalised  and  non-
    specific fear.

15.  The first and second appellants informed the expert that the  political
    unrest is causing a lot of disruption to  schools  and  to  travel  and
    there was a lot of violence and disruption to the security  systems  in
    the country. No evidence  however  was  adduced  in  support  of  these
    claims. The expert carried  out  a  parenting  stress  index  test  and
    concluded, at paragraph 55 of her report,  that  the  overall  parental
    stress experienced by the first and second appellant fell within normal
    limits and there was no  indication  of  difficulties  in  parent/child
    system. In relation  to  a  child's  strength  checklist  which  checks
    industrial capability,  creative  capability,  self-coping  and  social
    interaction skills, the  third  appellant's  results  were  all  within
    acceptable limits and there were no areas of  concern  noted.   Towards
    the conclusions of her report the expert psychologist  noted  that  the
    third appellant is settled socially, academically  and  emotionally  in
    the  UK,  that  leaving  the  UK  would  disrupt  her   education   and
    achievements to date, her attachments to peers and extended family, and
    would negatively impact upon her confidence. It was the opinion of  the
    expert that it is in the best interests for both children to remain  in
    the United Kingdom. I  accept  this  but  the  best  interests  of  the
    children is a primary and  not  a  paramount  consideration.  It  is  a
    significant factor in any proportionality assessment  but  it  must  be
    considered against the  public  interest  factors,  specifically  those
    indentified in Section 117B, and through the prism of paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules, which gives expression to Article  8  private
    life  considerations.  I  find  these  are  significant  countervailing
    factors. I additionally note that the third appellant is  not  British,
    has never had any right to future education in the  UK,  and  that  her
    immigration status has always been precarious.

16.  At paragraph 65 of her conclusions the expert notes that it  is  likely
    that disrupting the third  appellant's  current  developmental  routine
    would predispose her to low mood and deterioration  in  her  levels  of
    motivation  and  positivity.  The  expert  indicated  that  the   third
    appellant would find it difficult to adjust to a different education or
    cultural system, her command of Bengali was said to be  poor,  although
    it is not clear on what basis this conclusion was reached.  The  expert
    claimed that a potential increase in the levels of  stress  experienced
    in the home  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  a  child's  overall
    development. The expert does not however indicate the particular degree
    of potential deterioration or difficulty that may be faced by the third
    appellant or how significant or lasting any impact would be. The  third
    appellant will have the support  of  her  parents  who  have  lived  in
    Bangladesh  all  of  their  lives  and  who  are  very  familiar   with
    Bangladeshi society. The first appellant's qualifications would put him
    in good stead to financially support the family. It  is  recognised  in
    the authorities I have already mentioned that a child of a young age is
    generally more adaptable. This is not considered in the report. I  note
    that the third appellant is not at any critical stage of her  education
    and that she has no medical difficulties. It is said by the expert that
    depriving the children of a good quality of  education  in  the  UK  to
    perhaps an inadequate  level  of  education  in  Bangladesh  will  have
    significant negative impact  on  their  confidence  as  well  as  their
    emotional, social and  academic  development.  There  was  no  evidence
    before  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  standard  of  education   in
    Bangladesh. But in any event, the same could  be  said  in  respect  of
    every child studying in the United Kingdom  who  relocates  abroad.  In
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74B the Supreme Court noted, in the  context  of  a
    family unit similar to the present being  returned  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo, that the children were not British and they  had  no
    right to future education and healthcare, and  it  was  concluded  that
    there would be no  breach  of  Article  8.  The  expert  concludes,  at
    paragraph 72, that a life in Bangladesh  would  disrupt  these  already
    developed systems and this could significantly impact  on  the  overall
    psychological wellbeing of the appellants. I am not however  satisfied,
    for the  reasons  I  have  given,  that  the  expert  report  discloses
    compelling circumstances sufficient to entitle the appellants to remain
    in the United Kingdom. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    23 July 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]    23 July 2015
Signed   Date

Judge Blum

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

