
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/20262/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 15 November 2016                      |On 20 December 2016       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                         Mr PATRICK EROMONSELE EJALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel
      (instructed by Gans & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS











      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Jordan on 21 September 2016 against the  determination  of
           First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor,  who  had  dismissed   the
           Respondent's appeal asserting an entitlement to settlement based
           on  10 years' continuous lawful residence, pursuant to paragraph
           276B of the  Immigration  Rules,  a  claim  added  by  permitted
           amendment  to  his  existing  appeal  seeking  settlement  under
           Appendix FM and/or Article 8 ECHR as  the  spouse  of  a  United
           Kingdom settled person. The decision and reasons was promulgated
           on 23 March 2016.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born there  on  9  March
           1969.  By the date of the appeal hearing before  Judge  Traynor,
           the Respondent was no longer pursuing his Appendix FM appeal  as
           the relevant relationship had ended.  He  relied  on  his  wider
           family circle and his private life under Article  8  ECHR.   The
           major part of the appeal was however devoted  to  the  paragraph
           276B claim.  Judge Traynor found that the Appellant's leave  had
           been  broken  between  April  2007  and  late  2009,  when   the
           Respondent had  been  granted  fresh  leave  to  remain.   Judge
           Traynor further found that the Appellant's human  rights  appeal
           should be dismissed on proportionality  grounds,  the  Appellant
           having been unable to  meet  any  applicable  Immigration  Rules
           which indicated where the balance should be struck.  There  were
           no compelling circumstances.  Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      3.    Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal  but
           was granted in the Upper Tribunal because it was considered that
           it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  erred  procedurally  by
           engaging  in  private  research,  specifically  in  relation  to
           extracting from the archives a copy of the  determination  of  a
           judge in appeal reference IA/020989/2007 on which Judge  Traynor
           had relied when finding that the Respondent's  leave  to  remain
           had been broken. Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal  for
           the further conduct of the appeal.








      Submissions


      4.    Mr Hawkin for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal.  In summary he argued that  the  judge  had  acted  with
           procedural unfairness, although Mr Hawkin was  bound  to  accept
           (having seen the detailed chronology prepared by Ms  Brocklesby-
           Weller from Home Office records, which was accepted as accurate)
           that  the  evidence  now  available  as  to  the  issue  of  the
           Appellant's  continuous  lawful  leave  did   not   assist   the
           Appellant.  Materiality  of  any  procedural  unfairness  was  a
           matter for the Upper Tribunal. There was nothing which Mr Hawkin
           wished to add to the grounds of appeal lodged before  the  Upper
           Tribunal.


      5.    Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Respondent had prepared a  detailed
           chronology, which had been shown to Mr Hawkin to enable  him  to
           take instructions  before  the  appeal  hearing  commenced.   As
           noted, Mr Hawkin had been able to confirm  that  the  chronology
           was accurate.  For present purposes, it is  sufficient  to  note
           from that chronology that  the  Appellant's  appeal  rights  had
           become exhausted on 28 March 2007, at which point his section 3C
           leave had expired.  The Appellant  was  next  granted  leave  to
           remain on 9 September 2009.  The gap was beyond any grace period
           permitted under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  The 10
           year claim failed and any error of law  was  immaterial.   There
           was no challenge to the judge's other  findings  dismissing  the
           Article 8 ECHR appeal.  The decision and  reasons  should  stand
           unchanged.




      No material error of law finding


      6.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           generous,  although  greater  latitude  may  be  expected  where
           questions of procedural fairness arise.  But in  the  tribunal's
           judgment, study of Judge Traynor's decision  and  reasons  shows
           that, far from straying into  procedural  unfairness,  he  acted
           with scrupulous fairness.  As already noted, the paragraph  276B
           claim was a late addition to  the  Appellant's  case,  doubtless
           because his advisors thought that their client had clocked up 10
           year's residence because of the delay in his appeal  reaching  a
           substantive  hearing.   Such  situations  have   occurred   with
           surprising frequency  because  of  the  limited  resources  made
           available to the First-tier Tribunal.


      7.    There was little doubt that the Appellant had been in the United
           Kingdom for 10 years, but the  issue  was  whether  that  period
           satisfied the requirement of paragraph 276B that such period  be
           lawful as well as continuous.  As Judge Traynor noted at [13] of
           his decision, during the Appellant's evidence  it  emerged  that
           there had been a previous appeal hearing.  The determination was
           not available.  There was no Home Office Presenting  Officer  at
           the first instance hearing.  It  was  plainly  material  to  the
           central issue in the appeal.  The judge explained that he  would
           obtain a copy, and give the Appellant the opportunity to comment
           if the determination needed  any  further  explanation.   As  he
           explained,  having  received  the   determination,   the   judge
           reasonably decided that the determination spoke for  itself  and
           proved that the Appellant's leave to  remain  had  been  broken.
           There was nothing which the Appellant could possibly have  said,
           as he advanced an Article 8 ECHR claim separately.  The break in
           continuity is now  accepted  in  the  light  of  the  chronology
           referred to above.


      8.    It is obvious that the steps taken by Judge  Traynor  were  with
           the express consent of the Appellant who  was  legally  advised.
           The Appellant should, of course, have had a copy of the previous
           determination himself, although nothing  particularly  turns  on
           that.  It would have been a complete waste  of  the  Appellant's
           costs to have adjourned the hearing until the determination  was
           available.  It was a practical and fair  solution,  far  removed
           from a judge conducting  private  research  before  or  after  a
           hearing without informing the parties and seeking their reaction
           or comment to any so material obtained.


      9.    The tribunal goes further: the steps taken by Judge Traynor were
           a necessary step in the interests of justice.  Unless the  facts
           had been properly ascertained, an  incorrect  judicial  decision
           might have been reached and the Appellant would have received  a
           benefit to which he  had  no  entitlement.  To  the  Appellant's
           credit, he now accepts that the evidence shows  that  his  leave
           was broken, and there was no suggestion that the 10  year  claim
           was advanced by anything more than a  limited  understanding  of
           the law. The  tribunal  accordingly  finds  that  there  was  no
           procedural unfairness and no error of law.


      10.   There was no substantive  challenge  to  the  dismissal  of  the
           Article 8 ECHR appeal,  rightly  as  the  claim  was  thoroughly
           examined in accordance with current authorities.    The  onwards
           appeal must be dismissed.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law and stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
