
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20867/2013
     IA/21727/2013
     Ia/21729/2013
     IA/21731/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 09 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     JAN
                                     RAM
                                  Master JN
                                 MASTER  UN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Mellon,Counsel, instructed by Perry Clements
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   All four appellants are citizens of Ghana. JAN's date  of  birth  is  3
    March 1975. His wife,RAM's date of birth is  7  November  1978.   Their
    children are JN and his date of birth is 16 June 2005 and  UN  and  his
    date of birth is 22 February 2008.  They also have a  daughter,  VN,who
    was born on 7  December  2011.   She  is  not  an  appellant  in  these
    proceedings.  She is a citizen of Ghana. I shall refer to  JAN  as  the
    appellant in this decision. All the children were born in the UK.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 22 June 2001 having been issued with  a
     valid visit visa which expired in December 2001. He travelled to Malta
    on 26 June 2001 and left Malta on 2 July 2001.    It  is  not  entirely
    clear when he re-entered the UK but it was some  time  between  5  July
    2001 and 7 December 2001.  The appellant was joined in the  UK  by  his
    wife, RAM, on 2 September 2004.  She had  been  granted  a  visit  visa
    which expired on 13 January 2005.   They  have  both  overstayed  since
    their visas expired.

 3.      On 1 April 2010 the appellants applied for leave  to  remain  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights.  This application was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision  of  9  January  2011.
    Following an application for judicial review  the  Secretary  of  State
    reconsidered the application and refused  the  application  on  14  May
    2013.  The application was refused under  Appendix  FM   and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules. The decision-maker also considered paragraph  353B
    of the Rules and concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances
    in the appellant's case to justify allowing him to remain in the UK.

4.   The appellants appealed and their appeals were dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Dennis in a decision that was promulgated on  7
    July 2014 following a hearing on 25 April 2014.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Chalkley  on  15  December
    2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the FtT

5.   The judge heard evidence from the main appellant and his wife and  made
    the following findings:

         "11.  In  the  reconsideration  of  14  May  2013,  the  respondent
             considered the application  of Appendix FM  and concluded  the
             appellants can be seen to  meet  its  requirements   and  that
             there  'no  other  sufficiently  compelling  or  compassionate
             circumstances to justify allowing you to remain in the in  the
             UK' noting that the children are 'all very young and could  be
             reasonably expected to adjust to life abroad with the  support
             of yourself and their mother'.  There do not  appear  to  have
             been separate letters prepared  for  the  minor  children.  As
             noted above, it has been asserted, and  it  is  accepted,  per
             Edgehill [2014] that it is insufficient solely to consider  an
             application made in 2010,  as  here,  under  the  subsequently
             adopted Appendix FM.


         12.  Reliance is placed by the appellants in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
             and  E-A  Nigeria  [2011]  for  the  premise  that  a  primary
             consideration in any decision must be the  best  interests  of
             the child as further mandated by section 55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requiring the  respondent
             'to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in
             the United Kingdom'.  These contentions are, equally,  neither
             challenged nor disputed. It remains to  establish  what  their
             best interests may be in the  totality  of  the  circumstances
             presented.


         13.  Both parties  have  relied  upon  E-A  (Nigeria)  [2011].   At
             paragraphs  32  and  33  thereof  reference  is  made  to  the
             withdrawn policy  DP5-96  regarding  the  'seven  years  child
             concession' which, while  withdrawn  in  2008,  is  deemed  to
             'continue to be an important relevant factor'.  Other  factors
             then set out are the length of the residence  of  the  child's
             parents without leave, whether their removal has been  delayed
             through protracted or repetitive representations, the  age  of
             the children, whether or not the children were conceived  when
             the parents had leave to remain  and,  whether  those  parents
             have  a  history   of   criminal   behaviour   of   deception.
             Significantly, subsection (e) of paragraph 33  notes  'whether
             return to the parents' country of origin  would  pose  extreme
             hardship for the children or put  their  health  seriously  at
             risk'.


         14.  I found this case of particular significance and assistance in
             this respect, especially so as the  appellants  clearly  rely,
             and principally, on the fact that JN, having been born in 2005
             has spent all of his nine years in  the  UK.   The  appellants
             rely on EM (Zimbabwe) CG [2011]  for  the  position  that  the
             residence of a child in the United  Kingdom  for  seven  years
             would justify a decision to regularise his stay here  'in  the
             absence of conduct or remains to the  contrary',  and  it  was
             urged that this line of  thought  thus  creates  an  effective
             presumption in favour of this to render any  decision  to  the
             contrary disproportionate. I am not prepared to draw that from
             the case,  though.   I  accept  its  general  premise  of  the
             significance of the fact of long or sole residence in  the  UK
             on a child.

         15.  There are,  however, other matters to be considered. The first
             is that in the event the appeal  fails, the whole family  will
             be removed as a unit. There is no suggestion to the  contrary.
             Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  makes  it  clear,  however,  that   mere
             presence in the UK does not mean the  best  interests  of  any
             child necessarily are to be served remaining there. The  first
             considerations is that his best interests are served by  being
             with his parents, and if they  are  to  be  moved,  then  'the
             starting point suggests that so should dependent children  who
             form part of  their household unless there re reasons  to  the
             contrary' noting, however, that 'stability and  continuity  of
             education provisions and the benefit growing up without in the
             cultural norms of the society to which the belong' are  to  be
             considered. It also cites that 'seven years from age  four  is
             likely to be significant to a child than the first seven years
             of life'.  I concur with  this  view,  and  find  it  entirely
             apposite in this case.

         16.      I note that despite the representations of  the  appellant
             mother that none of the children  speak  their  native  tongue
             (apparently Fanti) she could not explain why  it  was  that  a
             teacher's letter relating to JN in 2009 states that  he  spoke
             almost no English, when he first came to  school,  which  have
             been produced, show him to  be  quit  a  slow  developer  with
             apparently, very limited progress over the years,  though  his
             younger brother appears to be doing better. Their sister  does
             not yet approach school age.

         17.  A good deal of effort was expended by  the  witnesses  at  the
             hearing to suggest that despite the  fact  both  parents  have
             their own mothers and siblings and their families remained  in
             Ghana, that the relatives there have limited accommodation and
             that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellants,  a
             family of five, to simply move withthem.  To the  best  of  my
             knowledge, despite its regular appearance in arguments,  I  am
             unaware of any authority that  says  there  must  be  adequate
             accommodation available for returnees  to  their  own  country
             whether provided by family or otherwise (let alone  employment
             etc).  I  am  satisfied,  at  least  for   the   short   term,
             arrangements could  be made and note, mutatis  mutandis,  that
             the appellant parents come to the  UK  without  employment  or
             permanent accommodation, and have managed well enough here. It
             is not a factor which is determinative in these matters,  even
             though chidrne may be involved.


         18.  Viewing the matter objectively, I find simply  not  obstacles,
             whatsoever, beyond disappointment and inconvenience  were  the
             family to be returned to their home  state.  I  also  consider
             that, of course, the appellant  parents  entered  with  proper
             visit  visas  but  have  concluded  by  the  point  of   their
             respective second entries they had no intent to  return,  that
             they then remained in the UK in the full and certain knowledge
             that they had no right to do so,  that  they  worked  here  in
             similar knowledge  of  its  illegality  and  that  they  have,
             effectively, treated the immigration law  as  an  inconvenient
             impendent to their effective immigration.


         19.  While I accept it is possible that they had difficulties  with
             previous solicitors, there does not  seem  to  have  been  any
             stateable basis for any actual  claim  to  'regularise'  their
             stay to have been made in  2006 any more than accompanied that
             with the present application of April 2010.  Merely 'asking to
             stay' is not actually a basis for granting  leave  to  remain,
             and  the  applications  were  correctly  refused  pursuant  to
             paragraph  322 for seeking leave under the Rules.


         20.  Considering the argument  that the  minor  children  meet  the
             requirements  of 276ADE I am not satisfied that this has  been
             made out as the first requisite obliges the appellants to meet
             the suitability requirements of  Appendix  FM.   Paragraph  S-
             LTR.2.3 states that the NHS  has  notified  the  Secretary  of
             State that charges in accordance with Regulations for overseas
             visitors of a total of �1000 have not been paid, and there  is
             a note that there appears to have been unpaid the NHS  charges
             surroundign  the  appellant  mother.  One  must   assume   the
             pregnancy care and birth of all three children was on the  NHS
             as has been their  subsequent  paediatric  care.  Nor  can  it
             simply be said that there is a flat obligation  of  subsection
             (iv), nor as an effective matter there would simply be a black-
             letter rule that if a child under 18 has lived in the  UK  for
             seven years than he has an inviolable right  to  private  life
             here. The provision continues, significantly:  'and  it  would
             not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK'.  I
             am satisfied in this case and on these facts and accepting the
             position in Azimi-Moayed, that it is perfectly reasonable  for
             all three children, even the  oldest,  to  return  with  their
             parents to Ghana. If in any casse the facts will  have  to  be
             considered  again  with  regard  to  proportionality  of   the
             decision to return.


         21.  This  brings  the  consideration  to  the  traditional  Razgar
             approach.  There seem to be very little point  in  considering
             the points raised pursuant to MF, MS, Nagre  and  Gulshan.   I
             accept that the  traditional  analysis  would  be  appropriate
             given the date  of  the  application  and,  in  any  case,  to
             ascertain whether  there might be as claimed, a breach of  the
             respondent's obligations to the appellants under Article 8  by
             these decisions.


         22.  I am prepared to accept that a family life exists in the UK as
             between the four appellants and toddler,  VN.  Equally,  I  am
             prepared to accept that all for them have established  a  form
             of  private  life  here,  but  that  private  life  has   been
             established here in the sure and certain knowledge it  was  in
             violation of immigration law.   Indeed,  with  regard  to  the
             parents, it would be courteous to say it  had  been  'casually
             disregarded', but I believe that the actual fact of the matter
             is that it has  been  consciously  and  wilfully  flouted  and
             ignored as inconvenient.  Even were I to  afford  the  greater
             weight to the purported attempt to 'regularise' their presence
             in 2006, I would have to note there was no basis  for  it,  it
             was never effected and it appears that fraud was contemplated.
              It took another four years for an actual approach to be made.
             In my considered opinion this militates strongly  against  the
             balance of proportionate  here. Likewise, although  all  three
             children have been  born  here,  and  even  JN  was  evidently
             conceived here immediately on his mother's entry, this was not
             with parents with any right of residence - though  his  mother
             was here temporarily as a visitor at the  time  the  appellant
             father has been here illicitly  for  thirteen  years  and  the
             appellant mother for ten. Objectively, these were  long  years
             before any attempt was made to regularise their stay, and when
             this was not prosecuted, there were many  long  years,  again,
             before any further effort was made.  Even  so,  their  efforts
             whether were not made with any  prospect  of  success  or  any
             stateable claim of right to remain.   I  have  not  found  the
             appellant parents to be entirely forthright in their evidence,
             selecting and interpreting it to their advantage, which is not
             surprising, but I am not informed of  any  actual  history  of
             criminal behaviour or other deception. Thus while I   conclude
             there is a viable family life in the United Kingdom as between
             them, I am obliged to conclude that their  private  life  here
             has a very tenuous foundation indeed.


         23.  I have no difficulty in concluding  that  there  would  be  no
             breach of their family life  were  the  entire  family  to  be
             returned as a unit to Ghana.  I do  accept  that  this  return
             would constitute an effective  breach  of  that  private  life
             though, again, it must be noted  that  it  is  an  anticipated
             consequence of their illegal entry and stay which cannot  come
             as any surprise to the appellants, at least to the adults.


         24.  Thus, while I find no breach with regard to family life, if  I
             were deemed to have erred in this, and accepting that a breach
             would occur of the tenuous private life, I  proceed  with  the
             Razgar analysis to conclude that the process he followed is  a
             lawful one and that the ends sought to be achieved thereby  in
             respect of maintaining the economic integrity  of  the  United
             Kingdom and the maintenance and enforcement  of  an  effective
             immigration law and policy as being conducive  to  the  public
             ... are proper state aims.


         25.      It comes, then to the crux of  the  appeal,  and  that  is
             whether the decision to return is  proportionate.   Here,  the
             burden shifts to the respondent.  Having considered the matter
             carefully, I am satisfied that the respondent has carried  the
             burden of proof in this respect.  Firstly, as noted  above,  I
             do not find that there  is  any  breach  of  family  life  and
             therefore the analysis is irrelevant as to  that  aspect,  but
             had it been applied, the same principles as are here  set  out
             in  respect  to  private   life   apply,   equally,   to   any
             consideration of family life. I am satisfied that the  history
             of the parents militate against any view that their  continued
             presence in the United Kingdom is  a  proportionate  response,
             whether based on their  own  history  or  merits,  or,  as  it
             appears now to be the case, in  the  hope  that  the  physical
             presence of the children here would be  sufficient  to   'tilt
             the balance'.  It has been judicially noted that  parents  are
             not to be seen using their children for such purposes, a point
             in which I strongly concur. Nonetheless, their best  interests
             are primary consideration and must be carefully reviewed.


         26.  I accept  that  the  preliminary  premise  is  that  the  best
             interests of the child are served by  maintaining  the  family
             unit with the parents. As, for the reasons stated  above,  the
             parents may be expected to be moreover,  it  falls,  therefore
             that the best interests of the children are to be removed with
             them. I must then consider  whether  that  removal  creates  a
             disproportionate  interference  with  the  children's  private
             life. It must be remembered that all  of  these  children  are
             quite young. They remain principally focused on their  family.
             I am satisfied it is more  likely  than  not  that  with  both
             parents being native Ghanaians and the note about JN's lack of
             English, that the Ghanaian customs, language and culture  must
             have been adequately introduced to them  from  an  early  age.
             Again, given their youth,  I  am  confident  that  they  would
             readily  adapt  to  life  in  Ghana  without   difficulty   or
             impediment. I note in particular, that even though JN is 9, he
             will not have spent seven years past the age of 4 here in  the
             United Kingdom,  and  I  accept  that  this  is  an  important
             distinction. I am particularly swayed by  the  fact  that  the
             return of the entire family to Ghana,  despite  the  complaint
             about  inadequate  accommodation  awaiting  them,   does   not
             constitute 'extreme hardship' for the children, nor  is  there
             anything put before me to suggest that their health  would  be
             seriously at risk.  There is a  notation  that  JN  carries  a
             particular blood type or condition, but this  is  couple  with
             the assurance that this is  of  no  moment  and  that  nothing
             needs to be done with respect to it.


         27.      Thus, and for the foregoing reasons, I have concluded that
             the  respondent   has   demonstrated   on   the   balance   of
             probabilities that the decision now appealed  is  proportionat
             as to all appellants with respect both to their private  lives
             and to their family life, were the same to  be  held  to  have
             been breached in some unspecified manner by  their  collective
             return to Ghana. This means, inevitably that even if I were to
             accept that the minor children have established a private life
             under para 276ADE, I am satisfied  that the decision to return
             them would, nonetheless, be proportionate and that it  is  not
             in any sense unreasonable to expect them to return with  their
             parents to what is, after all, their country of nationality if
             not immediate experience."


The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The first ground of appeal argues that the  decision of  the  Secretary
    of State is not in accordance with the law because  the  decision-maker
    relied upon  the  appellant's  failure  to  meet  the  requirements  in
    paragraph 276ADE(iii) as a material consideration and  the  application
    was made before Appendix FM. The  appellant relied on  he  judgment  in
    Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402, with particular  reference  to  paragraph
    33. The judge erred because he should have allowed the  appeal  because
    the decision is not lawful.

7.   The second ground of appeal argues that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    apply paragraph 276ADE(i) in assessing the appeals of the two children.
     Their mother had failed to pay a NHS charge for  the  care  associated
    with the birth of the two children. The judge  found that the  children
    could not meet the requirements of 276ADE because they do not meet  the
    suitability requirements because they failed  to  pay  an  NHS  charge.
    There was no evidence that the children themselves had failed to pay  a
    charge or that they could even by held liable for the charge.

8.   The third ground of appeal argues  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    evaluate the  private life claims of the main appellant and  his  wife.
    There is an analysis of the reasonableness or  otherwise  of  expecting
    the children to leave the UK in the light of the parents'  removal  but
    no distinct prior proportionality assessment relating to  the  parents'
    private life.  The appellant had been in the UK for thirteen years  and
    his wife ten.

9.   The fourth ground argues that that the judge did  not  properly  assess
    the children's best interests in accordance with Zoumbas v SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 74 in which it was decided that in precariousness  cases  a  child
    must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not  responsible.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not conducted an assessment, failed to have
    regard to the evidence before it relating to the consequence of removal
    and it applied the wrong  threshold  (one  of  extreme  hardship)  when
    evaluating the conditions to which the children would  be  sent  rather
    than adopting a holistic assessment and deciding whether removal  would
    be reasonable.

10.  I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Miss  Mellon  argued  that
    276ADE(iii) was material to the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Her submissions were in the context of the grounds of appeal   and  the
    main thrust of her argument in relation to the children  was  that  the
    judge had failed to take into account evidence.  I asked her to explain
    to me what evidence the judge had not taken into account and I gave her
    time in order to consider that question.  In her submission  the  judge
    had failed to consider  the  length  of  residence  in  the  UK,  their
    friendships and their education here.  In her view the entire thrust of
    the judge's decision was about their parents and  his negative view  of
    them.

11.  Mr Wilding made submissions in the context of the Rule 24  response  on
    18 December 2014 in which he argued that the decision was in accordance
    with the law and was lawful and sustainable.





Conclusions


12.   There is no merit in ground 1. The failure to satisfy 276ADE(iii  )was
    not material to the decision of the Secretary of State and ground 1  is
    without merit. The decision-maker took into account that the  appellant
    had entered the UK in 2001, that he had overtstayed and that  he  could
    not establish that he had no social or cultural  ties  to  Ghana.   The
    decision-maker  considered  paragraph  353B  of  the  Rules  and   gave
    consideration to whether or not there were  exceptional  circumstances,
    noting that the appellant and his wife had lived in Ghana for the  vast
    majority of their lives.  It is  stated  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter that consideration had been given  to  all  these  circumstances
    (paragraph 353B for the Immigration Rules) individually  and  together.
    In the circumstances I do not  accept  that  the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law. It appears that the judge  did  not  determine
    this issue, but this was not a material error  of  law.  There  was  no
    other reason put forward by the appellant in the permission application
    or in oral submissions to support the assesrtion that the  decision  is
    not in accordance with the law.

13.  In my view grounds 2 and 4 should be dealt with together and  they  are
    without merit. The judge properly identified his task that was to  make
    a finding in relation to the children's best interests and he took into
    account the evidence.  The  judge  properly  found  that  is  the  best
    interests of the children to remain with their parents  and  that  this
    was the starting point. I  reject  the  submission  that  the  relevant
    factors were not taken into account and that the judge failed to make a
    holistic assessment. The judge attached much weight to  the  precarious
    status of the parents but this did not impact on the assessment of  the
    best interests assessment (but it is relevant consideration in relation
    to proportionality).

14.  I have taken into account  the  comments  of  Mr  Justice  Mann  in  SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 which are as follows:

         "The circumstances in  which  the  Tribunal  will  require  further
         inquiries to be made, or evidence to be obtained, are likely to  be
         extremely rare. In the vast majority of  cases  the  Tribunal  will
         expect the relevant interests of the  child  to  be  drawn  to  the
         attention of the decision-maker by the  individual  concerned.  The
         decision-maker would then make such additional inquiries  as  might
         appear to him or her to be appropriate. The scope for the  Tribunal
         to require, much less indulge in,  further  inquiries  of  its  own
         seems to me to be extremely limited, almost to the  extent  that  I
         find it hard to imagine when, or how, it could do so."

15.  It  would  seem  that  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC)  and  SS  (Nigeria)
    effectively overrule the comments of Justice Thornton QC in  Tinizaray,
    R (on the application of) v SSHD [2011] EWHC 1850 (Admin) that decision-
    makers could not solely rely on information volunteered  by  a  parent,
    particularly if that information was incomplete. Instead  the  decision
    maker had a duty to seek further information.

16.  The main thrust of Miss Mellon's argument is that he failed to  make  a
    holistic  assessment  and  consider  relevant   factors,   namely   the
    children's education, the length of time they have been here and  their
    friends here.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  relation
    to the  best interests of the children was minimal.  There  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal witness statements from the adult appellants in
    which they state their children were born here  and  have  never  lived
    anywhere else.  They have made friends at school and were involved with
    the church and within the  local  community.   In  addition  they  have
    family here. There were school reports relating to the children  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  oral  evidence  the  adult  appellants'
    evidence was that  their relatives in Ghana had  limited  accommodation
    and as such it would be unreasonable to expect them  to  move  in  with
    them.  The judge found that  at  least  for  the  short  term  adequate
    arrangements could  be made. It is clear from  the  final  sentence  of
    [17] that he took the accommodation difficulties into account  but  did
    not find them to be determinative  or  indeed  as  significant  as  the
    appellants' evidence suggested.

17.      The appellant's evidence is that he lost his job in Ghana and  that
    is why he decided to stay here.  It is a fact that the family has  been
    here for a lengthy period and for  children  seven  years  is  seen  as
    significant by the both the  Home  Office  and  case  law.   The  judge
    recognised this at [14], [15] and again at [26].  It  is  clear  in  my
    view that the judge recognised that this was a weighty consideration in
    the appellant's favour. The judge was aware that both the children were
    at school (see [10]) and he took into account the school records in the
    appellant's bundle (see [16]).  The judge found that the children  were
    all quite young and focused on their  family  and  they  would  readily
    adapt to life in Ghana without difficulty or impediment and these  were
    findings that were open to him on the evidence.

18.      I was not referred to any evidence that was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which would establish that the children had formed significant
    ties outside the family home. Both the children  are  still  relatively
    young and at the date of the decision before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    they were both attending primary school. There was  evidence  from  the
    appellant's brother, EN, that the children are close to their  cousins,
    but they have family in Ghana.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    children do not speak Fanti.   The adult appellants could have provided
    more evidence to assist the Tribunal but  chose  not  to  do  so.   The
    decision that the judge reached in relation to the best interest of the
    children was one that was open to him on the limited evidence  and  his
    decision is not irrational or perverse.

19.   The  judge  understood  that  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  required  him  to
    consider reasonableness and he concluded at [17] and [20] that it would
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.   In relation  to
    the suitability issue, it is not material whether the  judge  erred  in
    this  respect  as  he  made  a  discrete   finding   in   relation   to
    reasonableness (it is accepted in ground 3 of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    that the judge conducted an analysis of reasonableness). The judge  did
    not apply an extreme hardship threshold as asserted in the grounds.  He
    referred to extreme hardship in the context of  E-A  (Article  8  -best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT 315 (IAC) at [13] and again at
    [26], again in the same context. Having read the decision  as  a  whole
    the judge did not apply the wrong test to  the  material  issues  which
    were the best interests of  the  children  and  reasonableness  in  the
    context of 276ADE(iv).

20.  There is no merit in  ground  3.  The  judge  found  that  all  of  the
    appellants have a private life here and he  correctly  identified  that
    proportionality was the derminative issue.  He put into the balance the
    length of time the  appellant  and  his  wife  had  been  here  and  he
    concluded that their private life here had a "very tenuous foundation".
     He recognised that they have an Article  8  right  independently  from
    their children (see [25]).  The  judge  was  obliged  to  consider  the
    precarious nature of the adult appellants' status here.  Their  witness
    statements were brief on the issue  of  their  private  lives  here  as
    distinct from that of their children.  It is clear  from  the  evidence
    that they have family and friends here and that they are involved  with
    the church but they also have family in Ghana and in my view these  are
    all factors that the judge took into account.    Beyond the  length  of
    time that they have  been  here  there  was  no  cogent  or  persuasive
    evidence of a significant private life.  Indeed  Miss  Mellon  did  not
    point to any in submissions.   The balancing exercise conducted by  the
    judge was reasoned and in my view it is lawful and sustainable.

21.      I make an anonymity direction in the light of the children in  this
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law and the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
under Article 8 is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date  6 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


TO THE RESPONDENT
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 6 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
