
[pic]
|Upper Tribunal                        | Appeal Number IA.20286.2013   |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:   North Shields         On:  11th April 2014
On:         13th March 2014

                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)

                                   Between


                                   Ms M M

                       (Anonymity Direction in Force)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:           Mr Cleghorn
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                                  Decision


   1. This matter appears before me leave to appeal having been  granted  by
      First Tier Tribunal Judge Hemmingway on the following terms:

      "1. The Appellant, a national of Algeria, has applied,  in  time,  for
      permission to appeal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      promulgated on 11* October 2013, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision of 13th May  2013  refusing  to  vary  leave  to
      remain as a spouse.

      2.  The  grounds  of  application,  in  summary,  contend  the  Judges
      decision, with respect to article 8 of the ECHR was against the weight
      of the evidence.

      3. Whilst the  grounds,  for  the  most  part,  are  no  more  than  a
      disagreement with the Judges conclusions, it  is  arguable  the  Judge
      erred in failing to consider what weight should  be  attached  to  the
      Appellant's  failure  to  meet  the  English   language   requirements
      contained within the Immigration Rules in the  article  8  assessment,
      bearing in mind her conclusion that  the  Appellant  spoke  very  good
      English and would pass an English language test with "top marks". Such
      an arguable error is potentially material because if the weight to  be
      attached to the lack of compliance  with  the  Rules,  when  assessing
      proportionality  had  been  reduced,  the  outcome  might  have   been
      different.

      4. Permission to appeal is granted and all the grounds may be argued."


   2. In the reasons for refusal letter dated 13th May 2013,  the  Secretary
      of State made it  plain  that  no  consideration  had  been  given  to
      paragraph EX1(a) since there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      spouse had a child or if so that they lived with the appellant.


   3.  In fact in relation to her 10  year  old  stepson  who  is  a  United
      Kingdom citizen the First Tier Tribunal found as a fact  at  paragraph
      20

      "I am satisfied that she has a very genuine and warm relationship with
      her stepson who lives with them  permanently   whilst  having  contact
      with his biological mother twice a week."


   4. The judge went on further at paragraph 26:

      "I recognise that stepson has a close bond with the appellant".


   5. At paragraph 25 the judge made it plain that it  was  unreasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

      "The appellant's stepson is thriving  at  school.  The  school  report
      demonstrates this. It would not be appropriate fro stepson and  father
      to accompany the appellant to Algeria and continue family life  there.
      This is because stepson has regular  and  frequent  contact  with  his
      biological mother. It is crucial that he be allowed to  continue  with
      these arrangements which to the credit of  all  the  parties  involved
      work very well."


   6. Paragraph EX1(a) reads as follows:

      "Exception
      Section EX: Exception
      EX.1. This paragraph applies if
      (a)  (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
      relationship with a child who-
      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age  of  18  years
      when the applicant was first granted leave  on  the  basis  that  this
      paragraph applied;
      (bb) is in the UK;
      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously  for  at
      least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  application  ;and

      (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK;
      or
      (b) the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in  the  UK
      or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and  there
      are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that   partner
      continuing outside the UK."


   7. It is plain from the findings of the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
      the requirements of EX1(a) were met, and in  those  circumstances  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules were met. The decision  made  by
      the First Tier Tribunal Judge therefore contains an error  of  law  in
      dismissing the appeal and must be remade. Since there  is  no  factual
      dispute over these matters it is not necessary to hear fresh  evidence
      on the matter and I can remake the decision by allowing the appeal for
      the reasons given above.


                                  Decision


   1. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal contains and error of law and
   must be remade.


   2. The Appeal is allowed




                                                                       [pic]
                                                           Judge John Aitken
                                                    Deputy Chamber President
                                    Health Education and Social Care Chamber
                                                       Monday, 31 March 2014


