

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20772/2014
                                                               IA/21444/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On May 6, 2015                                |On May 8, 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MUBEEN HAIDER
                              MISS ANAM MAQSOOD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
    For the Respondent:     Mr Malik, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
    Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  On  September  14,  2013  the
    applied for leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants but their
    applications were refused by the respondent on April 28, 2014.  At  the
    same decisions were taken to remove them pursuant to section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellants appealed these decisions on May 8,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appeals came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Russell
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on December 16, 2014, and in  a
    decision promulgated on January 21, 2015 he allowed  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on January 23, 2015  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by failing to give adequate reasons for findings  on
    material matters.

 6. On February 25, 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Frankish  gave
    permission to appeal finding the FtTJ may have erred  by  allowing  the
    appeal because the specified evidence required did not exist.

 7. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant were in attendance.

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 9. I raised with Mr Walker whether paragraph [3] of his  grounds  had  any
    merit because there was evidence before the  FtTJ  that  the  financial
    requirements of table 4 of Appendix A had been met and this was  not  a
    matter that had been taken in the lower court. Mr Walker accepted  that
    there was no merit to paragraph [3] of his grounds and went further  by
    adding there was evidence of matters referred to in  paragraph  [4]  of
    the grounds and that he was of the opinion that the FtTJ had reached  a
    decision that was open to him.

10. In those circumstances I asked him did he intend to pursue the  grounds
    further and he indicated he merely relied on the grounds.

11. Mr Malik endorsed the approach being adopted by Mr Walker and submitted
    that the permission should never have been given as the FtTJ had  heard
    the evidence and made findings that the respondent  now  accepted  were
    open to him.

FINDING ON MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

12. Permission had been given but  a  full  reading  of  the  determination
    suggests the FtTJ had reservations about the application but  concluded
    that on balance the rules were met. He had concerns about the  proposed
    business but reminded himself that as long as the application  complied
    with the Rules, and today Mr Walker accepted it did,  then  the  appeal
    had to be allowed.

13. Turning to the grounds of appeal I find there is no merit to  paragraph
    [3] of the grounds because it was accepted the funds had been invested.
    As regards paragraph [4] there was evidence of market research  in  the
    bundle of papers and the FtTJ had assessed the lack of reports  against
    the fact the business was up and running and to use his words concluded
    that "where a business plan is being executed  this  is  good  evidence
    that the plan itself is genuine. The amounts involved suggest that  the
    appellants treat the business  plan  as  viable  and  are  prepared  to
    execute it and it is not therefore a made up enterprise".

14. The FtTJ had concerns, which he expressed  in  paragraph  [14]  of  his
    determination but he concluded the business was a credible and  genuine
    business and therefore met the requirements of the Rules.

15. I  see  no  basis  to  go  behind  that  decision  and  I  refuse  this
    application.

DECISION

16. There was no material error. I uphold the original decision.



Signed:     Dated: May 6, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application was made to reverse the fee award decision.



Signed:     Dated: May 6, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

