
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20181/2014
                                                               IA/20184/2014
                                                             & IA/20187/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2015 and 9 November 2015    |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                     Mrs Mayra Elizabeth Canizares Ruiz
                       Mr Fredy Ramiro Ludena Narvaez
                                     CLC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ren�, Counsel instructed by Thoree & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer (8/5/15)
     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer (9/11/15)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second appellants are the parents of the third appellant.
    All are citizens of Ecuador. They appeal with  permission  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson  promulgated  on  15
    January 2015 in which he dismissed their appeals against the  decisions
    of the respondent made on 15 April 2014 to refuse to grant  them  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules. Subsequent to the decisions of 15 April 2014,
    the older child of the first two appellants was registered as a British
    citizen. His appeal was therefore deemed to be abandoned.

 2. The first appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  12
    February 2001; the second appellant had entered in a  similar  fashion,
    somewhat earlier on 21 December  1999.  They  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom since that date and their two children were  born  here,  J  in
    2004 and C in 2007. On 29 September 2008 the second  appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules.  The  other  appellants  (and  J)  were  added   as
    dependants. That application was refused and the  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed. On 27 February 2013 the first appellant applied
    for further leave to remain pursuant to Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
    Convention  listing  his  wife  and  children   as   dependants.   That
    application  was  refused  without   a   right   of   appeal   but   on
    reconsideration, a decision giving a right of appeal  was  made  on  15
    April 2014. It is against that decision that the appeals to the  First-
    tier Tribunal were brought.

 3. In  summary,  the  respondent  concluded  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants were not entitled to remain under the partner route  or  the
    parent route of Appendix FM as neither was present lawfully and neither
    was entitled to leave under the parent route as paragraph EX.1 did  not
    apply (as at the date of decision), neither was the parent or carer  of
    a child who is a British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom.  The
    respondent also concluded none of the appellants were entitled to leave
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE, the respondent concluding that  they  did
    not fall within the relevant age limits and had not shown that they had
    lost ties to their home country. The  respondent  also  concluded  that
    their children would be able to adapt to life in Ecuador and  it  would
    be reasonable for them to return as a family unit. Further, having  had
    regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009, she considered that whilst there might be a degree of  disruption
    to their private lives, it was proportionate to the aim of  maintaining
    effective immigration control  and  is  in  accordance  with  the  duty
    pursuant to Section 55 and thus a grant of leave outside the Rules  was
    not appropriate.

 4. At the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson  on  1  December
    2014 the appellants were represented by Mr  P  Thoree,  Solicitor;  the
    respondent was represented by Mr S Vaghela, Presenting Officer.

 5. Judge Jackson found that:-

      i) Paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1(d) required as a condition of obtaining leave
         as a parent, a person to satisfy paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3 in  addition
         to paragraph EX.1. As paragraph ELTRP.2.3  require  the  person  to
         have sole responsibility for a British citizen or settled child, as
         the care of the children is shared between  them,  they  could  not
         meet this requirement even if paragraph EX.1 was met.

     ii) The Secretary of State did  not  undertake  anything  more  than  a
         cursory assessment of the children's best interests [48] which  was
         not, in light of TO and Others (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
         UKUT 00517 (IAC) sufficient to meet the duty upon her to do so  but
         that it was not appropriate to allow  the  appeal  outright  as  an
         assessment of the Immigration Rules was required to  determine  the
         appeal and the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  able  to  undertake  the
         assessment of best interests;

    iii) It was in C's best interest to remain with her parents  and  within
         the family unit and, if all else was equal (which it was  not),  it
         would be in her best interests to continue  her  education  in  the
         United Kingdom [50];

     iv) The best interests  of  C  were  a  primary  but  not  a  paramount
         consideration [51] and that although not culpable for her  parents'
         actions neither she nor her parents nor until recently her  brother
         had any right to remain in the United Kingdom and when the previous
         application and appeal failed they did not comply with the findings
         and return to Ecuador [51];

      v) There were no significant factors in C's circumstances such that it
         would not be reasonable for her  to  return  to  Ecuador  with  her
         parents [52] and it would not be unreasonable to expect C to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

     vi) The first and second appellants had not shown that they had no ties
         remaining in Ecuador [53] or that there would be  very  significant
         obstacles to their integration back into Ecuador [54];

    vii) Although there was family life between the appellants there was  no
         family life beyond that [56] and that although the first and second
         appellants had established some  degree  of  private  life  in  the
         United Kingdom [57] it  is  relatively  limited  and  there  is  no
         element of it which could be maintained from Ecuador or could be re-
         established and enjoyed from there [57];

   viii)  The  appellants'  removal  to  Ecuador  would  not  amount  to  an
         interference with their family life as they would be removed  as  a
         unit [58] there being no evidence that J could or would stay behind
         in  the  United  Kingdom;  although  a  British  citizen,  it   was
         reasonable for him to go with them [58]; that he would  effectively
         be required to leave the United Kingdom and  go  to  Ecuador,  such
         that he  would  not  be  able  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  British
         citizenship at least until age where  he  may  wish  to  live  here
         independently [59].

     ix) J's best interests are in remaining in the United Kingdom and to be
         able to benefit from the advantages of British citizenship [60].

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the refusal of the respondent to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom is contrary to her duty pursuant to  Section  55  of
         the 2009 Act and Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention [18];

     ii) having found [48] and that as the Tribunal  emphasised  in  TO  and
         Others, that the best interests of the  child  must  be  considered
         first it being apparent that the judge had not done so [25];

    iii) the judge made a clear  error  of  law  when  not  considering  the
         children's best interests as paramount in line with ZH (Tanzania) v
         SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and misapplied the  principles  set  out  in  EV
         (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874;

     iv) the judge had put the appellants' British  citizen  child  in  this
         position to have to choose between  furthering  his  education  and
         life in the United Kingdom thus enjoying his  right  as  a  British
         citizen to which he is clearly entitled or being with  his  family;
         this is not permissible;

      v) the judge erred in concluding that there  would  be  no  breach  of
         family life given that the decision  to  remove  the  other  family
         members is an interference with the  appellant's  right  to  family
         life and in failing to have  proper  regard  to  his  rights  as  a
         British citizen.

 7. On 3 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted  permission
    including that it was arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  due
    consideration to the issue of proportionality and  Section  55  of  the
    2009 Act insofar as it applies to safeguarding  the  third  appellant's
    welfare as a paramount consideration  [6];  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that the children's best interests were not  paramount  [7];
    and that the judge's decision, in effect putting J  in  a  position  to
    choose between furthering his education and life and enjoying rights as
    a British citizen to which he is clearly entitled  or  being  with  his
    family were not acting in the child's best interest [9].

    Hearing on 8 May 2015

 8. Mr Rene submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had,  although
    directing himself
    in line with EV (Philippines), erred in respect to his  application  of
    the principles in his findings at in what he had said with regard to  J
    was contradictory, in particular paragraphs [59] and [61]. He submitted
    further, following Tinizaray [2011] EWHC 1850 that the judge had  erred
    in approach to Section 55 of the 2009 Act in that  having  gone  on  to
    consider the content of the  Section  55  duty  had  not  made  a  full
    assessment of the claim, in particular failing to have  regard  to  the
    children's feelings as to where they wished  to  be,  contrary  to  the
    guidance in "Every Child Matters".

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted it is clear from the determination  at  [46]  and
    [48] that the judge had directed himself properly and had taken account
    of all the relevant evidence (see paragraphs 49-50)  and  had  assessed
    properly the issue of  whether  it  was  proportionate  to  remove  the
    appellants given the  effect  there  would  be  on  the  child,  J.  He
    submitted that  having  directed  himself  properly  in  line  with  EV
    (Philippines) [11]-[12] and to properly apply these in his decision  at
    paragraphs 51 and 52. He submitted that in reality the  argument  being
    put by the appellant was that J's nationality was determinative of  the
    issue of proportionality and reasonableness of requiring the appellants
    to leave the United Kingdom but in this case the judge had  had  proper
    regard to the Rules and whilst the decision might have been generous in
    the respondent's favour, it was one open to the judge.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted further  that  at  paragraph  50  the  judge  was
    entitled to refer to all factors being equal and that  they  were  not,
    this being a clear reference to the decision in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.
    He submitted that the decision in Tinizaray was no longer good law  and
    challenges to the judge's assessment of J's  British  citizenship  were
    simply arguments about weight.

11. It is not in dispute that J is a British Citizen. Given his age, he  is
    inevitably dependant on his parents, and the factual  citizen  bears  a
    very close relationship to that in Zambrano. In the circumstances,  and
    given the decision in Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048(IAC)  as  well  as  the  respondent's  Policy
    Guidance  "Immigration  Directorate   Instruction   Family   Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0(b) at Section 11.2" that the judge did not give
    sufficient weight to the  fact  that  the  older  child  is  a  British
    citizen.

12. For these reasons, I was satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal as it relates to the consideration of article 8  involved  the
    making of an error of law and must be set aside. The  grounds  did  not
    challenge the decision under the Immigration Rules.

    Remaking the decision

13. When this matter came before me on 8 May 2015 I gave reasons set out in
    a decision issued on 2 July 2015 why this matter needed to  be  remade.
    Subsequent to that I gave directions as  to  how  this  matter  was  to
    proceed given the issues identified.  In short, it was  my  preliminary
    view that the facts of these appeals are such that the  appellants  may
    be entitled to residence cards as confirmation of the derived right  of
    residence pursuant to  Regulation  15A(4A)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and I gave  directions  for  the  parties  to  provide
    skeleton arguments addressing  those  issues.  It  is  noted  that  the
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal did not

14. The issue as distilled in the skeleton  arguments  which  both  parties
    have provided to me is such that the issue is narrow and that is it  is
    accepted that the older child is a British citizen but it was submitted
    by the Secretary of State that as he  could  be  looked  after  by  his
    relatives in this country, that is aunts and uncles who are referred to
    in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  then  he  would  not  be
    compelled to leave the United Kingdom. Miss Holmes relied on  a  policy
    document issued by the Secretary of State entitled  "Derivative  rights
    of residence - Ruiz Zambrano cases" which was  issued  on  12  December
    2012.

15. The Secretary of State's case is that where there is a direct  relative
    who can care for a child then the Zambrano principle does not apply  as
    the child would not be compelled to leave the United Kingdom.

16. The first difficulty the respondent faces in this  submission  is  that
    "direct relative" is not defined in the EEA Regulations.  It does  bear
    echoes of the definition of family member which refers  to  the  direct
    ascending line but equally, it has  been  put  to  me  in  other  cases
    regarding reg. 15 (7A) that "direct relative" is such that it excludes,
    for example, uncles and aunts and on that basis they do not have appeal
    rights because that person, who is not either a  legal  guardian  or  a
    direct relative which appears to be construed as in  the  ascending  or
    descending line, is not a direct relative and  therefore  as  there  is
    inevitably no proof of being a direct relative there  is  no  right  of
    appeal.  The  position  adopted  by  the   Respondent's   guidance   on
    "Derivative Rights of Residence" of April 2015, at  page  55,  is  that
    direct relative for  the  purposes  of  reg.  15  (7A)(a)  confined  to
    parents, grandparents, spouses, children and grandchildren.

17. In Hines v Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660,  the  issue  of  what  kind  of
    alternative care might avoid the  conclusion  that  a  child  would  be
    forced to leave. At [24] Vos LJ held:

18. It would be undesirable, I  think,  for  the  court  to  lay  down  any
    guidelines in this regard, but it was, as I have  said,  common  ground
    that an available adoption  or  foster  care  placement  would  not  be
    adequate for this purpose. That is because the quality of the  life  of
    the child would be so seriously impaired by his removal from his mother
    to be placed in foster care that he would be effectively  compelled  to
    leave. I do not, however, think that all things being equal the removal
    of a child from the care of one  responsible  parent  to  the  care  of
    another responsible parent would normally be expected so  seriously  to
    impair his quality and standard of life that he  would  be  effectively
    forced to leave the UK. Apart from anything else, he would, even if  he
    did leave, still only have the care of one of his previously two  joint
    carers

19. It is evident that the child in this case cannot be compelled to  leave
    the United Kingdom because he is a British citizen.   The  question  is
    then whether the child would effectively be compelled.  In  this  case,
    the respondent proposes that a  fostering  relationship,  albeit  by  a
    relative, would avoid the child being compelled to leave.

20. That alternative is quite stark.  He would have to live with relatives,
    would be separated from his parents and would  be  separated  from  his
    sister because although she was born here she has not  yet  lived  here
    for ten years and is not yet entitled to apply for British  citizenship
    and she has no leave to be here.

21. I consider that whilst a minor child can survive without his parents in
    that adoption, foster care or a children's home offer an adequate level
    of care, such an alternative to the care by parents is only  likely  to
    be considered where there are  serious  reasons  for  interrupting  the
    relationship between a child and his parents.  In the  ordinary  course
    of events, a court would need very  serious  reasons  relating  to  the
    child's safety and well-being to make an order taking that  child  from
    his parents.   This  reflects  the  position  acknowledged  in  the  UN
    Convention on the Rights of the Child 1990 that children should grow up
    in the family environment and they are in need  of  specific  forms  of
    protection.  Article 9(1) of the Convention provides  that  the  United
    Kingdom nominally provides that a child shall not be separated from his
    parents  against  their   will,   except   in   defined   and   limited
    circumstances. There is here a significant difference from  adults  who
    have capacity to make decisions for themselves which is  not  the  case
    with children.

22. I consider that in this case the older child of  the  appellants  would
    effectively be compelled to leave the United Kingdom to remain with his
    parents and that bearing in mind what was said in Hines v Lambeth  that
    decision would be contrary to the ruling of the  Court  of  Justice  in
    Zambrano in that he would, in effect, be compelled to leave the  United
    Kingdom and thus would be unable to exercise his rights as a citizen of
    the EU.

23. For these reasons I am satisfied that in the case of the two  principal
    appellants the requirements of Regulation 15A (4A) and (7) are met  and
    that accordingly they  are  entitled  pursuant  to  Regulation  18A  to
    derivative residence cards.

24. In respect of the remaining appellant, who is a child, I  am  satisfied
    that she is also entitled to  a  residence  card  as  she  is  entirely
    dependent on her parents who  are  persons  entitled  to  a  derivative
    residence card and thus she would meet the requirements  of  Regulation
    15A(5).

25. The consequence of this is that, as was noted in Amirteymour and others
    (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) at  [25]-[27],  those
    such as the appellants who have rights of residence under EU law do not
    require leave to remain by virtue of section 7 of the  Immigration  Act
    1988. Further, those rights arose or crystallised once  the  first  two
    appellants' son acquired British Citizenship and thus, they (and  their
    daughter) could not be removed.  The decision  to  remove  them  is  in
    consequence a nullity, as it is not in  accordance  with  the  law.  It
    follows therefore that as there is no decision to remove them,  article
    8 is not engaged.

26. For these reasons I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2.  I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeals  under  the   EEA
    Regulations.


Signed   Date: 3 December 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the basis on which the appeals have been allowed  arose  only  out  of  a
change of circumstances arising post-decision.


Signed   Date: 3 December 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

