
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20087/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 4 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                               SYED ANJUM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by the Lee Valley,
                    solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration History

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan, whose date of birth  is  8
    March 1980. His appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse
    his application for leave to remain as the victim of domestic  violence
    was refused by the Respondent  under  paragraphs  289  of  HC  395,  as
    amended (the Immigration Rules). A decision was also  made  to  curtail
    his existing leave  under  paragraph  322(1A)  and  to  remove  him  to
    Pakistan.  His  appeal  against  those  decisions  was   dismissed   by
    Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coates  (the   Judge)   in   a
    determination promulgated on 27 February 2014.


 2. Permission to appeal against that decision to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted on 18 March 2014 and the Appellant's appeal was heard by me  on
    21 May 2014. I reserved my decision.  I  decided  that  there  were  no
    material errors of law in the Judge's determination in relation to  the
    refusal under paragraph 289 but that he had failed to make findings  of
    fact in relation to the decision under paragraph 322(1A).  My  decision
    and reasons are set out in my determination, which was  promulgated  on
    29 May 2014. I decided that the issues under paragraph 322(1A) would be
    argued before me at a resumed hearing and invited the parties to submit
    evidence in relation to those issues only,  for  the  purposes  of  the
    resumed  hearing.  Both  parties  have  received   a   copy   of   that
    determination and the directions issued pursuant to  it  and  there  is
    therefore no need for me to reiterate the contents of it or  to  append
    it to this decision.


 3. The Respondent provided copies of the documentary evidence relied on to
    establish that the document  obtained  from  Hunters  Moor  as  to  the
    treatment received  by  the  Appellant  for  depression  was  a  forged
    document. The Appellant provided no additional evidence.


 4. The facts, briefly, are that the Appellant  claimed  to  have  suffered
    from depression as a result of domestic violence and to corroborate his
    account that he had received treatment for depression  he  provided  to
    the Respondent a compliment slip from Hunters Moor  Neurorehabilitation
    Centre for the West  Midlands  (Hunters  Moor).  On  the  face  of  the
    compliment slip, it is stated (inaccuracies as in the original):


         "To whom it may concern


         "Re (the Appellant)


         "To inform that (the Appellant) attends sessions at  our  unit  for
         his depression sessions. For any concerns, contact for enquiris.


         "Thanks."

 5. The Respondent contacted Hunters Moor, who responded in  the  following
    terms:


         "...I can confirm that the compliment slip is official Hunters Moor
         documentation. However, if we had been requested  to  provide  this
         type of information the reply would  have  been  on  letter  headed
         paper and signed by the appropriate Medical Consultant.


         "I can also confirm that (the Appellant) has never been  a  patient
         at Hunters Moor  (we  are  a  Specialist  Centre  for  Neurological
         Rehabilitation) and has not been an employee of Hunters Moor.


         "However, he has previously applied for a job as  a  Rehabilitation
         Assistant (he was alerted to the vacancy  by  one  of  our  current
         staff members) but was not offered a position.


         "Thank you for raising this with us" (Respondent's bundle p G2).


 6. It is the compliment slip which  the  Respondent  states  is  a  forged
    document  and  the  Appellant  states  is  not  because   he   received
    counselling at Hunters Moor.


The Hearing


 7. I had before me, by  way  of  documentary  evidence,  the  Respondent's
    bundle (RB) filed for the purposes of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,
    and Appellant's bundle (AB) filed for the purposes  of  the  First-tier
    tribunal hearing sent under cover of  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    representatives dated 14 February 2014.


 8. Mr Jafar stated that a witness  statement  was  not  provided  for  the
    Appellant's witness, Ms Rohela  Afzal,  for  the  purposes  of  today's
    hearing but she was present  if  evidence  was  required  and  she  had
    brought with  her  details  of  her  qualifications.  However,  he  was
    perfectly aware that directions had been sent to the Appellant and  his
    representatives and no evidence by way of  witness  statements  or  her
    qualifications had been  filed,  in  breach  of  directions.  Mr  Mills
    objected to the late production of evidence.


 9. No explanation had been provided as to why evidence had not been  filed
    in accordance with directions, a witness statement was not provided and
    nor was evidence of Ms Afzal's qualifications filed. Had evidence  been
    filed in time, it would have given the  Respondent  time  to  make  any
    enquiries in relation to it prior to the hearing. I therefore  declined
    to admit it.


10. Mr Jafar stated that the Secretary of  State  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof because evidence to the required standard had not  been
    provided; cogent evidence was required. This was very different to  the
    Judge's conclusion that evidence could not to be relied.


11. Mr Mills submitted that:


        a. The burden of proof was on the Secretary of State  to  establish
           that the compliment slip provided by the Appellant in support of
           his appeal from Hunters Moors was a forgery.


        b. At G2 of the  Respondent's  bundle  (RB)  was  the  email  which
           confirmed that if a request  had  been  made  for  the  type  of
           information which the compliment slip contained, the reply would
           have been on letter headed paper and signed by  the  appropriate
           Medical Consultant. The email confirmed that the  Appellant  had
           never been a patient at Hunters Moor.  The  Appellant  did  not,
           therefore, attend sessions there. Ms Afzal stated that she wrote
           it, accepting that it was not her role to do that and  had  done
           it as a friend to the Appellant.


        c. To show forgery,  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
           probabilities. The email confirms that he was never a patient at
           Hunters Moor and that they did not issue  the  compliment  slip.
           The Judge did not accept the rebuttal evidence presented. He did
           not believe Ms Afzal. At [39 - 40] he  expressly  considers  her
           evidence, agrees that the proper  way  for  an  organisation  to
           confirm someone is a patient is to provide  a  formal  reply  on
           headed notepaper. Her rebuttal evidence was  inadequate  because
           the  Judge  did  not  accept  that   she   had   the   necessary
           qualifications or expertise to provide professional  counselling
           for people suffering from depression. There is therefore  cogent
           evidence from Hunters Moor  and  Ms  Afzal's  evidence  was  not
           credible or reliable.

12. Mr Jafar submitted that:


        a. Hunters Moor had confirmed that the compliment slip is  genuine.
           Whether the content of the compliment slip reflected  the  truth
           depended on  the  perception  of  truth.  Tanveer  Ahmed  (Ahmed
           (Documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439)
           confirmed that only rarely would there be there  be  a  need  to
           make an allegation of forgery and strong evidence is required to
           support it. The evidence established that Ms Afzal was  employed
           by Hunters Moor at [38]. She stated that there had been a change
           of management at  Hunters  Moor  which  is  why  there  were  no
           records. A clear explanation was provided which was not rejected
           by the Judge; he did not say that Ms Afzal was  not  a  credible
           witness. The Judge was ambiguous about  the  credibility  of  Ms
           Afzal as a witness at [39 - 40]. He only states that the  proper
           way to establish that someone is a patient  is  to  provide  the
           details within a letter. The compliment slip was  not  a  formal
           reply; it was not for the NHS or the courts; it  was  to  enable
           the Appellant to take time off work. To say it is not the proper
           way to provide information is not the same as to say that it  is
           a forgery. Furthermore, the email may  confirm  that  no  formal
           treatment had been received but there was nothing  to  establish
           that informal treatment had not been provided by Ms Afzal.


        b. The findings at [39-40] do not necessarily  establish  that  the
           Respondent has shifted the burden of proof, bearing in mind  the
           seriousness of the consequences of finding that a document is  a
           forgery. Hunters Moor confirmed that  the  compliment  slip  was
           genuine; it  was  not  as  if  someone  replicated  an  original
           document,  for  example  a  forged  bank  note  or  letter.  The
           Respondent had not approached Hunters Moor to find out if  there
           had been a change of management and whether  they  would  retain
           records after the change. These questions should have been asked
           to discharge the burden of proof.


        c. Pursuant to RP (Proof of Forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT  00086
           cogent evidence was required to establish forgery and the burden
           of proof is on the Respondent under paragraph  322(1A)  pursuant
           to JC (Part 9 HC395- burden of proof) China [2007]  UKAIT  00027
           as no clear findings of fact were made at [38 -  40],  Mr  Jafar
           submitted that forgery had not been proved and if the Judge  had
           carried out a more structured approach, he would have found that
           the allegation of  forgery  had  not  been  proved.  He  further
           submitted  that,  despite  my  findings  in  my  error  of   law
           determination, the lack of  a  structured  approach  could  have
           affected the Judge's findings of fact.


13. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that because Hunters Moor  confirmed  that
    the compliment slip was genuine, did not mean that the document was not
    a forgery when it was purporting to confirm information  that  was  not
    from Hunters Moor. In the circumstances, the Appellant put  forward  an
    argument to explain the contents  of  it.  It  was  then  not  for  the
    Respondent to return to the organisation to seek details regarding  the
    change of management. Mr Mills submitted that Ms Afzal in fact  had  no
    status in the UK and following the investigation as  to  what  happened
    with the Appellant's documents a decision was taken to remove her  from
    the UK in October 2013. She had  made  no  applications  for  leave  to
    remain since 2008. Mr Jafar stated that Ms Afzal had been in the UK for
    over 20 years and was stateless to which Mr Mills  responded  that  she
    may have said she was stateless but she  had  not  been  recognised  as
    stateless.


14. I informed both representatives that I would make my  findings  on  the
    evidence before me, bearing in mind that evidence had been presented to
    the Judge as to Ms Afzal's status and findings had been made by him. Mr
    Jafar stated that there was no finding that  Ms  Afzal's  evidence  was
    incredible or that as an overstayer she was not  allowed  to  work.  He
    submitted that in the absence of clear findings, a person is  credible.
    He also submitted that they were not aware that  findings  were  to  be
    made on her status or evidence would have been called.


15. Following submissions I reserved my decision.

Decision and reasons


16. I make clear that in reaching my conclusions, I have had no  regard  to
    the comments of Mr Jafar  or  Mr  Mills  as  to  the  statelessness  or
    otherwise of Ms Afzal. The Judge made a finding of fact that she had no
    leave [25] and no evidence was produced  today  to  the  contrary.  The
    Judge also found as fact that she had been  employed  by  Hunters  Moor
    [38]. These findings are my starting point and no evidence was provided
    to undermine these findings.


17. It is not in dispute that the burden  of  proof  for  a  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) is on the Respondent. The  burden  of  proof  is  the
    ordinary civil standard  of  the  balance  of  probabilities,  although
    cogent evidence is required to establish an allegation of  forgery  and
    the  evidence  must  be  subjected  to  anxious  scrutiny  due  to  the
    consequences of a finding of forgery.


18. The submission of Mr Mills was in essence that cogent evidence had been
    presented and this had not been adequately rebutted by  the  Appellant.
    Mr Jafar's position was that the document was confirmed as genuine,  it
    was not the same as a bank note  or  a  forged  letter,  and  that  the
    evidence presented in relation to it by  Ms  Afzal  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant was not rejected by the Judge as incredible, and  that  given
    Ms Afzal's explanation, the Respondent needed to make further enquiries
    to establish if Hunters Moor had undergone a change of management.


19. I have carefully examined the submissions made and the evidence  before
    me and I find:


        a. There is no merit in Mr  Jafar's  submission  that  because  the
           compliment slip has been  confirmed  as  genuine,  the  document
           cannot be said to be forged. As recognised by  the  Tribunal  in
           Tanveer Ahmed, some documents are:


                       "... false in that  they  are  not  made  by  whoever
                  purports to be the author and the information they contain
                  is wholly or partially untrue.  Some are "genuine" to  the
                  extent that they emanate from  a  proper  source,  in  the
                  proper form, on the proper paper, with the  proper  seals,
                  but the information they contain is  wholly  or  partially
                  untrue.   Examples   are   birth,   death   and   marriage
                  certificates from certain countries, which can be obtained
                  from  the  proper  source  for  a   "fee",   but   contain
                  information which is  wholly  or  partially  untrue.   The
                  permutations of truth, untruth, validity and "genuineness"
                  are enormous.  At its simplest we  need  to  differentiate
                  between form and content; that is whether  a  document  is
                  properly issued by the purported author  and  whether  the
                  contents are true. They are separate questions.  It  is  a
                  dangerous  oversimplification  merely  to  ask  whether  a
                  document is "forged" or even "not genuine""


        b. As to the Hunters Moor compliment slip, it is established by the
           email at G2 of RB that it is genuine but the contents of  it  do
           not tally with their records; it is  positively  confirmed  that
           the Appellant was not a patient at Hunters Moor. Not only  that,
           but there is specific confirmation that the release of any  such
           information as is stated on the  face  of  the  compliment  slip
           would be on headed note paper signed by the appropriate  medical
           consultant. There was no evidence before the Judge that Ms Afzal
           was a medical consultant. The Judge did not  accept  Ms  Afzal's
           evidence that she had provided the  Appellant  with  counselling
           and he gave his reasons for so finding at [39 - 40].  It  cannot
           be seriously argued  that  it  cannot  be  inferred  from  these
           findings that he did not find her evidence to be credible. If he
           had found it to be credible, on the balance of probabilities, he
           would not have rejected it.


        c. Mr Jafar submits that a reasonable explanation was offered as to
           why Hunters Moor would not have a record of the Appellant  being
           a patient; there had been a change of management and old records
           had not been kept. However, this was rejected by  the  Judge  at
           [39 - 40]. I would add that such an explanation does not in fact
           explain why they would have a record  of  the  Appellant  having
           applied for employment there and had not been offered a position
           but not have any record of him  being  a  patient  there  if  no
           records are retained due to a change in  management.  Whilst  it
           would be arguable  that  current  employees'  records  would  be
           retained, there is no explanation as to why there would  be  any
           record of a past application. Ms  Afzal's  evidence  as  to  the
           Appellant in fact being a patient at Hunters Moor and  why  they
           did not confirm it when contacted by the Respondent was  soundly
           rejected by the Judge with good reason.


        d. Mr Jafar sought to  argue  that  the  compliment  slip  was  not
           provided by Ms Afzal for the NHS or the court; it was simply for
           the purposes of enabling the Appellant to take  time  off  work.
           However, this in itself would  not  make  the  contents  of  the
           compliment slip less false or the  document  itself  less  of  a
           forgery if he did not in fact receive treatment at Hunters Moor.
           Nor does it help the Appellant's case to argue that the item was
           not intended for the use to which the representative is  seeking
           to put it.


20. Bearing in mind that the Judge found that Ms Afzal  did  not  have  the
    necessary  qualifications  or   expertise   to   provide   professional
    counselling services for  people  suffering  from  depression,  on  the
    evidence in the round, on the balance of probabilities, I find that the
    compliment slip from Hunters Moor purported to confirm  details  within
    it which were not in  fact  true  and  was  not  signed  by  a  medical
    consultant who had the authority to release  such  information.  It  is
    therefore a forged  document,  in  the  sense  that  that  it  contains
    information  which  is  not  true,  with  the  intent  to  deceive  and
    ultimately or use to seek leave to remain under false pretences. I find
    that the Respondent has discharged the burden of proof.


Decision

21. The decision of Designated Judge Coates contains a  material  error  of
    law in that he did not  deal  with  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's application under paragraph 322(1A).


22. I dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


Anonymity


23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  No
    request has been made for an anonymity order and pursuant to Rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I find no reason  to
    make an order.





Signed                                  Date



M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed, no
fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

