
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20879/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                              ADENIYI OYEBANJO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ogunbiyi, Counsel, instructed by Spring
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make any order restricting publicity about
    this case.

 2. This is an appeal brought with permission given by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Grubb against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent refusing him  a
    residence card. He said that  he  was  entitled  to  a  residence  card
    because he was the former husband of an EEA national exercising  treaty
    rights who had established a  permission  right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom by working for at least five years,  and  this  was  the
    state of affairs when they divorced in September 2013.

 3. I am satisfied, having had the opportunity of  considering  the  papers
    and quizzing Mr Armstrong for an explanation of the decision, that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was wrong.

 4. There is a very substantial bundle of  documentary  evidence  which  is
    apparently credible and this shows that the appellant's former wife was
    declaring money to Her Majesty's Customs and  Revenue  for  the  period
    ending in the tax year April 2013.  It does not strictly show when  she
    started to earn money or indeed the source of the money  that  she  was
    declaring.  However there is evidence that she made a  tax  return  for
    the year ending in April 2009 where she was not required to pay any tax
    because she had not earned sufficient money.

 5. As is very often the case  after  a  divorce,  the  former  matrimonial
    partners are not on good terms or even in contact with each  other  and
    although there is no reason at all that gaps in the evidence should  be
    assumed to be filled in a way that is  to  the  appellant's  advantage,
    gaps in the evidence should not be viewed  as  sinister  or  revealing.
    They are just that.  They are gaps.

 6. The relevant question is what is the most likely explanation for  these
    tax returns having been made.  The most likely explanation is that  the
    appellant's then wife was in the United Kingdom  doing  something  that
    required her to declare her income to the revenue and it  is  extremely
    likely that whatever she was doing was something was part of exercising
    treaty rights.  The only thing we know she was doing was working  as  a
    hairdresser.  The probable explanation is that she  was  working  as  a
    hairdresser throughout the five-year period. This is sufficient time to
    establish a permanent right of residence,  which  was  the  established
    status she had when the parties divorced. It follows  as  a  matter  of
    European law recognised in United Kingdom law that this  appellant  was
    entitled to a residence card as well as his former wife.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, I find, erred at paragraph  17  when  he
    did not accept the evidence as evidence of  economic  activity  in  the
    relevant period.  It really is not clear how people have a liability to
    pay tax without some sort of economic activity and whilst not all forms
    of economic activity arise from exercising treaty rights  it  is  quite
    clear that it is the most likely explanation in this case.

 8. As I read the First-tier Tribunal's decision, he did not  have  another
    explanation. I think it more likely that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had lost sight of the  relevant  dates.  Certainly  before  me  we  all
    struggled a little to work out precisely what period was covered.

 9. Mr Armstrong had an  opportunity  to  address  me  and  could  not  see
    anything wrong in the course I propose to take and I have therefore set
    aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  allow  the  appeal
    because I am satisfied the evidence when read properly and  applied  to
    the appropriate dates can only, in the absence  of  contrary  evidence,
    prove economic activity of a kind  that  arose  from  the  exercise  of
    treaty rights and that is sufficient to establish the case.

10. I therefore allow this appeal.




    Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 November 2016               |

