
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20998/2013
                                                               IA/21001/2013
                                                               IA/21003/2013
                                                               IA/21005/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 July 2014                                 |On 05 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                           mrs Tina Nkiru Uzodekwe
                           mr sunny okey Uzodekwe
                   master jessey kelechi Munachim Uzodekwe
                  master onyedikachin davis chika Uzodekwe
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Bexson
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria being husband and  wife  and
    their two children.  They applied for further leave to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and on human rights grounds. Their applications were
    refused.

 2. The appellants appealed the decision to the First-tier Tribunal  (IAC).
    In a determination promulgated on 30  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Callender Smith dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules
    and under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellants applied for permission to appeal  the  decision  of  the
    judge and permission was granted.  It was found arguable that the judge
    made no or no adequate assessment  of  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect either or both children to return to  Nigeria  independently  of
    what should happen to their parents.   The  judge  granting  permission
    went on to state that contrary to what is said at paragraph 5.6 of  the
    grounds the judge did refer to the children not wanting to leave the UK
    and being well-integrated into the UK and that he was  evidently  aware
    that the elder child had been  in  the  UK  for  nine  years.   It  was
    arguable, however, that he did not carry through  those  findings  into
    his conclusions about the best interests of the children,  or  did  not
    give adequate reasons for his  conclusion  that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of both children to return to Nigeria with their parents.

Submissions before me.

 4. Ms Bexson,  representing  the  appellants,  submitted  that  the  judge
    concentrated in the determination  on  the  credibility  issue  of  the
    parents rather than looking at the best interests of the children.   He
    did not look at their individual rights and failed  to  deal  with  the
    children's interests as a primary consideration.  The judge found  that
    both appellants have families to whom on return to Nigeria  they  could
    turn for assistance, and the fact-finding on the basis of  credibility,
    or lack of it, created a  different  dynamic  within  the  appeal,  the
    operation of the Immigration Rules on the key elements  of  the  appeal
    and, in the final analysis,  in  the  consideration  of  "stand  alone"
    Article 8 ECHR private or  family  life  rights.   Although  the  judge
    considered  the  children's  education,  that  was  only  part  of  the
    assessment that he needed to make.  He did not mention the  seven  year
    residence point and does not say that it would be reasonable to  expect
    the children to leave the United Kingdom.  He makes  no  assessment  of
    whether it is reasonable for the children to go to Nigeria.  The  judge
    spends more time criticising the immigration history  of  the  parents.
    He did not deal with the evidence of the elder child who wrote a letter
    saying that he has loads of friends in his school and that if  he  went
    to Nigeria he would suffer and the teachers in  Nigeria  like  smacking
    and hurting students.

 5. In his submissions Mr Jarvis provided many authorities.  I  ascertained
    that he had given Ms Bexson copies of these and that she did  not  need
    time to consider them.

 6. Having heard these submissions I announced my  decision  that  I  found
    that there was no material error of law in the determination  and  that
    there was no other good reason for the appeals to be reconsidered.





Reasons for finding that there is no material error

 7. This is a thorough and detailed determination.  In  essence  the  judge
    found that the adult appellants came into the United  Kingdom  in  2003
    with the assistance of an agent.  They have never lawfully  been  here.
    The judge heard evidence from the adult parents  and  a  witness.   For
    reasons that  were  open  to  him  the  judge  found  that  both  adult
    appellants have families to whom they  could  turn  for  assistance  on
    their return to Nigeria.  It was  one  of  the  crucial  findings  that
    needed to be made because  the  decision  on  the  point  would  affect
    consideration of the Article 8 position.

 8. The judge correctly identified in paragraph 63 that the best  interests
    of the children need also to be  considered  in  the  context  of  this
    appeal.  The judge found that the children do not  want  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  This is where they were born and educated and he found
    that there was objective evidence that the children are well-integrated
    here.  He appreciated clearly that one of the children is now  9  years
    old and the other is 6 years old.  Consideration of the best  interests
    of the children, he stated, is  an  integral  part  of  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise and it is also clear that it is a matter that has to
    be addressed as a  distinct  inquiry.   He  directed  himself  that  an
    "overall assessment" needs to be made and that assessment then needs to
    be reflected in the wider Article 8(2) proportionality assessment.

 9. At paragraph 65 onwards the judge considered the  children's  education
    and in particular  the  effect  of  any  disruption  of  their  current
    schooling and educational development caused by  their  removal,  their
    progress and opportunities in the broader sense.   He  had  regard  not
    only to the children's past and present educational setting,  but  also
    the setting likely to confront them  in  Nigeria.   He  concluded  that
    although the standards and opportunities within the Nigerian system may
    not be of exactly the same standard as those available to the  children
    at their UK schools, they are not being asked to relocate to a  country
    without a developed secondary education and English, in which they  are
    both fluent, is the medium of instruction in most Nigerian schools.  He
    referred to the case of MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT
    00475 (IAC) on more than one occasion in the  determination  and  found
    clear that where there is an educational system, then while there would
    be disruption on removal to Nigeria it is likely to  be  temporary  and
    something which each of these children could  accommodate  given  their
    current skills and accomplishments.

10. The judge concluded that the best interests  of  the  children  lie  in
    remaining with their parents and that their parents can  reasonably  be
    expected to return to their country  of  origin,  namely  Nigeria.   He
    referred to the comments of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph  54  of  MK
    and stated that those transpose as  well  from  India  as  they  do  to
    Nigeria.

11.  The  judge  carried  those  issues  over  into  the  wider  Article  8
    assessment, effectively finding that there  would  be  some  short-term
    disruption to the children's education but that this was outweighed  by
    several factors,  including  the  availability  of  good  education  in
    Nigeria, the family's Nigerian nationality, the fact  that  they  would
    all be together, and the adults' cultural links with Nigeria. The judge
    then went on to deal with what he called the "wider assessment".

12. The judge commented that the adult appellants deliberately entered  the
    UK unlawfully and they have worked here unlawfully, paid  no  taxes  or
    national insurance and have had the benefit of using  both  the  health
    and the education system parasitically for over ten years.   There  was
    no suggestion that they could not have gone on living in Nigeria  after
    their marriage in 2002. Echoing paragraph 57 of MK the adult appellants
    had the means and the stability of a settled life in Nigeria.   He  did
    not accept their account to have come  here  against  a  background  of
    having been disowned by their  respective  families  because  they  had
    married, or  in  the  context  of  cultural  differences.   Each  adult
    appellant sought to maintain the same  fiction  as  to  their  family's
    circumstances and  they  have  a  deceitful  and  dreadful  immigration
    history.

13. Turning once more to the children and considering matters in the  round
    at paragraph 74, the judge accepted that the children are not to  blame
    for their parents' conduct, but he considered that their parents'  poor
    immigration history added significant weight to  the  factors  weighing
    against the family's claim to remain in the UK.

14. The judge did not refer specifically to 276ADE (iv) which sets out  the
    requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK, where at the date of application the
    applicant is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least seven years, and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the applicant to leave the UK.  The elder child has lived in the
    UK since birth and is now 9 years old. However, having  considered  his
    findings the judge concluded that the best interests  of  the  children
    lie in  remaining  with  their  parents  and  that  their  parents  can
    reasonably be expected to return to Nigeria.  Although  the  one  child
    has been in the United Kingdom for more than seven years, although  the
    judge has not said in terms that it would be reasonable to  expect  him
    to leave the UK, it is clear enough  on  the  findings  that  that  was
    indeed his finding.  The best interests of the children are  a  primary
    consideration but that is not the same as  the  primary  consideration,
    still less the paramount consideration.  None  of  the  appellants  are
    British citizens which played such a significant aspect in the case  of
    ZH (Tanzania) (FC) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

15. There is  little  doubt  that  from  the  reasoning  of  the  judge  he
    considered that  the  force  of  other  considerations  outweighed  the
    interests of the children in remaining in the United Kingdom.  It  will
    be recalled that in the case of ZH (Tanzania) the appellant mother  was
    a national of Tanzania who had two children aged 12 and 9.   They  were
    British citizens, but importantly so was  their  father.   There  could
    therefore be no question  of  removing  the  father  and  nor  did  the
    Secretary of State have any power to remove  the  children.   The  only
    power open to the Secretary of State was that of  removing  the  mother
    alone.  If, therefore, the children were to stay in the UK  they  would
    be separated from their mother.  On the other hand,  if  they  followed
    her to Tanzania they would be separated from their  father,  unless  he
    chose to go with them, and they would be deprived of the opportunity to
    grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

16. In this appeal the judge considered  the  seriousness  of  difficulties
    which any of the children might encounter in Nigeria.  Although he  did
    not say so in terms, it is clear that  he  concluded  that  the  family
    would be returned as a unit and would be returning to  extended  family
    members there.  EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874
    is instructive.  This is a case that was  heard  after  these  appeals.
    Lewison LJ at paragraphs 58 to 60 said as follows:-

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?

         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             Tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

17. Whatever shortcoming there may be in the determination, such as failing
    to mention the words "primary consideration" or the  seven  year  point
    referred to above, it is not necessary or desirable for  these  aspects
    to be considered by rote.  Little is to be gained by  so  doing,  other
    perhaps than the greater certainty that a decision will be  less  prone
    to a successful appeal.

18. The judge did all that was necessary and took into account  the  wishes
    and feelings of the children (or certainly the elder child)  and  their
    integration into UK society, their relationship with their parents  and
    their circumstances upon return to Nigeria.

19.  Given the particular circumstances of these appeals it is difficult to
    conclude that the judge could have come to any other decision than  the
    one that he did.  There is no lack of reasoning and as I  announced  at
    the hearing I can see no error of law which would  entitle  me  to  set
    aside that decision.

Decision

20. For the above reasons the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    stands and these appeals remain dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction has been made previously and in  the  particular
    circumstances of the case I see no particular need for one to  be  made
    now.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


