

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/20146/2015

                                     IA/20147/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|On 2 August 2017                          |On 4 August 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          DR MUHAMMAD ASHRAF FARUK
                              MRS MARIA MSTARY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms N Bustani of Counsel.
For the Respondent:     Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Cruthers, promulgated on 8 April 2016, in which the Judge dismissed
        the appellant's appeal under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
        human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh. The first appellant
        was born on 1 January 1978 and is the lead case in relation to this
        matter, the Judge noting at [2] that the second  appellant  is  the
        spouse  of  the  first  appellant  and  that  their  representative
        accepted at the hearing that the appeals stood or fell together.
     3. The Judge carries out a careful analysis of the factual  matrix  of
        the case,  sets  out  the  issues  the  tribunal  was  required  to
        consider, and the arguments  for  the  respective  parties,  before
        setting out findings of  fact  from  [52]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge.
     4. In relation to the respondent's  allegation  concerning  the  first
        appellant's English language test results of August 2013,  the  ETS
        issue, the Judge finds at [63] that the totality  of  the  evidence
        from the respondent on the issue was  not  sufficient  or  specific
        enough to show that the appellants test results of August 2013  had
        been obtained improperly. There is no challenge to this  aspect  of
        the decision.
     5. The Judge accepted the chronology/immigration history  as  a  whole
        although  records  reservations  regarding  some  aspects  of   the
        evidence.
     6.  In  relation  to  the  paragraph  276B  argument,  it  being   the
        appellant's case that he was entitled to leave  to  remain  on  the
        grounds of long residents  having  completed  at  least  10  year's
        continuous lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Judge
        considered not only the factual matrix presented  in  the  evidence
        but also the cases of MU ('statement of additional  grounds'  -long
        residence - discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT  442  and  also  the
        later decision of AQ (Pakistan) [2011]  EWCA  Civ  833.  The  Judge
        accepted that the issue relating to the 10-year rule was before the
        Secretary of State when she made the decision under appeal.
     7. The Judge concluded that the appellant could not  succeed  on  this
        ground as he was seeking to rely on the fact that he  had  attained
        the required 10 years' continuous residence in  the  UK  after  his
        index application was made. The Judge also, for reasons set out  in
        the decision under challenge, considered the human  rights  aspects
        of the appeal but concluded that the decision was proportionate.
     8. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  refused  by  a
        Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on  a
        renewed application to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable that the Judge erred in law in calculating the  period  of
        the appellant's continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.
     9. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 reply of 28 June 2017  stated
        that the respondent did not oppose the appellant's application  for
        permission to appeal and invited the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
        the appeal with  a  fresh  oral  continuance  hearing  to  consider
        whether the first appellant can  satisfy  the  relevant  10  years'
        continuous lawful residence requirement for the purpose of
        paragraph 276B.




Discussion



    10. In addition to the case law referred to by the Judge, the Secretary
        of State's Modernised Guidance: Long Residence,  acknowledges  that
        the ten years can be completed whilst an appeal is pending:


        "A person may complete 10 years continuous lawful residence  whilst
        they  are  awaiting  the  outcome  of  an  appeal  and  submit   an
        application on this basis. Under sections 3C  and  3D,  it  is  not
        possible  to  submit  a  new  application  while   an   appeal   is
        outstanding. However, the applicant can submit further  grounds  to
        be considered at appeal."


  11. The renewed application for permission to  appeal  asserted  that  the
      First-tier was permitted to, and  indeed  ought  to,  have  considered
      whether the First Appellant had accrued to 10 years' lawful  residence
      by the date the respondent reached her decision (which it is  asserted
      he clearly had).
  12. In light of the  Secretary  of  State's  concession  in  the  Rule  24
      response the Upper Tribunal accepts the Judge erred in law in a manner
      material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  relating  to  the
      assessment pursuant to paragraph 276B of  the  immigration  rules  and
      that element of the decision is set aside.
  13. Mr McVeety accepted, taking into account the periods of leave  granted
      to the first appellant and the effect of section 3C of the Immigration
      Act 1971 (as amended), that  the  first  appellant  had  acquired  the
      necessary 10 years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.
      On that basis, the Upper Tribunal remakes the decision by allowing the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules. The appeal of the second appellant
      succeeds in line.
  14. In light of this there is no need to consider separately the challenge
      to the decision on human rights grounds.


Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. The appeals are allowed.


   Anonymity


    16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 August 2017










