

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/20791/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 16 March 2018                    |              On 13 April 2018        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     S S
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel, 12 Old Square instructed on
                    a direct access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   None  has  been
sought.  However, my  decision  contains  a  lot  of  medical  and  personal
information in relation to the gentleman for whom the  Appellant  cares  and
for that reason I consider it appropriate to  anonymise  his  name  and,  by
extension,  the  name  of  the  Appellant.   I  have  for  similar  reasons,
anonymised their details in the error of law decision which is  appended  to
this decision.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

            Background


   1. By a decision promulgated on 11 January 2018, I found an error of  law
      in the   decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Geraint  Jones  QC
      promulgated on 23 March 2017 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal.   I
      therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and   gave
      directions for a resumed  hearing.   My  decision  promulgated  on  11
      January 2018 is annexed hereto for ease of reference.

   2. In short summary of the background to this appeal, the Appellant is  a
      national of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK on  26  August  2009  as  a
      student and his leave was extended in that  capacity  until  30  March
      2016.  On 7 February 2015 he made an application to remain outside the
      Immigration Rules ("the Rules") principally on the basis that he cares
      for WM who is a British Citizen.  They are not  related  in  any  way.
      The Appellant lives in the same house as WM.  It appears that this  is
      in accommodation provided by the Council. The Respondent  refused  the
      Appellant's application to  remain  on  22  May  2015.   That  is  the
      decision under appeal.

   3. I note that the Appellant's application was made prior to 6 April 2015
      and was for  further  leave  to  remain.   Accordingly,  although  the
      Respondent's  decision  was  after  that  date,  the  previous  appeal
      provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  apply
      (in other words, those which applied before the amendments made by the
      Immigration Act 2014).  That is by reason of the relevant transitional
      arrangements  (The  Immigration  Act   2014   (Commencement   No.   4,
      Transitional and Savings Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015: SI 2015
      No 371).  As such the Appellant could appeal the Respondent's decision
      on the basis that this was not in accordance with the Rules or the law
      as well as on human rights grounds.   As  well  as  the  human  rights
      grounds which are addressed in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, the
      Appellant also appeals on the basis that the Respondent has failed  to
      consider her policy on carers which appears at Chapter 17,  section  2
      of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  ("the  Care  in   the
      Community Policy").

   4. For the purposes of this hearing I was provided with medical  evidence
      relating to WM which I address in a separate section  below.   I  also
      received written  statements  from  the  Appellant  and  WM  and  oral
      evidence from them both.  I deal with that evidence so far as relevant
      below.

   5. I have only drawn attention to that evidence which is relevant to  the
      issues for me to determine.   I  have  though  taken  account  of  all
      evidence before me whether or not that is expressly mentioned.

   6. I received a skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   Ms
      Malhotra apologised for failing to provide one in accordance with  the
      directions given.  She had taken over conduct of the appeal at a  late
      stage from previous Counsel (who was ill and unable to attend) and had
      not realised that there was a direction for a  skeleton  argument.   I
      received oral submissions from her (and from Mr Walker) which  I  have
      taken into account in my discussion and conclusions.

   7. Following the hearing,  on  26  March  2018,  Counsel  who  previously
      represented the Appellant (Mr Turner) purported  to  file  a  skeleton
      argument itself dated 23 March 2018.  That was filed  about  ten  days
      after the hearing but prior to the finalising  of  this  decision.   I
      have though disregarded that document  for  two  reasons.   First,  Mr
      Turner was not Counsel who represented the Appellant at  this  hearing
      and it was inappropriate and unnecessary for him to  file  a  skeleton
      argument when another barrister, Ms Malhotra, had  attended  and  made
      submissions on the Appellant's behalf.  Second, the  content  of  that
      skeleton argument was targeted at reasons why the previous  First-tier
      Tribunal decision was wrong in law.  Since  I  had  already  set  that
      decision aside, those issues were no longer of any relevance.


   THE EVIDENCE

   Medical Evidence

   8. Since the position of WM and his medical conditions lie at  the  heart
      of this appeal, it is appropriate to deal with  the  medical  evidence
      first.

   9. WM was born on 27 April 1949 and is now aged nearly sixty-nine  years.
      I begin with a  description  of  WM's  medical  conditions  which  are
      helpfully summarised in a letter from his GP dated 26  September  2014
      ([AB/46-47]) as follows (including the  dates  when  those  conditions
      began):-
   a) Agoraphobia with panic attacks: 1 January 1959 ongoing
   b) Obsessive compulsive disorder: 1 January 1988 ongoing
   c) Panic disorder: 1 January 1992 ongoing
   d) Registered disabled: 29 April 2003 ongoing
   e) Blepharitis: 27 October 2003 ongoing
   f) Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder: 10 November 2004 ongoing
   g) Atrial fibrillation: 12 September 2007 ongoing
   h) Primary open-angle glaucoma: 3 March 2011 ongoing
   i) Anticoagulation monitoring in primary care: 18 April 2011 ongoing

  10. According to his medical notes, WM has been prescribed eye drops  from
      May 2003 onwards, Bisoprolol since  November  2007,  Citalopram  since
      December 2007, Warfarin since May 2008 and eye drops for his  glaucoma
      since March 2011.  His current  medication  (as  at  September  2014),
      according to the letter from his GP, consists of  eye  drops  for  his
      glaucoma, Warfarin for his heart condition and Bisoprolol.

  11. WM has been registered disabled since  April  2003.   According  to  a
      document dated 31  January  2014  ([AB/152-159])  WM  is  entitled  to
      disability living allowance on the middle rate care component for help
      with personal care and lower rate mobility  component  for  help  with
      getting around.  That entitlement is indefinite.

  12. According  to  his  evidence  (which  I  accept),  the  Appellant  was
      registered as WM's carer by Westminster City Council in January  2015.
      I deal in more detail  with  that  when  considering  the  Appellant's
      evidence below.  The Appellant is not a qualified  carer  and  has  no
      qualifications obtained from his studies in the UK which  are  in  any
      way relevant to that position.

  13. I have received medical  evidence  from  WM's  GP,  Westminster  Adult
      Health Services, Imperial College Healthcare (in relation to WM's  eye
      problems) and two individual reports from claimed experts.

   Evidence from GP

  14. The letter dated 26 September 2014 to which I refer at [9] above, also
      states as follows:-
           "[WM] has requested I write this letter.  He tells me that  [SS]
           DOB: 31.12.1989 who lives at the same address is his  full  time
           carer and that he cannot do without him.
           [WM] has significant physical and mental  health  problems  (see
           list below [as appears at [9]  above])  and  is  taking  regular
           medication which [SS] helps him manage."

  15. A further letter from Dr Robert Wormell, GP  dated  10  December  2016
      helpfully summarises the conditions from which WM continues to  suffer
      as follows:-
           "1.   He has  had  an  obsessive-compulsory  disorder  for  many
           years.  In addition, he has had a panic disorder and agoraphobia
           (a fear of wide-open spaces).  He also has acrophobia (a fear of
           heights).
           2.    In November 2004 he was diagnosed with a mixed anxiety and
           depressive disorder.
           3.    In 2007 he was diagnosed with atrial  fibrillation,  which
           is  still  present  and  which  requires  anticoagulation   with
           Warfarin.
           4.    Since 2011 he has  had  primary  open-angle  glaucoma  for
           which he takes Latanoprost eye drops."

  16. A further letter dated 22 February 2018 was filed  on  9  March  2018.
      That was outside the time  period  provided  for  by  the  directions.
      However, Mr Walker did not object to the Appellant's reliance on  this
      letter.  That letter is also written by Dr Robert Wormell. The  letter
      is addressed to the Appellant's direct access barrister.   Dr  Wormell
      writes as follows:-
           "Thank you for your letter, requesting information  about  [WM],
           who is a registered patient in  this  practice  and  his  carer,
           [SS].
           [WM] suffers from agoraphobia, which is a  fear  of  wide,  open
           spaces and also bathophobia, which is a fear of high  buildings.
           When he is in the vicinity of a  high  building,  he  loses  his
           bearings and screams.  He has to shut his eyes  and  follow  the
           directions and instructions of [SS], his carer.  This  means  he
           does not know where he is going, as he has  a  fear  of  a  high
           building falling on him and crushing him.  He also suffers  from
           an obsessive compulsive disorder and can wash his hands for  two
           to three hours every day.  In addition, he has a  mixed  anxiety
           and depressive disorder.
           As a result of his psychological illnesses mentioned above, [WM]
           has an extreme need for a carer to be with him wherever he goes,
           unless he is shopping in Tescos, which is next door to where  he
           lives, or attending church, which is  just  around  the  corner.
           This means he  is  unable  to  go  outside  alone  and  must  be
           accompanied by his carer.
           In addition, his personal hygiene depends on his  carer,  as  he
           needs [SS] to wash his hair twice a week and to help him take  a
           shower twice  a  week.   Because  of  his  obsessive  compulsive
           disorder and the frequent washing of his hands, [WM]  can  often
           flood the floor with water and he needs his carer to help mop up
           the wet floor.
           [WM] also suffers from a hearing loss in both ears, for which he
           needs a  hearing  aid.   As  well,  he  has  primary  open-angle
           glaucoma, which requires drops to be  inserted  into  both  eyes
           every day by his carer and atrial  fibrillation,  for  which  he
           takes Warfarin to prevent a cerebrovascular accident.
           It is quite clear that [WM] depends constantly and  consistently
           on [SS] as his carer who has been with  [WM]  for  seven  years.
           [WM] says that [SS] understands him better than any other person
           and that [SS]'s support is better  than  any  other  person  can
           provide.
           [WM] is seen regularly and followed up by the Central and  North
           West London NHS Foundation Trust and they are in full  agreement
           that [SS] helps him with all aspects of daily  living,  such  as
           shopping, cooking, cleaning etc.  They say  that  [WM]  benefits
           from his help and support and that, as a result, his symptoms of
           obsessive compulsive disorder have been considerably  eased  and
           reduced."

   Imperial College Healthcare

  17. A letter dated 11 November 2016, deals with WM's glaucoma.  His visual
      acuity is said to be 6/6 in the left eye.  His pressure is 17 mmHg  in
      the right eye and 16 in the left eye.  There is no  detail  about  the
      level of WM's glaucoma.  The recommendation is simply that  WM  should
      continue to instil his eyedrops every night  "with  the  help  of  his
      carer [SS]" and should receive a routine review in six months.

   Westminster Adult Mental Health Services

  18. By a letter dated 21  April  2015,  Westminster  Adult  Mental  Health
      Services provided the following report:-
           "I have been asked to prepare this report by the Home Office  as
           requested by solicitors for [SS].
           [WM]  has  been  known  to  our  services  since  2011,  with  a
           longstanding history of fear of contamination,  and  washes  his
           hands before and after touching anything. He is  diagnosed  with
           Obsessive Compulsive  Disorder,  which  is  a  chronic  enduring
           mental illness.  His illness  is  managed  with  medication  and
           psychology input.  He is followed up regularly in our outpatient
           clinic.
           His GP is monitoring his  physical  health  problems  of  Atrial
           fibrillation and glaucoma.
           He was assessed by our occupational therapist (please  refer  to
           their report)"

  19. The report to which reference is there made is one dated 20 April 2015
      and reads as follows:-
           "I saw [WM] today in the clinic along with [SS].   He  complains
           of feeling dizzy very often.  I gather he is on Warfarin for AF.
            He is trying to work on increasing the length  of  exposure  to
           tall buildings but dizziness is holding him back.   His  washing
           has reduced to 20 to 15  minutes  now.  His  OCD  symptoms  have
           improved  slightly  comparatively.   He  is   [sic]   medication
           compliance is erratic.
           Today discussed the  benefits  and  risks  associated  with  his
           medication combination.  Encouraged to  take  it  regularly  and
           reiterated the CBT techniques."

        The report continues under the heading of "Follow Up":-
              "- GP  to  investigate  his  dizziness  further  and  do  ECG
              (forward a copy to us)
    - To continue Citalopram 20mg, advised to take it regularly
    - Reiterated CBT techniques, [WM] to let us know when  he  is  ready  to
      address emotions relating to family with psychologist
    - Monitor physical health
    - Follow up appointment 29/06/2015 at 10:00am"

  20.  A  review  document  dated  21  June  2016  provides  the   following
      information:-
           "Seen [WM] for follow up appointment  along  with  his  Live  in
           carer [SS] on the 21st of June 2016.
           [SS] informed me that he has been living with [WM] for more than
           5 years now and has been his carer.  He provides support to [WM]
           by helping him with his activities of daily living ie  shopping,
           cooking, cleaning etc.  He said that [WM] derives  benefit  from
           his reinforcements against his unhealthy thoughts and behaviours
           in relation to his Obsessive compulsive disorder.  As  a  result
           of his company, [WM]'s symptoms of OCD  have  been  considerably
           under control.  [WM] agreed that he has  not  been  spending  as
           much time as before in his cleaning rituals (used to spend up to
           2-3 hrs before and now spends about half an hour).
           In terms of his fear of tall buildings  and  open  spaces,  [WM]
           feels supported and comforted in [SS]'s  company.   [WM]  rarely
           goes out unaccompanied as he would have fainting episodes due to
           anxiety.
           [WM] was today neatly dressed and had good personal hygiene.  He
           was anxious and frequently throwing up and pacing about at times
           when he wished to talk about his brothers who he  believes  have
           ill treated him.  It took a while before he could tell me  about
           his brothers who he said "hate me".  He said that [SS] has  been
           of immense benefit to him and he regards him as a member of  the
           family.  He said that he gets psychological help from  [SS]  and
           there has been no physical relation between them.  There were no
           e/o depressive features and no e/o psychotic symptoms during the
           assessment."

  21. Having listed WM' medications, the review continues that  "[WM]  would
      need reminders about his medication/timings from [SS]".  The reviewing
      doctor comments that it is his impression that  WM  has  "ongoing  OCD
      symptoms but has benefited from  consistent  reinforcements  from  his
      live in carer...". I note at this juncture that I  have  no  documents
      before me for the period April 2015  to  June  2016  and  this  latter
      document is prepared by a different doctor to the one who prepared the
      April 2015 review when the Appellant's involvement  in  WM's  care  is
      scarcely mentioned.  It is not clear  therefore  to  what  extent  the
      doctor preparing the June 2016 review had seen WM  and  the  Appellant
      previously in order to note the benefit derived from  the  Appellant's
      presence.

  22. The June 2016 review suggests follow up action as:-
           "1.   To request Dr Tracy Chotoo to  review  any  further  input
           from psychology this would help both [WM] and his carer [SS]  to
           deal with [WM]'s anxiety in a healthier way.  Probably develop a
           care plan to follow which would promote  more  independence  for
           [WM] and also lessen the care burden.
           2.    [WM] was advised to continue with Citalopram 20mg OD.GP to
           please continue to prescribe at this dose.
           3.    [SS] has  agreed  to  maintain  a  diary  to  monitor  the
           response to his treatment.
           4.    Agreed to review response to Citalopram  on  the  26th  of
           July 2016 @3pm
           5.     GP  requested  to  review  his  Cough  and  frequency  of
           micturition.
           6.     [SS]  would  continue  to  provide  with  the   necessary
           psychological support for [WM] without which  I  believe  [WM]'s
           mental health would  deteriorate  significantly.   Therefore,  I
           would support any application made for [SS] to be  his  official
           carer.
           7.    I have advised [SS] to seek appropriate advise [sic]  from
           the Citizens  Advise  [sic]  bureau  Westminster  to  check  his
           entitlement for any benefits."

  23. On the day of the hearing, I was provided with an update  report  from
      Tonia Ibrahim who is an acting clinical lead/senior social worker with
      Westminster Adult  Mental  Health  Services.   She  does  not  provide
      details of her qualifications but I  understood  the  Appellant's  and
      WM's evidence to be that she is the person in that  organisation  with
      whom they now deal.  She does not say in her report for how  long  she
      has dealt with WM nor on what her  opinion  is  based.   Although  the
      report was not filed and served in accordance with  the  directions  I
      made on 11 January 2018, Mr Walker did not object to  the  Appellant's
      reliance on this report.

  24. Ms Ibrahim reports as follows:-
           "I have been asked to prepare this report in support of [SS].  I
           can confirm [SS] is the recognised live in carer for  our  above
           named client [WM].
           [WM]  has  been  known  to  our  services  since  2011,  with  a
           longstanding history of fear of contamination.  He suffers  with
           panic attacks, extreme  anxiety  and  agoraphobia.   His  mental
           health is further complicated by depressive episodes.  He has an
           established diagnosis of OCD, and  suffers  with  other  complex
           physical health problems.
           [WM] would not be able to manage without his carer, who provides
           support  around   maintaining   his   nutrition,   keeping   his
           environment clean and safe, helping him to manage  his  laundry,
           personal care and supporting him to go to  church  etc.   [WM]'s
           severe OCD impacts on every aspect of his life.
           Without the support of his carer, [SS], [WM] would not  be  able
           to manage his medication.  For example he would be  at  risk  of
           becoming so over involved in  his  rituals  that  he  would  not
           remember to take his medication and begin to  panic  and  become
           confused.  [WM] is on Warfarin, which  need  careful  monitoring
           and titration and has significant risks if not taken properly.
           Another example of the support [WM] needs, is the reassurance of
           his carer whilst he  is  out  and  about  in  the  community  eg
           maintaining  appointment  with  the  CMHT,  his  GP,   shopping,
           attending church etc.  [WM] suffers with panic attacks and is at
           risk of becoming stuck in rituals, which stop him from attending
           appointments on time.  He has a fear of high buildings and using
           toilets whilst out of his home.  [WM]  also  suffers  with  poor
           memory and confusion brought on [sic] severe anxiety.
           [WM]'s GP is  monitoring  his  physical  health  problems  which
           included Atrial fibrillation and glaucoma."







   Professor S Lingam, MD (Hons), FRCPCH, FRCPS, DCH, DRCOG

  25. Professor Lingam has provided a report in this matter dated 2 February
      2018 based on  one  assessment  on  23  January  2018.   I  note  that
      Professor Lingam is a District  Medical  Appraiser  appointed  by  the
      Tribunal Judiciary. He was also a Senior Medically Qualified  Tribunal
      Member for fifteen years  until  April  2015.   However,  on  his  own
      account, his specialisms are in writing medical reports on victims  of
      torture and in paediatric neurology and  child  developmental  issues.
      He also says that he is an expert in vaccine damage issues  and  toxin
      damage including damage to the brain.  He has reported on scarring and
      industrial injuries before Tribunals.

  26. In spite of the lengthy statement of his expertise, I can find nothing
      in Professor  Lingam's  statement  relating  either  to  his  previous
      practice experience or medico-legal experience which qualifies him  as
      an  expert  to  report  on  WM's  conditions.    His   only   relevant
      qualification is that of a Fellow of the Royal College  of  Physicians
      and Surgeons which is a general qualification.  He is not, it appears,
      someone with particular expertise as a psychiatrist or psychologist.

  27. Although, once again, this report was filed out of time on 8 March,  I
      received it without objection from the Respondent.

  28. The relevant part  of  Professor  Lingam's  report  reads  as  follows
      (produced in identical form to the report itself):-
           "1.   I REMAIN CONCERNED ABOUT [WM] COMPLEX MEDICAL NEEDS  WHICH
           ARE GETTING WORSE.  MY CLINICAL VIEW IS THAT  HE  WILL  NEED  AN
           ASSESSMENT BY SOCIAL SERVICES AND HIS CARE NEEDS WILL NEED TO BE
           REVIEWD (sic)
           2.    From the  time  I  saw  him  I  thought  that  he  is  now
           clinically depressed and this will need urgent attention.   [WM]
           is also concerned about  his  future  without  [SS]  and  he  is
           concerned what will happen to him.  Social services should  look
           into this element.  My clinical assessment is that [WM] will not
           manage independent living as at  present  without  the  help  of
           [SS]."

  29. Although Professor Lingam says that he understands his  duty  to  this
      Tribunal, it is far from clear that  he  does.   He  cites  from  "new
      research" in support of what causes depression which he  says  may  be
      linked to a "higher level of  inflammatory  markers"  and  makes  some
      quite outlandish suggestions based apparently on this  research  about
      how depression can be abated by reducing inflammation.   He  does  not
      say what this "new research" is, who has published it or whether it is
      tested in any way.  He does not explain what is the relevance of  that
      research to this case.  For example, his apparent suggestion  that  WM
      could carry out regular exercise of light  walking  for  two  to  four
      hours per week takes no account of WM's condition of agoraphobia.

  30. Nor does Professor Lingam say on what he bases his  view  that  WM  is
      "now clinically depressed" nor how  he  reaches  the  view  that  WM's
      "complex medical needs" "are getting worse" since it does  not  appear
      that he has ever reviewed WM in the  past  or  been  involved  in  his
      treatment.

  31. For those reasons, whilst I take into account  what  Professor  Lingam
      says about the need for Social Services to  assist  if  WM  is  to  be
      deprived of the Appellant's care, I cannot place any  weight  on  this
      report as to WM's medical conditions.

   Dr Rozmin Halari, BSc, MSc, PhD, C.Psychol, DClinPsych, DClinHyp, AFBPSs

  32. Dr Halari is a Chartered Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Honorary
      Senior Lecturer  at  Kings  College,  London.   His  report  dated  15
      February 2017 was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  it  is
      largely on the basis of the Judge's failure to deal with  this  report
      that I found an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      decision.

  33. Dr Halari's report is based on one interview of one and a  half  hours
      with WM  and  the  Appellant.   Dr  Halari  bases  his  assessment  on
      observation of WM and what he is told by both WM  and  the  Appellant.
      He also carried out some psychometric tests and appears to have had at
      least some of WM's medical records before him.

  34. I do not need set out  what  is  said  by  Dr  Halari  about  how  the
      Appellant knows WM as that is  dealt  with  in  the  evidence  of  the
      Appellant and WM.  It is though instructive to  note  what  Dr  Halari
      reports about  the  relationship  between  WM  and  the  Appellant  as
      follows:-
           "[18] [WM] told me that he is "entirely dependent" on [SS]  "for
           my eyes" and with regards to his activities of daily living  and
           emotionally.   He emphasised that [SS] is like his family.
           [19]  [WM] reported that he has two brothers.   He  became  very
           distressed and shaky in the assessment.  One of his brothers  is
           a Professor at Greenwich University.  He told me that his family
           have never been supportive of him.  He  has  been  living  alone
           with very little to no contact with his family.   He  said  that
           life became very difficult for him when his physical and  mental
           health started to deteriorate."

  35. Likewise, the Appellant reported to Dr Halari as recorded at [25]  and
      [26] of the report that he "has formed a very food  [good]  friendship
      with [WM] who he cares for and he  provides  him  with  practical  and
      emotional support".  He says that this is a "genuine friendship", that
      "[WM] is very vulnerable" and that  he  (the  Appellant)  "has  always
      tried his best to care for,  and  protect  [WM]."  The  Appellant  has
      apparently returned to Bangladesh on four occasions since  knowing  WM
      and although he asked friends to support WM in  his  absence  he  says
      that WM became depressed and lost weight.

  36. WM reported to Dr Halari that "he is very dependent on [the Appellant}
      for practical and emotional support".  The Appellant is said to ensure
      that WM takes his medication, helps him  to  exercise  and  cooks  and
      cleans for him.  It is also clear that they have a social relationship
      as friends and do some things together such as going to Church. WM has
      reported that he "would not be able to cope"  if  the  Appellant  were
      removed.  He  says  he  would  feel  depressed,  lonely  and  socially
      isolated as he would have no  friends  or  family  to  help  him.   WM
      describes the Appellant as "[his] family, [his] only family."

  37. In terms of the psychological impact of the Appellant leaving the  UK,
      based on what is said by WM and the Appellant and the  "central  role"
      which Dr Halari understands the Appellant to have  in  WM's  life,  Dr
      Halari says that the Appellant's  uncertain  immigration  history  has
      caused both the Appellant and WM "to feel  very  anxious  and  low  in
      mood".  He goes on to say however that WM feels low in mood because of
      his own physical health but his low mood "has been exacerbated by  the
      fear" that the Appellant might leave.   He  considers  the  friendship
      between the Appellant and WM to be a "protective factor" for WM.   The
      Appellant leaving "would have significant  negative  impact"  on  WM's
      physical,  social  and  emotional   wellbeing   and   a   "significant
      detrimental impact" on his physical and mental health.

   WM's Evidence

  38. WM has provided a statement dated 6 February 2015 and  contributed  to
      the joint statement dated 15 March 2018 which was  apparently  written
      by the Appellant and part of which  is  that  of  the  Appellant.   WM
      adopted both statements. There is also a statement dated 17  May  2016
      but that simply replicates the statement of 6 February 2015 and it was
      not necessary to deal with that separately.

  39. Due to his medical conditions, WM clearly found it very  difficult  to
      give his oral evidence.  At times, particularly  when  speaking  about
      his family, he became very agitated and had to be given time  to  calm
      down.  I agreed with Ms Malhotra before he gave evidence that we would
      take his evidence as slowly as needed, that he could be  given  breaks
      as often as was necessary and that, if she considered that any of  the
      cross-examination was inappropriate  in  light  of  his  anxiety,  she
      should intervene.  I did not  though  have  any  medical  evidence  to
      suggest that his mental or physical health conditions  meant  that  he
      was unable to give oral evidence and be cross-examined.

  40. WM explained his family circumstances.  He has two  brothers  and  one
      sister.  His sister lives in  USA.   One  of  his  brothers  lives  in
      Glasgow.  The other lives, he thinks, in London.   That  brother  was,
      when WM last heard, a Professor at Greenwich University.  It was quite
      clear from WM's evidence that there is no love lost between  siblings.
      He considers that his siblings have treated him  cruelly  and  do  not
      care about him at all.  His mother, who was previously living  in  USA
      with his sister, has recently died.  I accept that WM has  no  support
      from his family and could not rely on  support  from  that  source  in
      future.

  41. WM spoke about his medical conditions.   Those  are  adequately  dealt
      with by the medical evidence which I have set out fully above.  He did
      though update the evidence in  this  regard.   He  said  that  he  has
      regular monitoring in respect of  his  atrial  fibrillation  which  is
      controlled  by  warfarin  but  recent   readings   have   shown   some
      deterioration which  is  being  monitored  by  the  nurse  at  his  GP
      practice.  He also confirmed in response to questions that  he  has  a
      blood test with  the  nurse  every  three  to  four  months,  that  he
      generally sees the nurse every three to four weeks  but  is  presently
      seeing her every week and that he sees his care worker (apparently  Ms
      Ibrahim) every two to three months.

  42. In terms of the assistance which the Appellant gives to him,  WM  said
      that,  whilst   his   physical   condition   is   deteriorating,   his
      psychological condition was helped by having the Appellant living with
      him.  He does not get panic attacks when accompanied by the Appellant.
       He could not for example  have  attended  to  give  evidence  if  the
      Appellant had not been with him.

  43. WM said that, before the Appellant came  to  live  with  him,  he  had
      cleaners and people who came to take his laundry.   He  did  not  have
      help with his medication although he said that  he  had  not  been  on
      warfarin long before the Appellant came to stay and his  glaucoma  had
      developed since.  The Appellant helps him with his eye drops.

  44. WM says  in  his  written  statement  dated  February  2015  that  the
      Appellant "has become part of [his] family and when all  [his]  family
      members left [him] he has been [there  for  him]".    He  "started  to
      treat him as [his] own  younger  brother  as  none  of  [his]  natural
      brothers care for [him]".  He says  that  the  Appellant  "treats  and
      respects" him as an older brother.  In his more recent statement dated
      15 March 2018, he says that the Appellant "is like a son".

  45. WM was insistent that if the Appellant were forced to leave, he  would
      not get adequate care from Social Services.  It was a  little  unclear
      whether he had asked, at least whether he had done so recently.  If he
      had, though, it was on the basis of wanting a "live in" carer.  He had
      not explored other options.  He was insistent that a carer visiting  a
      few times per day would not assist and that he needed someone  twenty-
      four hours per day.  He  said  that  the  Appellant  had  to  call  an
      emergency doctor a few times (although no details were provided  about
      when and why) and he would not feel safe without someone there to help
      him if necessary.

   The Appellant's Evidence

  46. The Appellant has provided three witness statements dated  6  February
      2015, 17 May 2016 and 8 December 2017.  He also  contributed  to  (and
      apparently wrote for WM)  the  statement  dated  15  March  2018.   He
      adopted those statements.

  47. The Appellant met WM in a coffee shop when the Appellant  was  with  a
      friend.  They chatted and exchanged numbers.  The Appellant was at the
      time  a  student  sharing  a  flat  with  others.    He   visited   WM
      occasionally.  The Appellant then had a problem  with  his  housemates
      which led to the police advising him to move out.   That  he  did  and
      asked WM if he could stay with him temporarily.  He moved in  with  WM
      in October 2011.  WM then asked him to stay and he did.  That  version
      of events differs  from  what  is  said  in  the  Appellant's  written
      statement and the written statement of  WM  which  suggests  that  the
      Appellant moved in with WM because WM was very ill.  The date when  he
      moved in is however consistent and nothing turns on that discrepancy.

  48. Until about 2014/2015 the Appellant continued to study  in  accordance
      with his leave.  However, his college licence was then revoked and  he
      was unable to afford to complete his education.  He says that  he  has
      not studied or worked since then. The Appellant confirmed that  during
      the period when he studied and worked  while  he  lived  with  WM,  he
      worked ten hours per week and went to college three to four  days  per
      week.  The college was not in the local area. When asked  how  WM  had
      coped when the Appellant went to college  and  worked,  the  Appellant
      said that he taught WM to use a mobile phone and to call if he  needed
      to and the Appellant would come  back  or  try  to  arrange  something
      (although it was not  said  that  WM  ever  needed  to  rely  on  this
      facility).

  49. The Appellant has family in Bangladesh.  His mother  calls  him  every
      day.  He says that his family also know WM and  sometimes  speak  with
      him.  He confirmed that his family provide no  monetary  support.   He
      referred to WM as being "his only family" in London.  The  Appellant's
      oral evidence that he remains in close  contact  with  his  family  in
      Bangladesh is contrary to his written statements dated 6 February 2015
      and 17 May 2016 where he says  that  "with  the  passage  of  time  my
      relationship with my family members has become distant and  I  do  not
      consider my ties to Bangladesh to be subsisting at present." For  that
      reason, I do not accept the assertion in that written  statement  that
      he and WM are "each other's sole guardian and next of kin."

  50. It is also clear from the Appellant's evidence that,  whilst  he  does
      live with WM, he is not there all the time.  The  Appellant  confirmed
      that he has some friends and  a  girlfriend.   He  said  that  he  has
      "enough time for himself".  His friends know WM and sometimes come  to
      visit and sometimes they visit his friends.

  51. The joint witness statement dated 15 March 2018 provides a "week daily
      life diary" about the care which the Appellant provides.  He says that
      he gets up and helps WM to get up and get dressed, makes breakfast for
      him and gives him medication.  The Appellant then goes out  alone  for
      exercise or to play football.  He sleeps at the  weekend.  Around  11-
      12am, the Appellant gives WM a bath twice per week.  He accompanies WM
      if he has an appointment or  wishes  to  go  shopping.   WM  sometimes
      sleeps or watches television. The suggestion  in  the  diary  that  WM
      needs help to use the lavatory was contrary to WM's own evidence  that
      he does not, provided he is at home.

  52. At weekends, the Appellant says that sometimes he takes  WM  out  late
      morning for a coffee, or to go to Church or the library.  Sometimes WM
      stays in bed.

  53.  The  Appellant  makes  lunch  for  WM  and   sometimes   feeds   him.
      Occasionally they go out for lunch.  After lunch, WM  sleeps.   Again,
      if WM wants  to  go  out,  the  Appellant  will  accompany  him.   The
      Appellant makes dinner for WM, helps him undress for bed and gives him
      his eye drops.

  54. The Appellant accepted that WM is able to collect prescriptions if  he
      is feeling well because the GP surgery is close but, if WM  could  not
      go, he sometimes collects  prescriptions.   The  Appellant's  evidence
      about how  often  WM  sees  his  care  worker,  Ms  Ibrahim,  was  not
      consistent with WM's evidence.  The Appellant said  that  he  sees  Ms
      Ibrahim once per week and WM and he see her every other week.  When it
      was pointed out to him that WM said that he sees Ms Ibrahim only every
      two to three months, the Appellant said that  "it  depends"  and  that
      sometimes he goes to see Ms Ibrahim alone if WM was unable  to  go  or
      that she calls him to make an appointment.

  55. The Appellant is registered as WM's carer  with  Westminster  Council.
      He gave evidence that he  registered  with  them  in  2015-2016.   The
      documentation shows that the Appellant's registration with the "Carers
      Network" was completed on 20 January 2015.  It appears from  a  letter
      of that date that this was registration for a "Carers Emergency Card".
       There is appended to that letter  a  questionnaire  setting  out  the
      "Emergency Care Plan Information" for WM.  What is  described  as  the
      "Emergency 24-hour Care Plan" is part of  that  questionnaire  and  is
      broadly consistent in outline form with what  the  Appellant  says  he
      does for WM.  However, because this is in outline form, the fact  that
      the Appellant is not providing twenty-four hours'  care  is  the  more
      evident.  The plan describes how the Appellant helps WM to get up  and
      go to bed, makes his meals, supervises his medication, and  goes  with
      him to appointments or if he wants to go  out.   It  does  not  appear
      though that the Appellant is at home for seven days per week,  twenty-
      four hours per day and indeed, that is consistent with the Appellant's
      oral evidence.

  56. There is a letter in support of the Appellant from the Carers  Network
      dated 16 April 2015 which states as follows:-
           "His caring role includes  helping  [WM]  getting  out  of  bed,
           getting dressed, preparing his meals and  sometimes  helping  to
           feed him,  supervising  his  medication,  accompanying  [WM]  at
           appointments  and  when  he  goes  out,  making  sure  [WM]  has
           everything he needs before he goes out  such  as  his  keys  and
           freedom pass, helping [WM] sit on and get up  from  the  toilet,
           helping him get up from any sitting position  and  putting  [WM]
           eye drops in his eyes before he goes  to  bed,  and  supervising
           [WM] when he is washing as he suffers from falls.   [SS]  states
           that he also carries out household tasks such  as  cleaning  and
           the shopping, and dealing with the paperwork.
           [SS] states that he has to carry out the above as  [WM]  suffers
           from  Atrial  Fibrillation  of  the  heart,   Glaucoma   (vision
           impairment), difficulty walking due to stiffness  in  his  limbs
           and spells of dizziness, Obsessive  Compulsive  Disorder  (OCD),
           for example repeated hand-washing and fear of  open  spaces  and
           tall buildings, which causes him to suffer  from  panic  attacks
           and disorientation.  [WM] states that he is seeing  a  therapist
           for this.  [SS] and [WM] state that [WM] needs to be accompanied
           at all times for his own safety for the above reasons.
           [WM] also states that he does not trust anyone else to carry out
           the above tasks for him."

  57. The Appellant confirmed that he has no relevant qualifications to  act
      as a carer. His qualifications are in business administration.  He had
      an interview when he registered with Westminster Council and  has  had
      some classes on how to care for  people.   He  has  contact  with  the
      Carers Network if he needs it.  He also said that he was brought up in
      a family where elders are respected and the disabled are cared for and
      as such, WM is like an "elder brother" who should  be  cared  for  and
      respected.

  58. The Appellant confirmed that he is  not  paid  by  WM  for  his  care.
      However, he is clearly supported by him in terms of board and lodgings
      and he confirmed that if he needs money, WM will give it to him.

  59. The Appellant confirmed that he and WM had asked Social Services about
      what assistance they could offer.  Contrary to what  is  suggested  by
      the medical  evidence  and  WM's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  does
      everything for him now, the Appellant said that WM is still  currently
      being provided with  help  with  cleaning  and  weekly  laundry.   His
      evidence about the care which Social Services said they would be  able
      to provide if the Appellant were not there  is  that  they  could  not
      provide live-in care, twenty-four hours per day. It is not  said  that
      any other more limited options have been explored.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   Care in the Community Policy

  60. There is no immigration rule  which  provides  for  the  situation  of
      carers of British citizens.  The Care in the Community Policy provides
      the only route.  That policy provides only for a short period of leave
      to remain in order for  arrangements  for  future  care  of  the  sick
      relative to be put in place.   Although  the  policy  refers  only  to
      relatives in relation to the initial period of  leave  to  remain,  it
      does go on to refer to additional periods being  sought  in  order  to
      look after a  sick  relative  or  friend.   As  such,  the  policy  is
      sufficiently wide to cover the circumstances of this case.

  61. I do not though need to deal with the provisions of this policy in any
      detail because Ms Malhotra accepted that  the  Appellant  cannot  show
      that he falls within the policy because he has failed to  provide  the
      necessary evidence.  He has not provided evidence from Social Services
      (or indeed any  other  medical  professional)  to  show  why  suitable
      alternative care arrangements are not available.   As such, it was not
      suggested on the Appellant's behalf that the Respondent's decision  is
      not in accordance with the law for failure to have regard to  her  own
      relevant policy.

   Article 8 ECHR

  62. The basis on which the Appellant seeks to succeed therefore is, as  it
      was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, that he should be  permitted
      to remain based on his rights under Article 8 ECHR and/or those of WM.

  63. It is accepted that the Appellant cannot meet the Rules in relation to
      his Article 8 rights.  Appendix FM very clearly  does  not  cover  the
      circumstances of this case.  The Appellant does not say (or  at  least
      does not now  say)  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration in Bangladesh where he has family members with whom he now
      admits he remains in close contact.  He has not been  in  the  UK  for
      twenty years.  Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules is not met.

  64. The Appellant submits however that he can succeed based on  Article  8
      outside the Rules because he says that removal will disproportionately
      interfere with his family and/or private life and that of WM.

   Family Life

  65. I can deal with this aspect of the appeal very  shortly  in  light  of
      what I say at [9] to [11] of my error of law decision appended to this
      decision.  In common parlance a "family relationship" is one based  on
      either blood ties (or similar ties based on adoption) or a marriage or
      partner relationship akin to a marriage.  The relationship between  WM
      and the Appellant is neither.  The case of Lama to which I refer in my
      error of law decision is based on highly unusual circumstances.  It is
      an extreme  case.   The  facts  there  go  way  beyond  the  level  of
      dependency which exists in this case.  Such cases are inherently  fact
      sensitive as the decision in Lama makes clear.  I am not in any  event
      bound by the decision in that case.

  66. WM's reliance on  the  Appellant  is  based  on  the  care  which  the
      Appellant provides to him.  WM says that he views the Appellant  as  a
      younger brother and says that the  Appellant  sees  him  as  an  elder
      brother because that is the way in  which  he  considers  the  sibling
      relationship should work.  His assertions about the familial nature of
      the relationship are based on the care which the Appellant gives. As I
      have noted, WM became very agitated when he spoke of his brothers  who
      do nothing for him.  He expects that they  should  do  so.   That  the
      Appellant is willing to provide the care which WM believes that family
      members ought to provide is the reason why he views the Appellant as a
      brother (or a son).

  67. Similarly, the Appellant's evidence  that  he  sees  WM  as  an  elder
      brother is based  on  his  experience  of  Bangladeshi  culture  where
      younger people respect their elders and take care of  them  or  others
      who suffer from some disability.  Although the Appellant  referred  to
      WM as his only family in  London,  it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant
      retains close contact with his family  in  Bangladesh  and  I  do  not
      accept that his relationship with WM is of the same nature.

  68. Put simply, the factors on which the Appellant and WM rely as  showing
      a family relationship are not sufficient to  show  that  such  exists.
      WM's dependence on the Appellant arises from the Appellant's  position
      as a carer. WM would probably rely on anyone who cared for him in  the
      same way.  It is  not  based  on  emotional  ties  akin  to  a  family
      relationship. Similarly, the Appellant would probably help any  person
      in WM's position in the same way because of  his  cultural  upbringing
      and desire to help.  This is a relationship of cared  for  person  and
      carer.

  69. The medical professionals who have  provided  evidence  speak  of  the
      relationship being a close friendship. I am prepared  to  accept  that
      the relationship is a close one based on the level of dependency which
      WM has on the Appellant.  However, where those professionals speak  of
      any other form of family relationship, they do so in  the  context  of
      reporting what they are told by WM and the  Appellant.   It  does  not
      appear from the evidence that they have addressed their own  minds  to
      whether the relationship is of that nature.  I do not accept that  the
      evidence shows that the relationship goes that far.

  70. For the above reasons, I do not accept that Article 8 (family life) is
      engaged in the circumstances of this case.

   Private Life

  71. I accept that Article 8 (private life) is engaged.  The issue in  this
      case is whether the removal of the Appellant would  disproportionately
      interfere with the private life of the Appellant and that of WM.   The
      Appellant does not rely on other aspects of his private life nor could
      he do so.  He said he has other friends but provides no  details.   He
      mentioned a girlfriend but provided no particulars  and  did  not  say
      that he could not be removed due to  that  relationship.   As  I  have
      already noted,  he  has  provided  no  evidence  of  very  significant
      obstacles to integration in Bangladesh where his family members live.

  72. The main impact of the interference caused by removal of the Appellant
      will be on the private life of WM linked to  WM's  medical  conditions
      and I begin therefore with that aspect.

  73.  I  start  with  the  medical   evidence.    None   of   the   medical
      professionals/experts who have provided letters/reports in  this  case
      attended to give oral evidence.  I do not suggest for one moment  that
      their evidence is anything less than truthful but the absence of  oral
      evidence from them whether as witnesses  or  experts  means  that  the
      extent of their evidence cannot be tested by cross-examination.

  74. This is particularly pertinent where, as appears to be the case  here,
      the evidence is largely based on what the  medical  professionals  are
      told  about  the  nature  of  the  care  relationship.   There  is  no
      suggestion that any of those professionals have attended WM's home  to
      observe the care which he needs and the extent to which the  Appellant
      provides that care.  This has led to a degree of exaggeration in  some
      of what is reported.  For example, it has been assumed by the  GP  and
      Westminster Adult Mental Health Services that  the  Appellant  carries
      out all the daily living needs for WM.  However, it  became  clear  in
      evidence that WM still has other help with cleaning and laundry.

  75. Similarly, there is a suggestion that WM told Dr Halari that he  needs
      the Appellant "for his eyes" and yet the medical evidence in  relation
      to his glaucoma does not suggest that WM's sight is  unduly  affected.
      Insofar as that relates to WM's anxiety condition and that  he  closes
      his eyes when he is outside to avoid things that frighten  him,  there
      is some conflict within the evidence about what WM can do.  His GP for
      example, accepts that WM can go to the local shop  or  church  without
      needing the Appellant and the Appellant confirmed that, provided WM is
      feeling well, he  is  able  to  go  to  the  GP  practice  to  collect
      prescriptions.

  76. Insofar as the evidence suggests that WM needs the Appellant to assist
      his mobility (see in particular the letter from Carers Network),  that
      evidence is exaggerated based not only on my observations of  WM  when
      he attended the hearing to give evidence but also on the assessment of
      his disability allowance for which he receives  only  the  lower  rate
      component for mobility.

  77. It is also notable that the medical evidence has expanded  over  time.
      Westminster Adult Mental Health Services do not appear to have had any
      involvement with WM until the Appellant went to live with him in 2011.
       I accept that may be because WM was unaware of  the  option  of  such
      help.  However, it also suggests  that  WM  was  able  to  manage  his
      several psychological problems without any help until that stage.   He
      had been living with those conditions in some cases from childhood. In
      relation to the evidence from that organisation, it is not  until  the
      letter of June 2016 that one finds mention of the  contribution  which
      the Appellant makes to WM's care.

  78. Although I recognise and accept the relevant expertise of  Dr  Halari,
      his report is based only on observation of the Appellant and WM during
      one quite short meeting, their reports of the care relationship,  WM's
      medical records and psychometric  testing.  Dr  Halari  has  not  been
      involved in WM's treatment over time.  That is particularly  important
      because Dr Halari has no knowledge of how WM was able to  cope  before
      the Appellant came to live with him.

  79. I accept what Dr Halari says  about  the  likely  negative  impact  of
      removal of the Appellant on WM's mental health, at least in the  short
      term.  It is less clear that Dr Halari has the relevant information on
      which to base any assessment of the impact on WM's physical well-being
      and, indeed, WM himself  accepted  that  his  physical  health  is  in
      decline even with the presence of the Appellant.

  80. I do not accept Dr Halari's suggestion that removal of  the  Appellant
      would impact to any significant degree on the Appellant's  own  mental
      health.  Although Dr Halari says that "the Appellant is displaying the
      signs and symptoms of low mood", there is no other supporting evidence
      to suggest that the Appellant has become depressed, has consulted  any
      medical professional on  that  account  or  has  been  prescribed  any
      medication to deal with depression.

  81. The medical evidence is also to some limited extent inconsistent  with
      the oral evidence given by the Appellant.  The impression given by the
      medical professionals (or perhaps  more  accurately  in  reporting  to
      those professionals) is that the Appellant is present in the home with
      WM all day every day.  That is not the Appellant's own  evidence.   He
      was able to work and study until 2014/15 and WM was left in the  house
      without  him  during  that  time.   The  Appellant  has  returned   to
      Bangladesh on four occasions and although he says that this  adversely
      affected WM's well-being, it did not prevent the Appellant leaving  WM
      on subsequent occasions when he wanted to visit his home country.

  82. The  medical  evidence  makes  clear  that  WM  is  already  receiving
      assistance from various  organisations  and  there  is  no  reason  to
      suppose that such assistance with his physical and  mental  well-being
      would not continue if the Appellant were removed.  I recognise that WM
      would prefer to have the Appellant (or another carer) living with  him
      full-time but, if the Appellant were not there, WM's  needs  would  be
      assessed and provided for by Social Services  as  necessary  by  those
      Services or other relevant organisations.

  83. I was unimpressed by the evidence of WM  and  the  Appellant  that  WM
      would not be  provided  with  adequate  care  if  the  Appellant  were
      removed.  The only enquiries which either of them appears to have made
      of Social Services is whether Social Services would provide a  live-in
      carer for twenty-four hours per day seven days per week.   I  have  no
      difficulty in accepting that Social Services have said that they would
      be unable to provide  that  care.   However,  no-one  has  asked  that
      department to assess what care WM would need and  how  that  could  be
      provided.  WM could, for example, be provided with regular meals.   He
      could be  provided  with  qualified  carers  to  visit  to  administer
      medication.  He already has assistance with laundry and cleaning.

  84. One of WM's objections to not having a carer living with him full-time
      is that he may need emergency medical assistance overnight.   However,
      I was given no examples of occasions when WM or the Appellant have had
      to call for such emergency assistance and there is no mention  of  any
      such occasions in the medical evidence. The Appellant says that,  when
      he worked and studied, he taught WM to use a mobile phone  to  contact
      him if necessary.  There is no reason why WM could not use a phone  in
      an overnight emergency by calling the emergency services himself.

  85. None of the medical evidence addresses one of the  main  issues  which
      arises in this case, namely how it is  that  WM  was  able  to  manage
      before the Appellant came to live with him in 2011.  That affects  the
      weight which I can give the  medical  evidence.   Prior  to  2011,  WM
      already suffered from most of the health conditions from which he  now
      suffers.  Indeed, as I have already noted, some of those date back  to
      his childhood.  WM's own evidence is that he  has  had  little  or  no
      contact with his family for some time. He  describes  himself  in  his
      written statement as "a singleton" who has never been married, and has
      only a few friends.  However, it appears from his statement that  this
      has been the position for most of his life.  I appreciate that  he  is
      getting older and may need more assistance but he is already receiving
      that assistance from those who are qualified to give it.

  86. It is of course also far from certain that if the Appellant were given
      leave to remain  he  would  stay  living  with  WM.   He  has  already
      developed friendships of his own and has a girlfriend.  I have already
      observed that he is not at home for twenty-four hours, seven days  per
      week and said himself that he gets enough time for his own  life.   He
      is a relatively young man who is unlikely to want to  tie  himself  to
      caring for an elderly person full-time, particularly since that is not
      his profession and he has other qualifications which would enable  him
      to obtain a job outside the home.

  87. For the above reasons, although I accept that the Appellant's  removal
      would have a detrimental effect on WM's mental health and to a  lesser
      extent physical well-being, I am not persuaded by  the  evidence  that
      the effect is so significant that it could not be managed  with  input
      as necessary from the organisations who assist  him  already  together
      with Social Services and other similar  services,  particularly  since
      many of WM's health conditions are long-standing and  he  has  managed
      those alone or without the assistance of the Appellant for many years.

  88. Although I have  found  that  the  relationship  between  WM  and  the
      Appellant does not amount to family  life,  I  accept  that  they  are
      friends  even  if  that  friendship  is  borne  out   of   the   carer
      relationship.  There is a  significant  age  gap  between  them.   The
      Appellant is aged twenty-eight years.  WM is aged  sixty-eight  years.
      However, they live in the same house, there is some evidence  to  show
      that they sometimes attend  social  functions  (with  the  Appellant's
      friends) and that they do some things together in the  house  such  as
      watch TV or talk.  I have no reason to disbelieve that evidence.

  89. The Appellant is a companion to WM as well as a carer.  I accept  WM's
      evidence that he would feel lonely if the  Appellant  is  removed  and
      might become socially isolated.  However, I come back to  what  I  say
      above.  WM has never had the close support of his own family  members.
      He has apparently lived alone for most of his adult life.  I note also
      that he attends church which is nearby and  which,  according  to  the
      GP's evidence and that of the Appellant, WM is able to go to  unaided.
      WM also says that he has a few friends.  I  do  not  accept  therefore
      that WM would be completely isolated if the  Appellant  were  removed.
      It is likely that, at least, the church community would rally  to  his
      aid if he needed them.

  90. I also accept that the Appellant would be upset about having to  leave
      WM as they have developed a friendship of sorts and he says  he  would
      feel guilty about leaving him behind.  However,  the  Appellant  is  a
      young man.  Even in  the  UK,  he  has  other  friends  with  whom  he
      socialises.  His family members are all in Bangladesh.   There  is  no
      suggestion that he would not be able to reintegrate into the community
      there.  He could form (or resume) his life there in the same way as he
      would if he remained in the UK.  He  has  qualifications  which  would
      assist him to obtain employment.

  91. I have no doubt that those who  provide  local  adult  care  services,
      whether it be mental health care or social services care, would prefer
      that a friend or relative provide that care where possible to ease the
      pressure on public services.  I do not consider it  to  be  stretching
      judicial notice too far to note the resource difficulties  within  the
      social care system at present.  However, as a British citizen,  WM  is
      entitled to social care if he does not have any other care  available.
      It appears that he lives  in  council  accommodation  at  present  and
      receives publicly funded support as necessary.  That could be extended
      to include social care so far  as  necessary  if  the  Appellant  were
      removed.

  92. I turn then  to  consider  the  public  interest  in  removal  of  the
      Appellant.  I accept that the Appellant has been in  the  UK  lawfully
      since he arrived albeit on a temporary  basis.   He  had  leave  as  a
      student but as he stated in evidence, he did not continue his  studies
      after his last college's licence was revoked  in  2014/15  because  he
      could not afford to do so.  When he made the  application  leading  to
      the decision under appeal, therefore, he had no basis  of  stay  under
      the Rules. Since his last leave expired, he has remained only  on  the
      basis of statutory leave which is precarious by its nature.

  93. Although section 117B (5) requires that only little weight be given to
      a private life formed whilst a person is in the  UK  on  a  precarious
      (temporary) basis, the circumstances in this case are unusual.  In any
      event, "little weight" is not synonomous with  "no  weight".   On  the
      other hand, the main interference of the Appellant's removal  is  with
      the private life of WM rather  than  that  of  the  Appellant  who  is
      unlikely to be affected as much by separation from WM.

  94. Section 117B (3) provides that the public interest requires persons to
      be financially independent.  The Appellant says in his statement  that
      he is not reliant on public funds.  It might be said  that  he  is  in
      fact obtaining a benefit from the public purse albeit indirectly.   He
      gave evidence that he is not working.  His family in Bangladesh do not
      provide any monetary support.  His only income derives from WM who  is
      himself dependent on public funds.   However,  I  also  note  that  no
      additional cost is claimed from the public purse  for  the  Appellant,
      that he has been assisting with the care of WM for which  otherwise  a
      paid carer might have to be provided  and  that  the  Appellant  would
      undoubtedly work if he were  given  leave  to  remain.   This  is  not
      therefore a consideration which weighs against the Appellant.

  95. I have  already  noted  that,  based  on  the  current  evidence,  the
      Appellant cannot meet the Carer in the Community Policy or the  Rules.
      Section 117B (1) provides that maintenance  of  effective  immigration
      control is in the public interest, that is to say, the system  favours
      allowing immigrants to remain, in general, only if they  are  able  to
      meet the legal requirements of that system.

  96. I have regard to what is said by the  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  and
      Ikuga v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  11,
      that, in a case where the appellant does not meet the  Rules,  removal
      of the person with no entitlement to remain in the UK is likely to  be
      disproportionate only where the effect  of  that  removal  is  "unduly
      harsh".  The question whether the interference  has  an  unduly  harsh
      effect in this case applies equally to the effect  on  WM  as  to  the
      effect on the Appellant (in fact probably more so).

  97. I have set out at [71] to [90] above, what I assess to be the  effects
      of the removal of the Appellant on the private lives of the  Appellant
      and WM.  I  have  regard  to  the  potential  impact  on  social  care
      resources of the need to provide WM with alternative  care  at  public
      expense.  However, the Appellant is not a person who  is  a  qualified
      carer and seeks to remain in that capacity within the Rules.  He seeks
      to do so outside the Rules on the basis that,  if  he  is  allowed  to
      stay, he might continue to care for WM. As I  have  already  observed,
      though, he might not do so.  At the very least, he is likely  to  want
      to find work suited to his  qualifications  so  that  he  can  support
      himself (as he did when he was entitled to work until 2014/15).

  98. Furthermore, the fact that there may be a gap in the resources of  one
      area of public services  does  not  justify  the  undermining  of  the
      immigration control system.  It is in the interest of a firm and  fair
      system of effective immigration control that those who  are  permitted
      to remain do so within the Rules and  are  only  permitted  to  do  so
      outside the Rules where the consequences of removal would  be  "unduly
      harsh".  Although I accept that there are  likely  to  be  detrimental
      consequences in particular to WM, caused by the  Appellant's  removal,
      those consequences are capable of being alleviated by assistance  from
      public authorities and are not of a level which is so  significant  as
      to be "unduly harsh".

  99. Having balanced  the  interference  with  the  private  lives  of  the
      Appellant and WM  against  the  public  interest  in  removal  of  the
      Appellant, I am satisfied that the decision to remove the Appellant to
      Bangladesh is not disproportionate.  The  Respondent's  decision  does
      not involve a breach of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   Nor  is  her
      decision otherwise  unlawful.   For  those  reasons,  I  dismiss  this
      appeal.


DECISION

The Respondent's decision does not involve a breach of the Human Rights  Act
1998 (Article 8 ECHR).  Nor is it unlawful on any other basis.  I  therefore
dismiss this appeal.


Signed
            [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
    Dated:  11 April 2018

                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/20791/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 15 December 2017                    |                             |
|                                              |.........11 January          |
|                                              |2018.........                |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    [S S]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, Imperium Chambers instructed
                    on a direct access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.

[SEE ANONYMITY ORDER IN MAIN DECISION]




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. The Appellant  appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Geraint Jones QC promulgated on 23 March 2017  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision  dated  22  May  2015  refusing  his
      application for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on human
      rights grounds ("the Decision").

   2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to the  UK  on  26
      August 2009 as a student and his leave was extended in  that  capacity
      until 30 March 2016.  On 7 February 2015 he  made  an  application  to
      remain which was refused by the Respondent's  decision  under  appeal.
      That application is based on his relationship with [WM] for  whom  the
      Appellant claims to act as an (unpaid) carer.

   3. The Judge did not accept that Article 8 was engaged in  terms  of  the
      Appellant's (or [WM]'s) family life.  He accepted that the Appellant's
      private life was engaged but not that of [WM].   The  Judge  concluded
      that the interference with the Appellant's private life occasioned  by
      his removal would be proportionate.

   4. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal on essentially  two  grounds.
      The first challenges the Judge's finding that the  Appellant's  family
      life is not engaged by his relationship with [WM] and submits  in  the
      alternative that the impact  of  the  Appellant's  removal  on  [WM]'s
      private life needed to be assessed.  Reliance is placed on Beoku-Betts
      v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  39.   In
      relation to the proposition that an impact  on  the  private  life  of
      another person needs also to be factored into the Article 8 assessment
      the Appellant relies on the starred decision of Kehinde v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2001] UKAIT 00010 which is not  only  a
      somewhat dated decision but  also  does  not  appear  to  support  the
      proposition which the Appellant puts forward.

   5. The second ground is that it was not open to the Judge  to  find  that
      [WM]'s evidence was exaggerated given the extent  of  the  documentary
      evidence before the Judge.  Specific mention is made of the report  of
      Dr Halari which report is not mentioned by the Judge.

   6. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth
      in the following terms:-

           "1.   It is arguable that the Judge should have dealt more fully
           with the extent of the evidence submitted  in  relation  to  the
           role played by the Appellant, taken into account the  conditions
           suffered by [WM].

           2.    It is arguable that the Judge should have  considered  the
           question of the extent of real support provided and whether  the
           friendship went beyond normal emotional ties.   It  is  arguable
           that the Judge should have dealt with or dealt with  more  fully
           the report of Dr Halari.

           3.    It is arguable that a fuller  analysis  of  the  range  of
           factors put forward on behalf of the  Appellant,  together  with
           the weight to be attached to those factors is  material  to  the
           carrying out  of  the  proportionality  exercise  and  that  the
           proportionality exercise has  been  flawed  by  an  insufficient
           analysis of all the relevant factors."

   7. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
      error of law in the Decision and if so either to re-make the  decision
      or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   Discussion and conclusions

   8. The Judge dealt with the claim that family  life  exists  between  the
      Appellant and [WM] at [6] of the Decision as follows:-

           "... At the outset, Mr Gajjar optimistically suggested that this
           appeal should be dealt with as though it was a "family life"case
           under article 8. When I pointed out that there was  no  familial
           relationship between the appellant and [WM]  he  contended  that
           there was a relationship "akin" to a  familial  relationship.  I
           reject  that  submission.   There  is   no   family   connection
           whatsoever between the appellant and  [WM].   It  has  not  been
           suggested that they are in any kind of relationship."

   9. In support of this aspect of the appeal, Mr Turner relied  heavily  on
      the case of Lama (Video Recorded Evidence - Weight - Article  8  ECHR:
      Nepal) [2007] UKUT 16 ("Lama") (a decision of the former President  of
      this Tribunal) which found family life to  exist  between  a  severely
      disabled man and his adult carer.  As I pointed out to Mr Turner, this
      was an extreme case on its facts.  As Mr Wilding also pointed out, the
      former President himself recognised at [37] of that decision that  his
      finding in relation to family life in that case  might  be  viewed  by
      some as controversial.  As that decision makes clear in any event (and
      consistently with Court of Appeal jurisprudence in this area), whether
      family life exists between adults depends in large part on the factual
      evidence.  Reliance on the facts in another  case  even  if  it  might
      appear analogous therefore is unlikely to be determinative.

  10. In this case, the highest the case on family life can be  put  is  the
      statement of [WM] that he treats the Appellant as  a  younger  brother
      because his own brothers do not care for him.  However,  that  appears
      from his statement to be due to the relationship of  carer  which  the
      Appellant has undertaken. Otherwise, the statements of  [WM]  and  the
      Appellant speak of their relationship in terms of a friendship  albeit
      a close one and a dependency of sorts which turns on [WM]'s illnesses.



  11. The other independent evidence does not assist the Appellant's case in
      this regard either.  I will consider  the  medical  evidence  in  more
      detail when dealing with the second ground.  However, the evidence  of
      those who treat [WM] is that the Appellant is his carer.  The evidence
      of Dr Halari, albeit taken from a short interview of the Appellant and
      [WM] rather than direct observation of  the  relationship  over  time,
      speaks of the relationship as one of a "live in carer"  and  a  "great
      friend".  Again, based on [WM]'s reporting, Dr Halari says  that  [WM]
      considers that the Appellant  is  his  family  and  his  only  family.
      However, that again appears to depend on  the  fact  that  [WM]'s  own
      family do not look after him in the same way as  does  the  Appellant.
      On the evidence here, there is no error of law made by  the  Judge  in
      rejecting the submission that family life exists between the Appellant
      and [WM].

  12. As the former President observed in Lama,  however,  the  relationship
      can still be one which needs  to  be  considered  in  the  context  of
      private life.   The Judge did take into account the impact of  removal
      on the private life of the Appellant in terms of the disruption to the
      relationship between him and [WM].  The Appellant's complaint in  this
      regard is that the Judge completely discounted  the  impact  on  [WM].
      The Judge dealt with this issue as follows:-

           "[8]  The next issue is whether [WM]'s private life  comes  into
           play.  In the case of family life the higher  courts  have  held
           that it is not only the family life of the immediate  appellant,
           but also the family life of his immediate  family  members  that
           needs to be taken into account.  That is understandable  in  the
           context of family  life.   Implicitly,  but  not  expressly,  Mr
           Gajjar submits that when private life is considered, I  have  to
           take into account the private life of  persons  associated  with
           the appellant and not simply the private life of  the  appellant
           himself.

           [9]   I reject that submission.  If it is correct, it would mean
           that when  determining  a  private  life  article  8  case,  the
           Tribunal would be obliged to take into account, if an  appellant
           expected to depart the United  Kingdom,  the  impact  that  that
           might have on the private life of all manner of people with some
           kind of association with the appellant. The various degrees  and
           types of association would be numerous and no  doubt  ever  more
           inventive submissions would be advanced to justify  the  private
           life of some friend or acquaintance being taken into account  in
           such an appeal.

           [10]  Thus I direct myself  that  it  is  only  the  appellant's
           private life that is relevant and that the Razgar questions must
           be answered by reference to the appellant alone."

  13. I have some sympathies with the views expressed by the Judge  in  this
      context.  It cannot possibly be right that in  considering  whether  a
      person's removal from the UK involves a  breach  of  human  rights,  a
      Tribunal Judge is bound to consider  the  impact  on  others  such  as
      friends and acquaintances. In a "family life" case,  by  contrast,  it
      goes without saying that the impact on other family  members  must  be
      considered.   However,  the  question  for  the  Tribunal  is  whether
      removal of an appellant involves a breach of  human  rights  and  that
      must involve consideration of the interference which removal  entails.
      It is therefore relevant in this case that  [WM]  will  lose  a  great
      friend and his full-time carer.

  14. All that said, though, I am not satisfied that the Judge  has  made  a
      material error of law in this regard in spite  of  the  express  self-
      direction at [10] of the Decision. At [13] to [24]  of  the  Decision,
      the Judge considers the  evidence  relating  to  the  care  which  the
      Appellant gives to [WM] and considers in the context of the Article  8
      assessment the impact of removal of the Appellant on that  care.   The
      Judge takes that aspect of the Appellant's private life  into  account
      when dealing with both the interference caused by the removal and  the
      proportionality of that interference.  As I observed to Mr  Turner  in
      the course of his submissions, it matters not that the Judge  did  not
      expressly refer to the impact of the Appellant's removal  on  [WM]  as
      the impact on the Appellant's private life is the other  side  of  the
      same coin since it is the care which the Appellant  provides  to  [WM]
      which forms the central tenet of  the  Appellant's  own  private  life
      claim.

  15. I turn then to the second ground which concerns an alleged failure  by
      the Judge to have proper regard to the medical evidence as to the care
      provided by the Appellant.  Mr Wilding accepted as he had to that  the
      Judge has failed to refer to or deal with the report of Dr Halari.  Mr
      Wilding submitted however that this failure was not a  material  error
      as that report did not take matters any further.

  16. When I  finally  succeeded  in  focussing  Mr  Turner's  very  lengthy
      submissions concerning the evidence before  the  Judge,  he  submitted
      that there were in fact four central documents which the Judge ignored
      (apart from Dr Halari's report).  The first is a care  plan  dated  21
      June 2016.  That refers to the contribution made by the  Appellant  to
      [WM]'s care.  It also refers  to  the  impact  which  the  Appellant's
      presence has had on his  care.   The  second  is  a  letter  from  the
      Appellant's GP which was written at the instigation of [WM] and  which
      reports [WM] saying that the Appellant is his "full  time  carer"  and
      that "he [WM] cannot do without him".  The third is a letter from  the
      local CMHT again stating that [WM] relies on his "live-in carer".  The
      fourth indicates that the Appellant assists  [WM]  with  administering
      eye drops for [WM]'s glaucoma.  If this ground  were  based  on  those
      documents alone, I would have no hesitation in finding any  error  not
      to be material.  The Judge took into account [WM]'s evidence about the
      contribution which the Appellant makes to his care although he did not
      necessarily accept all of it.   Those documents  simply  reflect  that
      evidence.

  17. However, I am unable  to  accept  Mr  Wilding's  submission  that  the
      failure to have any regard to Dr  Halari's  report  is  not  material.
      True it is that the report is based only on an interview of one and  a
      half hours and the doctor's observations  about  the  care  which  the
      Appellant  provides  are  therefore  necessarily  limited.   There  is
      however evidence not contained in the other documents about the impact
      on [WM]'s psychological  health  of  the  Appellant's  removal.   That
      evidence does need to be considered and given appropriate weight.

  18. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is a  material  error  of
      law in the Decision and I set it aside.  Mr Turner submitted that  the
      appeal should be remitted as it would be necessary to consider further
      evidence as it is said that [WM]'s health may have deteriorated  since
      the last report.  This is not though a case where  there  are  adverse
      credibility findings (although the Judge did find some of the evidence
      to be exaggerated).  The re-making  of  the  decision  depends  on  an
      analysis of the evidence  and  an  Article  8  assessment  based  that
      evidence which this Tribunal is undoubtedly qualified  to  carry  out.
      This is not a case which needs to be remitted for a  re-hearing.    In
      light of Mr Turner's submission that further evidence is likely to  be
      required, however,  I  have  given  directions  below  for  a  resumed
      hearing.





DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge Geraint Jones QC promulgated on 23 March 2017 and make  the  following
directions for the re-making of the decision.

DIRECTIONS

   1. Within 28 days from the promulgation of this decision,  the  Appellant
      is to file with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent  any  further
      evidence on which he wishes to rely at the resumed hearing.
   2. Within 21 days from the service of evidence at [1] above, both parties
      are to file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party a  skeleton
      argument dealing with the legal issues which are said to arise in this
      appeal.
   3. The appeal will be relisted for a resumed hearing after 56  days  from
      the date of promulgation of this decision with a time estimate of half
      day.

Signed
            [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
       Dated:  9 January 2018


