
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20928/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 17th January 2017                          |On 7th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Kashif Ali
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Gokhool, instructed by S G Law, solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    refusal to grant further leave to remain on the  basis  of  family  and
    private life, that decision being taken on 31 January 2015.

 2. In 2011, the claimant came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  and
    applied for leave to be extended for private medical  treatment,  which
    his brother has funded.  He was here with leave  on  that  basis  until
    February 2015 and it is to be noted that all his applications for leave
    to remain were made in time and that he  has  not  had  any  period  of
    intentional overstay.

 3. Before coming to the United Kingdom, the claimant lived with his mother
    and three sisters, one of whom is also schizophrenic. His mother is now
    70 years old and struggling to cope with the  claimant's  schizophrenic
    sister.  His illness was not well controlled there and he spent periods
    in state-run psychiatric institutions in Pakistan where he was not well
    treated, where he was beaten, and where he was unsafe, on one  occasion
    taking apart an electrical appliance  and  exposing  live  wires  which
    could have done him or other people harm.

 4. The application for leave to remain made on 31 January 2015 was refused
    on 1 April 2015 on the basis that the drugs which the claimant receives
    are available in  Pakistan  and  that  there  is  treatment  there  for
    schizophrenia.  The Secretary of State  considered  that  the  claimant
    could be supported by family in Pakistan, but the  evidence  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted, was that while in Pakistan  he  was
    effectively supported by the brother with whom he now lives  in  London
    and who supervises him all day, takes him to work with him, makes  sure
    he dresses, makes sure he eats, makes sure he takes his medication  and
    so forth.     The claimant's brother runs a dry cleaning business:  the
    claimant presses clothes and helps out  a  bit,  but  has  no  customer
    interaction.

 5. The Secretary of State did not appear or arrange representation for the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  evidence  adduced  by  the  claimant,  being
    witness evidence from himself and his brother and a medical report from
    Dr Amir Bashir, MBBS, MRCPSYCH, DPM, DPP, DAB, consultant  psychiatrist
    at the London Psychiatric Clinic was not cross-examined  or  challenged
    by her.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  as
    credible and found that, on the particular facts of this appeal,  there
    were 'very significant obstacles' to the claimant's return to Pakistan.
     He allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State now invites the Upper  Tribunal  to  reopen  the
    finding of  fact  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to the claimant's  reintegration  into  Pakistan.
    The Secretary of State puts her case thus:

         "It is asserted that such a finding is irrational, given  that  the
         [claimant] has spent 37 of his 42 years in that country, speaks the
         language and has family there to accommodate and support  him.   In
         terms of the [claimant's] schizophrenia, the judge finds that there
         is a functioning mental health system in  Pakistan.   Although  the
         judge finds that the [claimant] is  at  risk  of  expressing  anti-
         Islamic views in Pakistan if he does not take his medication  [60],
         there is no explanation as to why he would not take this medication
         with the support of family  and  mental  health  professionals.   A
         finding of very significant obstacles was not open to the judge  on
         the evidence".

 7. Before the Upper Tribunal can interfere with a finding of fact  by  the
    First-tier   Tribunal,   particularly   in   circumstances   where   no
    representative of the Secretary of  State  appeared  to  challenge  the
    evidence at the hearing or advance contrary arguments, it is  necessary
    to meet the standard set out in R (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [90] by Lord Justice Brooke,  in
    which he identified a narrow range of circumstances where  interference
    with a finding of fact could be made on appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal:
    perversity, Wednesbury unreasonableness, failure to make findings which
    accord with the evidence such that they are not supported at all by the
    evidence or unintelligible to the reviewing Judge.

 8. In this case the evidence before the judge was set  out  at  [43]-[55],
    and the findings of fact therefrom, at [56]-[61].  In short, the  Judge
    found that the claimant lived in Pakistan until the age of 43, and  had
    outpatient  and   residential   medical   treatment   there   for   his
    schizophrenia, being supported by the brother with whom he now lives in
    the United Kingdom.  The claimant's mother has the misfortune  to  have
    two schizophrenic children and is now about 70 years old and not coping
    particularly  well  with   the   claimant's   sister,   who   is   also
    schizophrenic.    The Judge found that she would not be in  a  position
    to take on the intensive care which the claimant requires, and that  he
    would deteriorate in Pakistan rapidly. His brother's input is the  most
    important part of management of his chronic illness.   During  a  brief
    period where he had to  sleep  in  the  brother's  shop,  the  claimant
    deteriorated because he was not sufficiently under his brother's eye.

 9. The evidence which the claimant's brother gave,  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted, was that before coming to the United  Kingdom,
    the claimant had several times ended up in psychiatric institutions  in
    Pakistan where he was ill-treated and unsafe.  Because  the  claimant's
    schizophrenia causes him, when not  properly  treated,  to  make  anti-
    Islamic  statements  and  to  challenge  the  religious  orthodoxy   of
    Pakistan, the brother's evidence, which Dr Bashir supported,  was  that
    he would be at particular risk on return as he is ill-equipped for self-
    protection.

10. The unchallenged evidence medical evidence from Dr Bashir is that, even
    with the level of support now provided by his  brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which amounts to 24-hour supervision, sometimes  the  claimant
    does not take his medication and has difficulty.  Dr  Bashir's  opinion
    is that if the claimant returns to Pakistan he is highly likely to stop
    his medication, his acute psychotic symptoms will reappear and he  will
    live aimlessly, be in company  of  antisocial  components  of  society,
    become eccentric, get into the use of illicit drugs  and  petty  crimes
    and end up in a long stay state run mental institution, where  he  will
    be ill-treated and unsafe again.

11. I remind myself that the Secretary of State was not represented  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and that the claimant's evidence, and  that  of
    his brother, was not challenged.  On the unchallenged  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that it was unarguably open  to
    the judge to take the view that this particular claimant could  not  be
    easily reintegrated into Pakistan and that there were very  significant
    obstacles, not the least of which is that in this  case  his  psychotic
    symptoms include religious expressions which are likely to  be  treated
    as anti-Islamic  in  Pakistan  and  put  him  in  danger  of  at  least
    disapproval and discrimination and possibly worse.

12. I decline to interfere with the finding of fact that the  claimant  had
    discharged the burden  upon  him  of  showing  that  there  were  'very
    significant obstacles' to his reintegration  in  Pakistan  if  he  were
    returned there.  The R (Iran)  standard  is  not  met:  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  is  neither  perverse,  Wednesbury  unreasonable,
    contrary to the unchallenged evidence, or unintelligible to me.

13. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:  6 February 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

