
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th June 2016                             |On 14th July 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                 Aysha Begum
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Anwar Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge S J  Pacey  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh born 10th January  1977
    so she is now 39 years of age.   On  12th  August  2014  the  Appellant
    applied for an extension of stay as the spouse of a person present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused on 24th  October  2014  with  reference  to
    paragraph 284(ix) of the  Immigration  Rules  which  requires  that  an
    applicant provides an English language test certificate in speaking and
    listening from an  English  language  test  provider  approved  by  the
    Secretary of State, which must meet or exceed level A1  of  the  Common
    European Framework of Reference (CEFR).

 4.  The  Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  provided  an   ESOL
    International (Entry 1) certificate awarded  by  EMD  which  is  not  a
    provider approved by the Secretary of State as specified in Appendix O.
     The Appellant was not from a majority English  speaking  country,  did
    not have an academic qualification equivalent to a bachelors or masters
    degree or PhD in the UK, taught in English, and the Appellant  did  not
    fall within any of the exemptions listed in paragraph 284(ix)(a).

 5. The Appellant appealed contending before the FtT that she had  obtained
    certificates from Elizabeth College dated  28th  March  2013,  and  EMD
    (Qualifications) Limited which also refers to  a  course  at  Elizabeth
    College.  It was also  contended  that  when  the  Appellant  made  her
    initial application to come to the United  Kingdom  in  September  2010
    there was no English language requirement, and therefore there could be
    no such English language requirement when the Appellant applied for  an
    extension of stay.

 6. The FtT noted that the initial application for entry clearance had been
    refused  on  24th November  2010,  but  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    subsequently allowed by the Upper Tribunal in March 2012.  However  the
    only  issues  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  related  to   adequacy   of
    accommodation and maintenance.

 7. The FtT found that the English language certificates  provided  by  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph  284(ix).   The
    FtT was satisfied, having been provided by the Presenting Officer  with
    a copy of the Immigration Rules last updated in July  2010,  that  when
    the Appellant made  her  application  for  entry  clearance,  paragraph
    281(i)(b)(ii) stipulated that a  person  seeking  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom needed to have;

         "Sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English  language  and  sufficient
         knowledge about life in the United Kingdom unless she is under  the
         age  of  18  or  aged  65  or  over  at  the  time  he  makes   his
         application;".

 8. The FtT found that the  Appellant  was  not  exempt  from  the  English
    language requirement, and because a certificate had not  been  produced
    from an approved provider, the appeal was dismissed with  reference  to
    paragraph 284(ix).

 9. The FtT went on to consider Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights and found that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  by
    reliance upon Article 8,  either  within  or  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

10. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that there was  no  requirement,  when  the
    Appellant made her application  for  entry  clearance,  to  provide  an
    English language certificate and the Appellant had not provided such  a
    certificate when she came to the United Kingdom.  It was contended that
    this requirement was introduced on 29th November 2010, which was  after
    the Appellant's application for entry clearance  was  refused  on  24th
    November 2010.

11. It was contended that because the Appellant had  only  applied  for  an
    extension of stay in the United Kingdom and not for indefinite leave to
    remain, there was no requirement for her to submit an English  language
    test certificate.

12. It was also contended that the FtT had erred in  its  consideration  of
    Article 8.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Davidge of the FtT and I  set
    out below the grant of permission in part;

         "Judge Pacey dismissed Mrs  Aysha  Begum's  appeal  on  Immigration
         Rules grounds on the basis that she required evidence of an English
         language certificate,  rejecting  the  argument  that  having  been
         granted leave to enter as a spouse  with  the  benefit  of  such  a
         certificate there was no additional requirement.   It  is  arguable
         that in light of the case of R (on the  application  of  Bhudia)  v
         SSHD [2016] UKUT 25 that the grounds may be correct in arguing that
         this is an erroneous approach.  The grounds also challenge the  'in
         the alternative' decision in respect of Article 8 on the basis that
         the judge failed to  consider  all  the  relevant  evidence.   That
         ground  is  not  adequately  particularised  and  I  do  not  grant
         permission on it."

14. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

15. Mr Khan adopted a different stance from that taken before the FtT,  and
    contained within the grounds seeking permission to appeal.   He  stated
    that he now accepted that paragraph 281 of the  Immigration  Rules  did
    contain a requirement that an applicant must have sufficient  knowledge
    of the English language, and that this requirement was  in  force  when
    the Appellant made her application for  entry  clearance  in  September
    2010.  Because entry clearance had not been refused with  reference  to
    the English language requirement, it followed that the  Appellant  must
    have produced an English language certificate, and therefore he  relied
    upon Bhudia which meant that because a certificate  had  been  produced
    for entry  clearance,  it  need  not  be  produced  again  and  no  new
    certificate was required.

16. Mr McVeety submitted that the FtT had not erred in law.  I was asked to
    find that the FtT had properly found that paragraph 284(ix) required an
    English language test certificate, and the certificate produced by  the
    Appellant was not from an approved provider and therefore the  FtT  had
    been correct to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mr
    McVeety noted that permission to appeal had been refused with reference
    to Article 8.

17. By way of response Mr Khan accepted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    indicate that an English language test certificate  had  been  produced
    when the application for entry clearance was made, but made  the  point
    that this did not mean that such certificate had not been produced.  At
    the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. As a preliminary point, I  note  that  the  judge  granting  permission
    indicated that the application for permission to appeal was out of time
    and  there  needed  to  be  an  application  to  extend   time.    Both
    representatives indicated that they believed that the  application  was
    in time.  Having considered rule 33(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  I conclude
    that the application was made in time, and therefore there is  no  need
    for an application to extend time.

19. Permission to appeal appears to have  been  granted  on  a  ground  not
    argued before the FtT.  I set out below  the  third  paragraph  in  the
    judicial head note of Bhudia;

         (iii)     The  requirement  previously   enshrined   in   paragraph
             284(ix)(a) of the Immigration Rules that an applicant  provide
             an English language test certificate  in  specified  terms  is
             satisfied  where  the  applicant  has   already   provided   a
             certificate of this kind to the Secretary of State  which  has
             been accepted as valid.

20. It was never the Appellant's case that  such  a  certificate  had  been
    provided when she was granted entry clearance.   The  opposite  was  in
    fact the case, with the Appellant contending that  no  certificate  had
    been provided when  she  made  her  application  for  entry  clearance,
    because there was no requirement in the Immigration Rules that required
    such a certificate.

21. I find that the FtT did not err in law for the following reasons.   The
    FtT appreciated that the Appellant was applying  for  an  extension  of
    stay, not for indefinite leave.  It was noted that  the  Appellant  had
    made her initial application for  entry  clearance  in  September  2010
    which had been refused on 24th November 2010, and that the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed by the Upper Tribunal in March 2012.

22. In relation to the certificates provided by the Appellant  in  relation
    to the English language requirement, the FtT found that these were  not
    from an approved provider  and  did  not  err  in  so  finding.   Those
    certificates did not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.



23. The FtT noted the Appellant's argument that she did not need to provide
    an English language certificate because there was no  such  requirement
    when she  made  her  initial  application  for  entry  clearance.   The
    Appellant's position has now changed on that, as Mr  Khan  accepted  in
    making submissions before the Upper Tribunal, that  there  was  such  a
    requirement.

24. The FtT noted  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  any  objective
    evidence to support her contention that she did not need to  supply  an
    English language test certificate when applying  for  an  extension  of
    stay.  The FtT found in paragraphs 9 and 11 that the Appellant "was not
    and  is  not  exempt  from  meeting  the  relevant   English   language
    requirement."  The  grounds  submitted  by  the  Appellant  disclose  a
    disagreement with the FtT, but they do not disclose a material error of
    law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law such that the decision must be set aside.  The appeal  is  dismissed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 5th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a  fee
award.


Signed                              Date 5th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
