
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20837/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 October 2017                         |On 27 October 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               ms wude salomon
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Eric Fripp, DWFM Beckman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Abebrese promulgated on 27  January  2017.  It  concerns  a  female
         appellant born on 12 August 1985.


      2. The point which I have taken as a preliminary to any of  the  other
         more substantive matters raised in the grounds of  appeal  is  that
         there is on the face  of  the  decision  a  self-evident  disparity
         between the assertion in  paragraph  1  that  the  appellant  is  a
         citizen of Eritrea  and  the  finding  in  paragraph  19  that  the
         appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.

      3. What appears to have moved the First-tier Tribunal Judge  from  the
         assertion in paragraph 1 to that in paragraph 19  is  the  apparent
         adoption of a conclusion reached by a  different  decision  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal determining an appeal in 2010.


      4. This is a case where nationality is  crucial  and  the  absence  of
         proper (or indeed any) reasoning as to why the First-tier  Tribunal
         ultimately reach  the  conclusion  which  it  did  on  nationality,
         rejecting its prior assertion, is crucial to the  disposal  of  all
         the other matters raised in the appeal.


      5. Mr Nath for the Secretary of State properly concedes  this  morning
         that notwithstanding what is  said  in  the  Rule  24  letter,  the
         unexplained inconsistent and insufficiently reasoned conclusion  on
         nationality is such that he cannot in conscience seek to uphold the
         decision of Judge Abebrese.


      6. There being so central a failure in the First-tier  Tribunal,  this
         matter needs to be looked at afresh.  All other discussion  in  the
         decision is predicated  upon  the  unexplained  shift  of  judicial
         finding from citizenship of Eritrea  to  citizenship  of  Ethiopia.
         There is nothing in the findings which can be preserved; nor  would
         it be appropriate to begin afresh in the Upper Tribunal, not  least
         because were the finding to be adverse to the appellant  she  would
         have lost a right of appeal in relation thereto.


      7.  Having  reached  that  view  on  this  preliminary  point,  it  is
         unnecessary and inappropriate for me to say any more of  the  other
         grounds which might have been developed today or to express a  view
         on the underlying merit of the case.  There is a material error  of
         law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  That decision must
         be set aside.  The  appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than (i) Judge  Abebrese  and
         (ii) Judge Doyle who dealt with the matter in 2010.


      8. It is not for me to dictate how the First-tier  Tribunal  runs  its
         procedure, but this is a case which might benefit from having a pre-
         hearing review where the stance of the Secretary of State and  that
         of the appellant can be looked at and  directions  made  to  ensure
         that all relevant issues are addressed and time is  not  wasted  on
         matters of irrelevance.  Beyond that I say no more.


Notice of Decision

   1) There being  a  material  error  of  law,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination is set aside.
   2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other than Judge Abebrese or Judge Doyle.
   3) No findings of fact are preserved.
   4) No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     27 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




