
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20532/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 November 2014                             |On 2 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 OKORO AKABA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23 February 1970.   By  a
    determination promulgated on 14 September 2011 Immigration Judge  Afako
    allowed the appeal of the  Appellant's  wife,  a  Portuguese  national,
    against the refusal of the Respondent to issue  her  with  a  residence
    card to evidence that she was  exercising  Treaty  rights  as  a  self-
    employed person.  The marriage of the Appellant who was  named  as  his
    wife's dependant was not in issue and in consequence of  Judge  Afako's
    determination the Appellant was issued with a residence card  as  under
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended  (the
    2006 Regulations).

 2. The Appellant and his wife had married on 17 April 2010 at All  Saints'
    Parish Church in Forest Gate of which the priest-in-charge was Reverend
    Shipsides.  On 3 April 2012 the Reverend Shipsides was convicted on his
    own admission of conspiring to breach the United Kingdom's  immigration
    laws by arranging sham marriages.  He was sentenced to a term  of  four
    and a half years' imprisonment.

 3. Following his  conviction  the  Respondent  investigated  a  number  of
    marriages involving foreign nationals which had been celebrated at  All
    Saints' Parish Church.  This included the marriage of the Appellant and
    on 26 February 2014 the Respondent revoked  the  Appellant's  residence
    card under the 2006 Regulations and in a letter of the same  date  (the
    reasons  letter)  gave  reasons  for  the  decision  and  required  the
    Appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  unless  he  made  a  further
    application or lodged notice of appeal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. On 6 May 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Reg.26 of the
    2006 Regulations and Section 82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The grounds  asserted  the  Appellant  had
    married at All Saints' Parish Church on 17 April 2010 and the  marriage
    had been conducted by a person other than the  Reverend  Shipsides  and
    that the Respondent  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  various
    documents which had been  completed  in  order  to  obtain  a  marriage
    licence.  The Appellant's wife was now in employment.

 5. By a determination promulgated on 9 September 2014 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bird dismissed the appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations.
    She found there was no evidence  of  cohabitation  apart  from  utility
    bills.  She noted there were no photographs of the  Appellant  and  his
    wife although by then they had been married for almost four years; that
    the Appellant had provided a false address within  the  parish  of  All
    Saints' and had made a sworn statement which referred to  or  contained
    details of a Nigerian passport with an indefinite leave to remain stamp
    in it which the Respondent considered to be a fraudulent document.

 6. On 22 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J G White granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal because it was arguably an error  of
    law for Judge Bird to have found at paragraph 21 that the burden was on
    the Appellant to show the marriage was not one of convenience once  the
    Respondent had made an allegation that it was one of convenience.   She
    had made reference to the determination in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
    marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038.

 7. Additionally it was an arguable error that Judge  Bird  had  not  taken
    into account the application of the jurisprudence in Devaseelan (Second
    Appeals, ECHR, Extra-Territorial Effect)*[2002] UKIAT 702  in  relation
    to the determination of Judge Afako promulgated on 14 September 2011 in
    consequence of which the Appellant was issued with  a  residence  card.
    Further it was arguable that proper weight had not been  given  to  the
    evidence produced by the Appellant to evidence his  assertion  that  he
    and  his  wife  were  cohabiting  and  the  marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. On 26 November 2014 the Appellant  who  had  been  represented  at  the
    hearing before Judge Bird but who was now unrepresented  filed  written
    representations with the Upper Tribunal and a copy  of  the  index  and
    chronology to the Appellant's bundle which had been before Judge  Bird.



 9. The representations refer to whether Judge Bird had erred  in  deciding
    where  the  burden  of  proof  lay  and  referred  to   Judge   Afako's
    determination and Devaseelan.  They assert that the Appellant's  wife's
    payslips and bank statements  addressed  to  the  same  address  showed
    cohabitation; that his wife's employers had supplied  the  Home  Office
    with a new address because  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  moved.
    Further, the Respondent had failed to  produce  the  Nigerian  passport
    which it was alleged was a fraudulent document.  The Appellant had  not
    produced any Nigerian passport and such a passport had not been  before
    Judge Bird.

10. The Appellant appeared in person with a woman who was described  as  "a
    friend of a friend".  She subsequently identified  herself  as  Dorothy
    Marshall.  The only means of identification were her assertion and  the
    production of a Visa  debit  card  bearing  her  name.   There  was  no
    photographic identity evidence.

11. I explained to the  Appellant  the  purpose  of  the  hearing  and  the
    procedure to be adopted.  I told him that the fact of his marriage  was
    not challenged  but  the  issue  was  whether  it  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience which, if it was,  did  not  qualify  him  under  the  2006
    Regulations for a residence card.  I referred him to paragraph 3 of the
    2011 determination that the issue of  his  marriage  was  not  in  fact
    before Judge Afako.  His wife had shown that she was exercising  treaty
    rights and so entitled to a residence card.   He,  the  Appellant,  had
    received his residence card in his  capacity  as  her  husband  without
    further questioning.

12. I reminded him that the appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    against the Respondent's decision to revoke his residence card and that
    the Respondent had supplied ample  evidence  to  raise  serious  doubts
    about marriages conducted  between  foreign  citizens  at  All  Saints'
    Parish Church and he had already admitted he  had  falsely  claimed  to
    have resided within the parish.

13. The Appellant then volunteered that in February 2014 he  and  his  wife
    had had an argument and she had moved out.  He had tried to  trace  her
    without success and there were letters at pages 72 and 73 of the bundle
    before Judge Bird and indeed I noted that she had  referred  to  it  at
    paragraph 14 of her determination.

14. Mr Kandola for the Respondent relied on the letter of 12 November 2014,
    being the response to the grounds of appeal filed under Procedure  Rule
    24.  In particular, he relied on paragraph 4 that the Judge  had  given
    sustainable reasons for her conclusions and noted the lack of  evidence
    from third parties in  support  of  the  claimed  cohabitation  of  the
    Appellant and his wife.

15. If, which was not conceded, the Judge had erred in the  self-directions
    she had given  at  paragraph  25  of  her  determination  referring  to
    Papajorgji, it was not a material error.  At paragraphs 27-29  she  had
    given sustainable reasons for rejecting various explanations  proffered
    by the Appellant and at paragraph 31  she  had  specifically  concluded
    that the Respondent had supplied enough information to shift the burden
    of proof to the Appellant.

16. Throughout, the determination contained  sustainable  reasons  for  its
    conclusions.  There was no evidence before the Upper Tribunal that  the
    Appellant's wife continued to exercise Treaty  rights.   I  noted  that
    this was not relevant to the error of law decision that I had to  make.



17. I explained to  the  Appellant  in  lay  terms  the  substance  of  the
    submissions for the Respondent was that the Judge had given sustainable
    reasons for her conclusions, even if he, the Appellant, did  not  agree
    with them.

18. The Appellant explained at the hearing before Judge Bird he  had  never
    been asked to produce any photographs of his  wife  and  himself.   The
    Respondent had failed to produce the Nigerian passport which was stated
    to be a false document, referred to in paragraph  31  of  Judge  Bird's
    determination.  His friends were unable to support him at  the  hearing
    before Judge Bird because they could not leave work.  His wife  and  he
    were happily married and he was still trying to trace her.

19. Ms Marshall stated she had met the Appellant at church in  about  March
    2014.  He was distressed because his wife had left him and he had  high
    blood pressure.  She understood the problems he  was  experiencing  and
    thought that if she intervened she might  be  able  to  help.   As  she
    encouraged him she became closer to him.  She had been  through  a  not
    dissimilar experience and thought she would be able to  help  him.   It
    was only months later that he had told her of the hearing in the  Upper
    Tribunal.  She had offered to travel to see his wife to persuade her to
    return. It was only earlier on the day of the hearing that she had seen
    some of the relevant papers.  She considered the Appellant was doubly a
    victim: a victim of his wife and  then  a  victim  of  the  immigration
    process.   He continued to look for her and wanted her back.

20. The Appellant produced photographs which he stated were taken in  2013.
    They showed himself and a woman together, at home or in a  caf�.   They
    would appear to have been taken on the same day since the Appellant  is
    shown wearing the same shirt although in some photographs he is wearing
    a suit and in others more casually dressed.  The woman is  wearing  the
    same camisole and jeans.  There are two photographs of  her  outside  a
    church wearing a dress.  Mr Kandola submitted that the photographs were
    not admissible because they had not been before the First-tier Tribunal
    and were not relevant to the finding of  an  error  of  law.   Further,
    Ms Marshall had not given evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.  Even if
    any of these matters were relevant to the finding whether there was  an
    error of law they were not relevant.  If I was minded to find an  error
    of law then the appeal should be remitted for hearing afresh.

21. The Appellant interjected that he had not been asked to the produce the
    photographs although he was  holding  them  throughout  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

22. The photographs show very little.  The  Appellant  was  represented  by
    experienced Counsel before Judge Bird.  Her Record of Proceedings shows
    that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  in  submissions  referred  to
    photographs.  I conclude that the judge had them in mind.  Her  failure
    to refer to them specifically in her determination may well be  because
    she considered them of little importance,  as  indeed  I  have  already
    commented that they evidence little.   It  was  of  note  that  at  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal the Appellant stated that the photographs
    had all been taken in 2013, and not when he and  his  wife  married  in
    2010.

23. The Appellant attached some importance  to  the  failure  of  the  Home
    Office to produce the Nigerian passport which  it  was  alleged  was  a
    false document.  His  claim  was  that  he  had  never  used  it.   The
    relevance of the passport for this appeal  is  that  the  passport  was
    submitted with other documents prepared in order to obtain  a  marriage
    licence.  Whether or not the Appellant completed the forms, he  had  to
    sign them and he was responsible for their content.  The net effect  is
    that by signing the documents he had represented that he had indefinite
    leave to remain.  If he did have indefinite leave to remain there would
    have been no need for the application leading to this appeal.

24. The fact is that false information given by or for the Appellant in the
    documentation for the marriage licence. He has admitted using  a  false
    address to secure the marriage licence and the use of the  passport  on
    his behalf to secure a marriage licence stating that he had  indefinite
    leave also goes to his credibility.  It is  arguable  the  Judge  might
    have better expressed her findings but this does not amount to an error
    of law.

25. The issue in the appeal before the Judge was  clear  cut:  whether  the
    Appellant and his wife were living in a subsisting  marriage  and  that
    their marriage was not a  marriage  of  convenience.   The  Appellant's
    claim is that the Judge applied the wrong burden of proof as  described
    in paragraphs 20 and 21 of her determination.

26. At paragraph 15 of the determination in Papajorgji the Tribunal  relied
    on Article 35 of the Citizens' Directive 2004/38/EC which provides:-

         Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse, terminate
         or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive in  the  case  of
         abuse of rights or fraud, such as  marriages  of  convenience.  Any
         such measure shall be proportionate and subject to  the  procedural
         safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31.

    The Tribunal referred to Council  Resolution  12337/97  addressing  the
    problem of marriages of convenience.  Paragraphs 3 and 4 provide:-
         3.   Where there are factors which support suspicions for believing
             that the marriage is one of convenience, Member  States  shall
             issue a residence permit or an authority to reside to issue  a
             residence permit ... on the basis of the marriage  only  after
             the authorities competent under national law have checked that
             the marriage is not one of convenience,  and  that  the  other
             conditions relating to entry and residence have been fulfilled
             ...
           4. Should the authorities ... find the  marriage  to  be  one  of
             convenience, the residence permit ... granted on the basis  of
             the third-country national's marriage shall as a general  rule
             be withdrawn, revoked or not renewed.

27. At paragraph 13 of Papajorgji the Tribunal found:-
         It is clear  that  the  terms  of  the  Citizens'  Directive  allow
         national law to make  Regulations  to  prevent  abuses  founded  on
         marriage of convenience.  So far as the detection of such marriages
         is concerned, it is clear from  the  Council  Resolution  that  the
         relevant resident documents are not  to  be  issued  if  there  are
         'factors which support suspicions for believing that  the  marriage
         is one of convenience', until the suspicions are  resolved  in  the
         applicant's favour.  That appears to us to be  a  clear  indication
         that, so far as EU law is concerned, the burden of proof, as it  is
         called  in  English  law,  rests  on  the  Appellant,  because  the
         suspicions having arisen the matter will be  resolved  against  him
         unless the suspicions are resolved in his favour.

    This does not expressly refer to a case where the residence document is
    to be withdrawn which is mentioned in the Council  Resolution  but  the
    Tribunal went on in the following paragraph 14 to say:-

         ...  that  means  that  there  is  an  evidential  burden  on   the
         Respondent.   If  there  is  no  evidence  that  could  support   a
         conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience,  the  Appellant
         does not have to deal with  the  issue.   But  once  the  issue  is
         raised, by evidence capable of pointing to a  conclusion  that  the
         marriage is one of convenience, it is for  the  Appellant  to  show
         that his marriage is not one of convenience.

28. The decision in question  in  Papajorgji  was  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card. In this appeal the decision is to  revoke  a  residence
    card. The Respondent had ample evidence to justify her suspicions about
    the nature of  the  Appellant's  marriage.   In  addition  to  all  the
    evidence which resulted in the  eventual  conviction  of  the  Reverend
    Shipsides and the findings about marriages conducted at his church, the
    Respondent had the evidence that the Appellant had  not  lived  at  the
    address in the parish of All Saints' where he claimed  to  have  lived.
    Additionally the documents leading to the marriage licence purported to
    claim he had indefinite leave to remain.  The Judge  did  not  make  an
    error of law in her description and assessment of the burden of  proof.



29. For the reasons given in  paragraph  11  above,  the  jurisprudence  in
    Devaseelan does not assist the Appellant. Judge Afako was not  required
    to and did not carry out  a  judicial  assessment  of  the  nature  and
    quality of the Appellant's marital relationship. Further, any  previous
    determination is only a starting-point for the  later  judge.  In  this
    case there is a substantial  amount  of  subsequent  evidence  to  have
    justified the Respondent looking into the Appellant's marriage  and  to
    support the Judge's decision to  consider  it.  She  went  on  to  give
    sustainable reasons for finding it to be a marriage of convenience.

30. The grounds for appeal and the written submissions bear marks of having
    been prepared by somebody with knowledge and experience of  immigration
    appeals in the United Kingdom but the application was  made  under  the
    Appellant's own name and he was unrepresented at the  hearing.  I  have
    therefore  carefully  considered  the  entirety   of   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's determination to see if it otherwise  readily  discloses  an
    error of law and find that it does not.  The grounds for appeal do  not
    disclose an error of law and  consequently  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination shall stand.

Anonymity

31. There was no request for anonymity and having considered the papers  in
    the Tribunal file and heard the appeal find there is no  need  for  the
    Appellant's identity to be protected by anonymity.

Decision

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside and shall stand.

    The consequence is that the appeal of the Appellant against refusal  of
    a residence card under the 2006 Regulations is dismissed.


Signed/Official  Crest                                                  Date
02. xii. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


