
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20009/2014
                                                               IA/20012/2014
                                                               IA/20020/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 28 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between
                            RICHARD EUSTACE FABLE
                             NALENE CHANAN FABLE
                                ROBERTO FABLE
                        (anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Md. Alabi of Cambridge Immigration Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are husband, wife and their child born  in  2009.   They
    are all citizens of Guyana.

 2. On 23 August 2006 the husband arrived with leave to enter as a student.
     Further leave in this capacity was granted and  ultimately  leave  was
    granted as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  which  expired  on  17
    February 2014.

 3. The husband had arrived with his wife and their first child, the  third
    Appellant, was born in 2009.  The birth  was  extremely  premature.   A
    subsequent child was also born extremely prematurely in September  2014
    and survived less than a day.

 4. The Appellants have throughout lived with the husband's  parents.   His
    brother and his partner and child live close by.

 5. On about 17 February 2014 the husband, together with his wife and child
    as his dependants, applied for further leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis of their private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The Decision and Original Appeal

 6. On 14 April 2014 the Respondent refused the Appellants further leave to
    remain and proposed  to  remove  them  as  a  family  unit  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The Respondent gave the reasons for the decisions in letters
    of 14 April 2014.  The husband was refused under the Immigration  Rules
    by reference to Appendix FM - parent route and paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules and the wife was refused  under  the  Appendix  FM  -
    partner route as well as under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.   Their
    child was refused under Appendix FM - Child Route and  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 7. At the time of the application,  it  was  feared  the  child  might  be
    diagnosed as being materially on  the  autistic  spectrum  but  at  the
    hearing Mr Alabi confirmed this was not the case but there  were  still
    some concerns about his speech and language.  The  child  had  received
    therapy following the death of his brother but this had now come to  an
    end.

 8. On 1 May 2014 the Appellants lodged notices of appeal under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert that if the Respondent had looked in the
    round at the Appellants' circumstances she would  have  concluded  they
    were exceptional and sufficiently compelling to justify permitting  the
    Appellants to remain.  Reference was made to the  child  and  that  the
    family had been living together with the husband's parents and that the
    grandparents played a large role in the  child's  life.   Further,  the
    Respondent was in error in concluding  that  the  interference  to  the
    private and family life of the Appellants  which  would  be  caused  by
    their  removal  to  Guyana  was  not  sufficiently  serious  to  engage
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 9. By a determination promulgated on 22 October 2014 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Walters dismissed the appeal of each  of  the  Appellants
    under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds  outside  the
    Rules.

10. On 13 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pirotta found  the
    Appellants' application for permission had been submitted out  of  time
    for which  there  had  been  no  explanation  and  did  not  admit  the
    application.  She considered the grounds of appeal and found  they  did
    not disclose any arguable error of law.

11. The Appellants renewed their application to the Upper Tribunal  and  on
    25 March Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chamberlain  found  the  original
    application for permission to appeal had been  submitted  in  time  and
    that the Judge had arguably erred in law by  concluding  there  was  no
    family life because of a lack of financial dependence of the Appellants
    on other members of the family and had not considered the  relationship
    between the child and his grandparents.  The other  ground  for  appeal
    was that the Judge had failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    best interests of the child in the light of his medical  condition  and
    the opinion of his headteacher.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. All three Appellants  attended  with  the  husband's  parents  and  the
    husband's brother.  I explained the purpose  of  the  hearing  and  the
    procedure to be followed.

13. For the Appellants, Mr Alabi submitted the Judge had erred  in  failing
    to deal with the relationship  between  the  child  Appellant  and  the
    grandparents.  He explained that the medical  diagnosis  of  the  child
    Appellant had turned out not to be as grave as anticipated at the  date
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  but  there  was  some  continuing
    concern about his speech development.

14. In reply Ms Kenny for the Secretary of State referred to  the  response
    under Procedure Rule 24 which  asserted  the  Judge  had  appropriately
    directed himself and made a comprehensive assessment of the claim under
    Article 8 and that if there had been a failure to address  specifically
    the relationship between the child and  his  grandparents  it  was  not
    material to the outcome.

15. She continued that on the evidence the Judge had found the relationship
    between the Appellants and  other  members  of  their  family  did  not
    disclose anything beyond the normal  emotional  ties  which  one  would
    expect.  To found a claim under Article 8, the Appellants would have to
    show more since the Appellants by themselves formed  a  nuclear  family
    and would be returned as a family unit to Guyana.  At paragraph  47  of
    his decision the Judge had made reasoned findings that there was family
    life between the Appellants and the husband's parents.  At paragraph 48
    he had noted that there was no suggestion of any  financial  dependence
    of the Appellants on them.  In the  round,  there  was  enough  in  the
    decision to show that the Judge had given sufficient  consideration  to
    all  the  relevant  family  relationships  enjoyed  by  each   of   the
    Appellants.

16. The Judge had extensively dealt with the medical issues  affecting  the
    child Appellant and the availability  of  facilities  in  Guyana.   His
    assessment of the best interests of the child Appellant  was  adequate.
    The husband's immigration status had throughout  been  on  a  temporary
    basis without any legitimate expectation of being permitted  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.   The  Judge  had  conducted  a  fair  balancing
    exercise and the decision contained no material error of law.

17. Mr Alabi reminded me that the husband's last grant of leave had been as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   In  November  2014,  after  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the wife's  mother  in  Guyana  had
    passed away.  He re-iterated that the  Judge  had  not  considered  the
    relationship of the child Appellant with his grandparents and  that  he
    had been born very prematurely and now had an  entrenched  relationship
    with his grandparents.  The husband and wife  were  employed  and  were
    self-sufficient so that the public interest would not  be  affected  if
    they remained in the United Kingdom and that in any event they had  not
    been in breach of immigration control.

Findings and Consideration

18. At the end of the hearing I announced my decision that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination did not contain a material  error  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside.  I referred to the passages in the Judge's
    decision in which he had taken adequate account of the relationship  of
    the grandparents with  the  Appellants  and  in  particular  the  child
    Appellant.  These are to be found at paragraphs 12, 14, 17, 33 and  46-
    48.

19. I found the evidence of the relationship between the  grandparents  and
    the child Appellant was described in two comparatively short statements
    submitted by each of the grandparents and their limited oral  testimony
    before the Judge.  The Judge had taken this evidence  into  account  in
    his decision.  On the Appellants' own  admission  and  fortunately  the
    medical diagnosis of the child Appellant was  now  considerably  better
    than had been feared at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

20. The Judge adequately dealt with the relevant aspects of the  appeal  in
    his decision.  The Appellants had never had any legitimate  expectation
    of being permitted to settle in the United Kingdom and  have  no  right
    under the European  Convention  to  choose  where  to  establish  their
    private and family lives. There was no material error  of  law  in  his
    treatment of the claim under Article 8 whether  under  the  Immigration
    Rules or outside them.

Anonymity

21. There was no request for an anonymity direction and none had been  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Having considered the appeal I  find
    that no anonymity direction is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law such that it should be  set  aside.   Therefore  it  shall
    stand.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 28. v. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

