
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 9 November 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               miss olufunmilola margaret lawrence akinrinmade
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 11 November  1961.   She
    claims to have come to the United Kingdom in 1989, having been  granted
    a visitor's visa.   Thereafter  she  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.  In January 2015 she was encountered as  an  overstayer  by
    the immigration  authorities  and  informed  of  her  liability  to  be
    removed.

2.   By an application dated 16 February 2015 she sought leave to remain  on
    the basis of private  and  family  life.   The  basis  upon  which  the
    application was made is set out in a letter  from  her  representatives
    dated 16 February 2015.  In essence she was to say  that  most  of  her
    close family  relatives  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  she  was
    supported by them.  She had lost contact with her husband and  children
    in Nigeria.  In particular, and of significance, that she had lived  in
    the United Kingdom for almost 25 years and had only returned to Nigeria
    for several weeks in November 2007  and  that  there  were  significant
    obstacles to prevent her integration into society in Nigeria, not least
    because of her lack of connection with that country over  such  a  long
    period of time.

3.   In a decision of 22 May 2015 the respondent refused the application  on
    the basis that she had not lived continuously in the United Kingdom for
    at least twenty years and in  particular  had  provided  no  acceptable
    evidence to cover the years 1998, 2004 and 2010.  It was  not  accepted
    that there would be very significant obstacles to her integration  into
    Nigeria and that there were no  compelling  circumstances  which  would
    prevent removal.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton on 12  August  2016.   A
    large number of documents were presented and she gave evidence  as  did
    her brother on her  behalf.   The  determination  is  a  detailed  one,
    promulgated on 7 February 2017.

5.   The appeal is dismissed in all respects.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant had been absent from  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  number  of
    occasions, visiting Nigeria.  It was not accepted  that  the  appellant
    had lost contact with her family and children in  Nigeria  such  as  to
    create significant obstacles to reintegration.

6.   Challenge is  made  to  the  decision  in  a  number  of  respects,  in
    particular the delay that was occasioned through  the  illness  of  the
    Judge from hearing the matter to its promulgation.  It was on the basis
    of possible unfairness in relation to delay, when  credibility  was  in
    issue, that permission was granted to the Upper Tribunal  to  challenge
    the decision.  Thus the matter comes before me.

7.   Clearly a significant delay of some five months is an important  matter
    to consider in the context of  fairness  of  proceedings,  particularly
    where  matters  of  credibility  and  recollection  may  be   involved.
    Challenge is made in the grounds of appeal that the passage of time may
    have affected the Judge's memory of subtle  features  relevant  to  the
    assessment of credibility.

8.   At the hearing Mr Plowright most fairly  indicated,  however,  that  he
    did not rely upon the Judge's lack of recollection or inaccurate recall
    of evidence but solely upon one matter, namely that the Judge failed to
    make findings  of  credibility  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's brother.  There were a number of aspects of  the  brother's
    evidence which, on their face, would seem to  be  somewhat  surprising.
    The appellant had three children  and  he  communicated  with  them  on
    Facebook and other media.   He had not asked the appellant whether  she
    had any messages from them  since she came to the  United  Kingdom.  He
    did not ask her about her children.   It was the  appellant's  evidence
    that she had lost contact with her children and it is perhaps  somewhat
    surprising in that context that  her  brother  was  able  to  make  the
    contact which she seemingly was unable to make.  Given  the  length  of
    time that she has been in the United Kingdom  it  is  perhaps  somewhat
    surprising that the brother has never asked her about her children.

9.   The brother also indicated that he has not aware that he appellant  had
    ever worked in the United Kingdom.  It was  her  evidence,  and  indeed
    documentary evidence produced, that she  had  certainly  been  working,
    earning significant wages for a number of years.  The  question  arises
    clearly as to what knowledge in practical terms the brother had of  her
    affairs, given that he knew so little about her.

10.  He also gave evidence that the  only  time  she  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom was to attend her father's funeral.

11.  At paragraph 41 of the  determination  the  Judge  noted  there  to  be
    implausible elements in the oral evidence of the appellant and  of  her
    brother and comments that matters seem to be strange and odd.  None  of
    those issues either individually  or  cumulatively  led  the  Judge  to
    dismiss their accounts as untrue.

12.  Mr Plowright relies upon the statement by the  brother  that  the  only
    time the appellant left the United Kingdom was to attend  the  funeral,
    as being a key element of his evidence  which  the  Judge  should  have
    accepted as being wholly accurate.  It seems to me, however,  that  the
    Judge is entitled to put that evidence within the entire context of the
    documentation and evidence that was submitted.  As  I  have  indicated,
    that the brother did not know that the appellant had ever worked in the
    United Kingdom simply highlights the question as  to  what  contact  or
    knowledge he really had with or of her generally.

13.  For the most part the Judge has  considered  the  documentary  evidence
    that was presented and has come to a number of conclusions relating  to
    the assistance which they provide to show that the appellant resided in
    the United Kingdom or otherwise.  It may be said that the  analysis  of
    the documents was perhaps over complicated in many ways,  with  perhaps
    irrelevant considerations being  applied  to  certain  of  them.   That
    having been said, however, a number of relevant matters were  noted  by
    the Judge.  At paragraph 45 the Judge noted the Nigerian passport which
    was issued on 4 October 1989 and  the  six  month  visa  issued  on  14
    November 1989.  The passport shows a visa issued on 26 May 1990 and two
    immigration stamps which appear to show that she passed through Gatwick
    Airport on 26 November 1989 and 17 November 1990.  The Judge noted that
    the appellant had never said that she returned to Nigeria in that  time
    but noted that it was not clear how she managed to return to the United
    Kingdom when her visa had expired in May 1990.

14.   In  paragraph  64  of  the  determination  mention  is  made  of   the
    computerised medical records from 2006  to  2013,  recording  that  the
    appellant received a tetanus vaccination in Nigeria on 10 May 2004.

15.  In paragraph 52 the Judge  considered  documentation  relating  to  the
    appellant's divorce, noting in particular that in them her  husband  is
    recorded as saying that their children were  born  in  September  1985,
    August 1987 and October 1994.  The claim that the last child  was  born
    in 1994 was considered significantly inconsistent with the  appellant's
    claim to be  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  1988  and  having
    separated from her husband before then.  Remarks made by the husband on
    the court Record  of  Proceedings  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant had been living more recently than that in  Nigeria  and  had
    potentially absented herself concerning service.

16.  Various other documents were considered  relating  to  evidence  as  to
    employment, hospital appointments,  study  and  significant  gaps  were
    found in the evidence that was presented, such as to lead the Judge  to
    conclude in paragraph 82 of the  determination  that,  looking  at  the
    evidence as a whole, the appellant had not shown that she  was  in  the
    United Kingdom between November 2007 and October 2009.

17.  In paragraph 84 the Judge noted that the appellant was able  to  travel
    to and from Nigeria in 2007 despite having  no  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Judge also found that the appellant was able to travel to
    and from the United Kingdom despite immigration controls.

18.   There  were  other  documents  considered  which  perhaps   were   not
    essentially on the issue of absence.

19.  Mr Plowright submits that, given the nature of  the  original  decision
    of refusal, the Judge should  have  concentrated  on  the  three  years
    specified in the decision.  Mr Duffy, however, submits that the lack of
    reference to other years did not expressly amount to a concession  that
    the evidence submitted in relation to them was  satisfactory.   It  was
    open to the Judge to consider the evidence as  submitted  and  come  to
    conclusions as to the nature of the same. He submits that such had been
    done by the Judge.  The Judge concluded therefore  that  the  appellant
    had visited Nigeria or at least had been out of the United Kingdom more
    frequently than she was prepared to admit.

20.  In terms of family connections in Nigeria the Judge noted at  paragraph
    85 of the determination documents, including an affidavit, which  would
    indicate that the appellant's mother lived in Nigeria rather  than  the
    United Kingdom and had lived there until 2015.  It was not accepted  by
    the Judge that the appellant had no relationship with her  children  or
    that  there  were  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  into
    Nigeria.  Some documents were considered which, although  not  directly
    relevant to her  absence,  raised  questions  as  to  her  credibility,
    particularly an invoice from Comet which showed  a  transaction  taking
    place on 13 September 1997 but payment of the same seemed to  be  by  a
    Maestro Card valid much later.  Documents were considered  in  relation
    to potential inconsistencies as to addresses and places  of  residence.
    Some documents were found to be consistent with her account and  others
    less so.

21.  Clearly it is the function of the Judge to consider  the  documentation
    and to come to conclusions upon it.

22.  Criticism is made of the Judge that the matters of concern  which  were
    noted were not put to the appellant at any stage  of  the  proceedings.
    It  is  said  that  that  rendered  matters  significantly  unfair.   A
    practical difficulty faced the Judge  at  the  hearing,  was  that  the
    respondent was not represented by a Presenting  Officer  and  therefore
    that restricted, in  practical  terms,  the  ability  to  question  and
    examine the appellant.

23.  The large volume of documentary evidence is noted at paragraphs  14  to
    18.  There were many documents  including  two  supplementary  bundles.
    There would seem to have  been  little  attempt  by  Mr  Plowright,  in
    representing the appellant at that hearing, to analyse in great  detail
    the nature of the documentation that was presented  or  to  assist  the
    Judge  with  the  approach  to  be  taken  to  it.   Sadly   so   often
    representatives produce a large bundle of documents which  it  is  said
    speak for itself.  It is then for the Judge to make such use  of  those
    documents as may be apparent upon examination.

24.  Indeed there  was  presented  with  such  documents  a  short  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the appellant prepared  by  Mr  Plowright  on  10
    August 2016, focusing exclusively on the narrow point that was advanced
    by the appellant that she had only returned to Nigeria for two weeks in
    November 2007.  Such skeleton argument did  not  address  the  concerns
    expressed in the refusal letter about the  three  years  in  particular
    when it is said that  she  was  absent  nor  indeed  did  the  skeleton
    argument highlight any reference to the documents in the chronology  of
    residence.  Thus to a large extent the Judge was left to make sense  of
    those documents which the Judge in the determination has sought to  do.
    Such arguments as were presented  gave  has  the  Judge  no  assistance
    whatsoever in analysing the documents or  explaining  their  relevance.
    It is difficult to understand how in  practical  terms  those  concerns
    that were apparent in the documents could be presented to the appellant
    for further clarification.  They were the documents relied upon by  the
    appellant to establish her case and it seems to me entirely proper  for
    the Judge to have come to the conclusions upon  them  which  have  been
    expressed.

25.  As I indicated to Mr Plowright, one concern that I  did  have  was  the
    many documents considered by the Judge as perhaps  serving  to  obscure
    the central focus of consideration.  However it is clear  from  looking
    at the determination as a whole that  the  Judge  was  engaged  in  the
    process  to  determine  whether  the  documents  produced   established
    presence in the United Kingdom or not.  In  many  cases  the  documents
    were found to establish presence  and  in  others  not.   That  was  an
    analytic process properly conducted by the Judge.

26.  In paragraph 28 of the grounds of appeal certain findings by the  Judge
    in relation to the documentation are highlighted in (a) to (h).   Apart
    from highlighting what the Judge  found  there  is  no  comment  as  to
    whether that finding was or  was  not  accurate,  simply  there  is  no
    comment upon them.  Rather, the  challenge  continues  that  the  Judge
    failed to make assessment of other documents set out in 29(a)  to  (f).
    Once again it is not entirely clear what relevance those documents have
    to the issues in this case.

27.  What is abundantly clear is that on any basis the  appellant  does  not
    meet the twenty year continuous residence.  This matter was conceded by
    Mr Plowright at the hearing and indeed accepted by him before me.   The
    real issue in the case is whether the absence in November was the  only
    one.  It was contended by the respondent in the decision  that  it  was
    not, indeed that there were other absences and such was  found  by  the
    Judge upon analysis of the documents properly conducted.  The fact that
    the appellant was able, seemingly, to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    return in spite of immigration control was a  relevant  factor  in  the
    mind of the Judge and indeed not even dealt with by  the  appellant  in
    connection with her claim to have gone to Nigeria in 2007 and returned.

28.  Overall I find that the Judge faced with  the  task  of  analysing  the
    documentation has done so.  There is no suggestion that  the  lapse  of
    time in doing so had  impaired  any  ability  to  make  that  analysis.
    Overall, therefore, I do not find there to be any material error in the
    approach taken by the Judge to the documentation or to the evidence  as
    presented.  In the absence of any suggestion that any  material  matter
    was omitted or mis-recalled I do not find there to be  any  significant
    unfairness or any unfairness in the procedure overall,  notwithstanding
    the delay in the promulgation of the decision.

Notice of Decision

29.  In all the circumstances  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.  The decision of the Judge  shall  stand,  namely  that  the
    appellant's appeal is dismissed in  relation  to  her  application  for
    leave to remain both under the Immigration  Rules  and  in  respect  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 9 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

