

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/20770/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10th May 2017                     |On: 19th May 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Huanming Yang
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the SSHD:          Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed by AGI Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent Ms Huanming is a national of China,  born  on  the  20th
    November 1985.  On the 31st August 2016 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Chambers) allowed her appeal against a decision to refuse to grant  her
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.










    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The relevant history is that Ms Huanming arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in December 2010 with leave to enter as a visitor.   She did not  leave
    at the end of the period stated by her, but  remained  in  the  country
    unlawfully. In December 2012 she met her partner, Mr Zi Man Chung; they
    were married on the 26th November 2013.  In  March  2015  she  made  an
    application to the Home Office in which she asked to  be  permitted  to
    remain in the UK with Mr Chung.

 3. The reasons for  refusal  letter  is  dated  the  27th  May  2015.  The
    Respondent begins by accepting that Ms Huanming meets the definition of
    'partner' within the  meaning  of  Appendix  FM.   She  then  turns  to
    consider whether she can meet the requirements of paragraph  EX.1,  and
    draws the following conclusions:


         "You have a genuine and subsisting relationship with  your  British
         partner. Whilst it is acknowledged that your partner has  lived  in
         the UK all his  life  and  is  in  employment  here  with  his  own
         business, this does not mean that you are unable to  live  together
         in China. Although relocating there together might cause  a  degree
         of hardship for your British partner, the Secretary  of  State  has
         not seen any evidence that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  in
         accordance  with  EX.2  preventing   you   from   continuing   your
         relationship in China. You therefore  fail  to  fulfil  EX.1(b)  of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules".

    The letter then rejects the claim on 'private life' grounds, and finds
    there to be no exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of leave
    'outside of the rules'.

 4. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal, both  Ms  Huanming
    and her husband gave live evidence.  There was  no  appearance  by  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department and so their  evidence  went
    unchallenged; Judge Chambers appeared satisfied that what they told him
    was all true. That was that Ms Huanming's immediate family members  are
    resident in the UK. Mr Chung has a thriving business in the UK, in  the
    form of a successful takeaway. It is his sole means of  livelihood.  If
    he were to relocate to China he would have to  close  the  business  at
    great economic loss with little or no prospect of obtaining  employment
    or re-establishing an alternative in China. The couple live in  a  home
    that Mr Chung owns. Although he is of Chinese origin  he  was  born  in
    this country and has only ever been to China for a holiday. He  has  no
    relatives in that country; nor does he speak Mandarin.  He communicates
    with his wife in broken English and Cantonese.  All of his close family
    live in this country and are British nationals. Judge Chambers did  not
    consider that Mr Chung's fear of losing  his  British  nationality  was
    justified, but did accept that he faced "economic ruin" if  he  had  to
    leave the UK, and thereby abandon his business;  that this was the sort
    of very serious hardship which would  satisfy  the  exception.   Having
    found the requirements of EX.1 to be met, it was not necessary for  the
    Tribunal to consider the matter 'outside of the rules' and  the  appeal
    was allowed.


 5. The Secretary of State for the Home Department has sought permission to
    appeal, that being granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Dr HH Storey on  the
    24th February 2017. Dr Storey considered it arguable  that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  whether  there   were   "insurmountable
    obstacles" was inconsistent with higher authority. Although  the  grant
    of permission does not identify a particular authority, before  me  the
    Secretary of State places reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court
    in R(Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (FC)  [2017]
    UKSC 11.

 6. Mrs Agyarko had made her way to the Supreme Court by way  of  a  failed
    appeal in the Court of Appeal against a decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    to refuse to grant permission for judicial review[1].  She  had  argued
    that in refusing permission the Tribunal had failed to  recognise  that
    the Secretary of State had imposed too high a threshold in  respect  of
    paragraph EX.1 of the Rules, and had failed to take relevant facts into
    account. This argument was rejected by both Court  of  Appeal  and  the
    Supreme Court, who held that the Secretary of  State  had  applied  the
    correct legal framework. Importantly for the purpose  of  this  appeal,
    they also held that on the facts presented, neither Mrs Agyarko or  her
    co-appellant Mrs Ikuga could possibly have established that there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to their family life continuing  abroad.  What
    then were these facts?

 7. Mrs Agyarko was a long-term overstayer of Ghanaian nationality. She had
    married a British citizen; they had no children. She however, had three
    children of her own (now adults), a  sister  and  a  mother  living  in
    Ghana. Her partner was British and had lived all his life in the UK. He
    was in employment here. The Secretary of State had accepted that  there
    would be a degree of hardship for her husband going to live in Ghana (a
    country with which he had no connection) but that this did not meet the
    test in the rule.  Mrs Ikuga was a Nigerian, also  an  overstayer.  Her
    British husband was of Nigerian origin.  She placed particular reliance
    upon the assertion that she was receiving medical treatment,  including
    for infertility, in the UK which would have been disrupted if she  were
    to leave.   The Secretary of State had cast some doubt on  whether  she
    was actually living with her husband and found that the claimed medical
    problems were not in fact as serious as the application had indicated.

 8. Mr Harrison for the Secretary of State for the Home Department  submits
    that the only obstacle identified in this case was  the  fact  that  Mr
    Chung would lose his job; this he submitted was on all fours  with  the
    finding in Agyarko's case.  Since Mr Chung could not be said to be more
    disadvantaged by the move than Mrs Agyarko's partner, it followed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal must have erred  in  finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles.

 9. Mr Ahmed objected to  this  characterisation  of  the  findings.    The
    finding was not that this family would be "disadvantaged"  by  a  move,
    but that Mr Chung would face "economic ruin", a qualitatively different
    matter.  He  pointed  out  that  the  factual  matrix  in  Agyarko  was
    strikingly different. Ms Agyarko had children  of  her  own  living  in
    Ghana, as well as  a  mother  and  siblings.  There  was  therefore  an
    established network for her and her husband to return to. Set  in  this
    context the fact that he  would  lose  his  job  was  not  particularly
    important.  The facts in Ikuga had been in doubt; the  central  matters
    that lady had identified as presenting obstacles to her return  had  in
    effect been rejected.



    My Findings

10. What this appeal illustrates is that in matters concerning  Article  8,
    the individual facts are always of central importance.


11. The core finding of the Tribunal was that Mr Chung would face "economic
    ruin" if he were to abandon his business  in  the  UK  and  move  to  a
    country with which he had only historical connections.    Although  the
    grounds of appeal assert that "new jobs  could  be  found"  this  would
    appear to be a submission on the facts, rather than a reason why  Judge
    Chambers erred in law in reaching the finding that he did.  Mr Harrison
    was unable to point to any evidence to show that this was not a finding
    that had been open to the Tribunal.  That is perhaps unsurprising since
    the Secretary of State did not attend the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,
    and so did not have  the  advantage  of  hearing  Mr  Chung's  credible
    evidence on the point.   I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  a  material
    difference between ruin  and  having  to  move  jobs.  Looking  at  the
    definition of "insurmountable obstacles" in EX.2, an elaboration of the
    test expressly endorsed by the Supreme Court, I am unable to agree that
    the First-tier Tribunal was irrational in reaching the finding that  it
    did. The rule states that the term should be interpreted to mean:


         "very  significant  difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by   the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

12. I am satisfied that Judge Chambers was entitled to find that ruin would
    be a very significant difficulty which could not be  overcome  or  that
    would entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  and/or  her
    partner.


13. It follows that the Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal
    must be dismissed.




    Decisions


14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and it is upheld.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department's
    appeal is dismissed.


15. There is no direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               17th May 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Under the statutory scheme then in place she had no right of appeal
against a decision to refuse to grant leave, no removal decision having
been served.

