
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20308/2015
     ia/20315/2015
     ia/20321/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |On 24 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                         santa [b] (FIRST appellant)
                        rajesh [t] (SECOND appellant)
                           [r t] (THIRD appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Abbas, Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants in this case are one family and citizens of  Nepal,  the
    first and second appellants are the parents of the third appellant  who
    was born on [ ] 2012.  The first and second appellants  have  a  second
    child [ST], born on [ ] 2016.  In a decision  dated  14  May  2015  the
    respondent refused the appellants' application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK.  In a decision promulgated on 3 March 2017, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Miles dismissed the appellants' appeals on all grounds.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission from the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  should  have  found
    compelling circumstances enabling the judge to  consider  a  breach  of
    Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal  are
    as follows:

    Ground 1      The judge erred in not finding  compelling  circumstances
                to consider outside of the Immigration Rules  and  paragraph
                276ADE(1)(vi) only applies  to  the  adult  appellants.   In
                addition it was argued that the  judge  failed  to  consider
                adequately the situation in Nepal following earthquakes  and
                it was arguably compelling.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. Mr Abbas relied on the permission grounds and accepted that at the date
    of application neither of the first and second appellants' children had
    completed seven years in the UK.

 4. Mr Abbas submitted that at paragraph 7 of the skeleton argument  before
    the First-tier Tribunal it was argued that the appellants' case  should
    be considered outside of the Immigration Rules as the  Rules  were  too
    restrictive to cater for the appellants' situation.  At paragraph  [15]
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  judge  had  noted  that  the  second
    appellant stated he could not do anything for his daughter if they went
    back to Nepal and that they would have to pay for medical treatment  as
    well as having to pay for school.

 5. Mr Abbas referred to page 28 of the  supplementary  bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which  was  a  letter  dated  28  January  2017  in
    relation to [ST]; it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    adequately consider this letter including specifically that the  letter
    noted that although there were no real concerns about the child and she
    was thriving "as she had neonatal encephalopathy she would continue  to
    require ongoing neurodevelopmental surveillance through the CDC and the
    physiotherapists.  This surveillance would continue  until  she  is  at
    least 2 years and indeed beyond."  It was noted that  the  daughter  of
    the first and second appellants was born on 25 August 2016.   Mr  Abbas
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal, at [21]  of  the  decision  and
    reasons, specifically summarised  the  January  2017  letter  from  the
    Consultant Paediatrician including that she would require  surveillance
    until she was at least 2 years old.  It was Mr Abbas'  submission  that
    this provided compelling circumstances and  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law.

 6. Ms Pettersen submitted that whilst the judge may have erred in  dealing
    with paragraph 276ADE given that neither child could  fall  within  the
    Rules as at the time of application neither child was 7 years  old,  it
    was submitted that such was not material as the  judge  had  considered
    and made findings on  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the
    impact of earthquakes in Nepal.  The judge had also noted, at  [24]  of
    the decision and reasons, the difficulties with the  evidence  of  both
    adult appellants and the discrepancies, including  as  to  whether  the
    elder child spoke Nepali and had ever been to Nepal.

 7. It was submitted by Ms Pettersen that the judge, at  [25],  had  looked
    all the evidence including in relation to the  children  and  concluded
    that there would be family support available on return.   It  was  also
    submitted that at [20] and [21] the  judge  had  set  out  the  medical
    evidence in relation to [ST].  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    completely aware of the circumstances in relation  to  the  appellants'
    family and the conclusion outside of the Immigration Rules was the same
    and therefore any error was not material.  Mr Abbas submitted in  reply
    that, as set out at page 6 of the skeleton argument, it  was  incumbent
    on the judge to consider the best interests of  the  children  in  line
    with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 8. For the reasons set out below I am  not  satisfied  that  any  material
    error of law has been disclosed.

Discussion

 9. The judge considered the case under case under paragraph  276ADE  which
    provides as follows:

         'The requirements of the Rules state that the applicant at date  of
         application:

         ...

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (ii), is aged 18 years or above,  has
             lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  twenty  years
             (discounting any period or imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.'

10. The third appellant was born in November 2012 and as already  indicated
    his younger sister was born in 2016 and it was  accepted  that  neither
    child could qualify under 276ADE(1)(iv).  The judge considered the case
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and considered whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Nepal.

11. However, in making findings the judge considered the  position  of  the
    entire family in some considerable detail.  The  judge  summarised  the
    appellants'  claim:  that  they  claim  to  have  no  accommodation  or
    employment on return to Nepal and the return would  be  detrimental  to
    their children.  The judge considered the evidence in relation  to  the
    earthquake in Nepal in 2015 but found that  the  parents  of  both  the
    first and second appellant had managed to continue to survive in  Nepal
    after the earthquake and there was no  objective  evidence  before  the
    judge that may  indicate  that  the  population  generally  experienced
    massive and significant disruption to everyday life.

12. The judge took into consideration all the evidence, including that  the
    first and second appellant had resided in  Nepal  all  of  their  lives
    prior to coming to the UK in 2010  and  had  parents  and  other  close
    family members there. The judge took into  consideration  that  neither
    would have any communication difficulties.  The judge  also  considered
    their claim that heir son only understood a little  Nepalese,  but  the
    judge did not accept this evidence which was at odds with  the  child's
    school report which describes Nepali as his first language and that  he
    speaks very little English.  The judge rejected this  claim  and  noted
    that the comment in the school report would have come from the  child's
    parents.  The judge made specific findings that the appellants had  not
    been truthful about this matter and similarly  had  not  been  truthful
    about the first appellant's claim that her son had never visited  Nepal
    which she  contradicted  in  oral  evidence.   The  judge  found  these
    untruths to undermine their claim in relation to the  potential  living
    conditions in Nepal on return.

13. The judge went on at paragraph [25] and [26] to  consider  specifically
    the situation of the children.  Although Mr Abbas referred to the  duty
    on the Tribunal to consider the best interests of  the  children  as  a
    primary consideration, that is what the judge  did,  at  [26],  finding
    that their best interests were  to  maintain  their  relationship  with
    their parents and each other.

14. The judge took into consideration that the third appellant had  started
    an early year's class in the UK but was satisfied  that  this  did  not
    indicate that he must remain in the UK and also took into account  that
    his sister would be able to at the appropriate time access education in
    Nepal.  There was no challenge to those findings.

15. As already noted the judge considered  the  medical  situation  of  the
    family's youngest child, in  some  considerable  detail  (at  [20]  and
    [21]).  The judge then went on at [25] to consider that  neither  child
    had entered full-time education with the youngest child being too young
    to appreciate her own individual circumstances.  The  judge  considered
    that although the third appellant was in good health the youngest child
    was born prematurely and that the medical evidence indicated  that  she
    had made very good progress and that she required regular  surveillance
    at the present time.  The judge reached a finding, which has  not  been
    challenged and  which  I  am  satisfied  was  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  that  the  evidence  did  not  indicate  a  serious  medical
    condition which was incapable of being dealt with outside the  UK;  the
    judge noted that both the first and second appellants had accepted that
    medical facilities were available in Nepal although they were difficult
    to afford.  However, the judge also took into  consideration  that  the
    second appellant was a fit healthy man and who had worked in the UK and
    had produced no evidence to support his  claim  about  unemployment  in
    Nepal to justify his assertion that he  would  be  unable  to  work  on
    return.  The first appellant had also accepted  that  her  husband  may
    well be able to obtain work but submitted that his earnings  would  not
    be very high although the judge noted that there  was  no  evidence  to
    support that contention but seemed to ignore the fact that  the  second
    appellant would be returning with skills from the UK which  may  be  of
    value to him by assessing employment in Nepal.

16. The judge went on to take the assessment of the best interests  of  the
    children into consideration in terms of his wider consideration of  the
    case  including  that  this  family  could  not  have  any   legitimate
    expectation of being granted settlement in the UK and  that  the  first
    and second appellants had entered as student and dependant and they and
    their son had only ever had time limited leave in the UK

17. Although the judge indicated that there were insufficient circumstances
    to merit a consideration outside of the Immigration Rules  and  applied
    SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387, given the findings  made,  as  summarised
    above, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  consideration  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules could have reached any  other  conclusion.   Such  an
    assessment would have been predicated on private life  and  would  have
    necessitated an assessment of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

18.  This  would  have  included  the  consideration  that  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest, that the  appellants  do
    not meet the Rules, that there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellants
    spoke English and that there was no adequate evidence that  the  family
    were financially independent.  Even if they were, this was, at best,  a
    neutral factor.   I take into account that it has been established that
    little weight is a spectrum (see Kaur [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC)) Although
    little weight should be  given  to  private  life  established  in  the
    circumstances specified, that approach  may  be  overridden  where  the
    private life in question has a "special and compelling character'  (see
    Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803).  However, it was not established that the private  life  in  this
    case was of a 'special and compelling character'.

19. The judge in essence followed the recommended 'balance sheet'  approach
    (see Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
    UKSC 60) SS It was not identified before me what if anything the  judge
    failed to consider in what was a careful and well reasoned decision and
    reasons, albeit that it might have been structured differently.

20. In the circumstances it cannot be said that any error made by the judge
    would have made a material difference to the outcome of the appellants'
    case.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.

Signed                                  Date:  12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Date:  12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
