
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
Ia/20327/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 April 2017                       |    On 9 May 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr kemdi chinaka chikweze
                        (anonymity directionNOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gifford Head, Counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal,  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr  Chikweze  as
    "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against  a  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse to issue a permanent Residence  Card  to  a
    person asserting a permanent right of residence, Regulation 15  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as amended.  The
    Respondent having refused the application not being satisfied that  the
    Appellant's ex-wife was exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the  requisite
    period up to the time of their divorce on 11 November 2014.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ian Howard who in a decision promulgated on 26 September  2016  allowed
    it under the Regulations.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the Tribunal Saffer in a decision dated 31 January 2017. His reasons
    were:

         "1.The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against a decision  of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  promulgated  on  26  September
           2016 whereby the appeal against the decision to refuse to  grant
           an EEA Residence Card was allowed.

         2.  I am satisfied that the application  is  in  time  and  it  was
           received on 3 October 2016.

         3. It is arguable that there was insufficient evidence  to  justify
           the  finding  that  the  Appellant's  former  spouse  had   been
           exercising EEA Treaty Rights for the requisite period."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") sets out the requirements to be met by  a
    family member who has retained the right of  residence.  Regulation  10
    has been substantially re-enacted in the  2016  Regulations  (in  force
    from 1 February 2017). The burden of proof for  establishing  that  the
    requirements of the Regulations have been met rests upon the  Appellant
    and the standard of proof is the usual civil  standard  of  balance  of
    probabilities. Facts and matters to be taken  into  account  are  those
    which exist at the date of hearing the appeal.

 7. Regulation 10(5) states:-

         "Family member who has retained the right of residence"

          10 -  (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a)he ceased to be a family member of a  qualified  person  on  the
         termination of the marriage or civil partnership of  the  qualified
         person;

         (b)he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;

         (c)he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

         (d)either-

             (i)prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for   the
             termination of the  marriage  or  the  civil  partnership  the
             marriage or civil partnership had lasted for  at  least  three
             years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had
             resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
             duration;

             (ii)the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified person
             has custody of a child of the qualified person;

             (iii)the former spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the  qualified
             person has the right of access to a  child  of  the  qualified
             person under the age of 18 and a court has ordered  that  such
             access must take place in the United Kingdom; or

             (iv)the continued right of residence in the United Kingdom  of
             the   person   is   warranted   by   particularly    difficult
             circumstances, such as he or another family member having been
             a victim of domestic violence  while  the  marriage  or  civil
             partnership was subsisting.

 8. There is no challenge to the legal background set out at paragraphs  9,
    10 and 11 of Judge Howard's decision. In order  for  the  Appellant  to
    succeed in his appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, in  the  context  of  the  2006  Regulations,  the
    Appellant was required to prove that he had the right to remain in  the
    context of the requirements as set out in the regulation under which he
    claims that right, namely Regulation 15. In order to satisfy Regulation
    15(1)(f) he had to show that he had a retained right  of  residence  in
    accordance with Regulation 10(5). The Judge then correctly set out  the
    burden and standard of proof. Ms Isherwood  began  her  submissions  by
    relying upon the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  I  set  out
    deliberately the relevant parts:-

         "Failing to resolve conflicts of fact on a material matter

         3. The Immigration Judge found  in  paragraph  30  that  they  were
            satisfied that  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's  divorce  in
            November 2014 the  former  spouse  had  been  exercising  Treaty
            rights  continuously  since  the   time   of   the   Appellant's
            application for a residence card as the family member of an  EEA
            national in November 2008.

         4. The Immigration Judge has drawn this  conclusion  with  evidence
            provided by the appellant (paragraph 16) of a letter from  Mamfe
            Global Net Ltd dated 06/10/2014, and payslips from the same firm
            in her name for the period July to November 2014.

         5. Whilst it is accepted the sponsor  would  have  been  exercising
            Treaty rights at the time of the appellant's original  residence
            card  application  being  granted  in  November  2008.   It   is
            respectfully  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has  not
            adequately considered and reasoned the lack of evidence that has
            been provided  by  the  appellant  to  show  the  ex-spouse  was
            exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period up to the  date
            of 15/04/2014 (date  on  letter  from  employer  that  ex-spouse
            started with the company).

         6. It is respectfully submitted that the Immigration  Judge  should
            have sought more evidence that  the  appellant's  ex-spouse  had
            been continuously exercising Treaty rights  for  the  full  five
            year period before making the finding.

         7. Permission to appeal is sought.

         8. An oral hearing it requested."

    She argued that it was necessary to assess whether  the  Appellant  had
    shown that his partner had the necessary continuous period of residence
    pursuant to Regulation 10  and  16.  At  paragraph  6  of  the  Judge's
    decision he had relied on no more than a letter and payslips which  was
    the only evidence that went toward this issue. It  was  necessary,  she
    argued, that the Appellant showed that he had done everything  possible
    to secure this information. This  was  not  an  "Amos"  case.  She  was
    referring to Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 552. The Judge here  had  only
    two items of evidence and within his decision he had given insufficient
    reasoning  as  to  how  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations. She then went on to refer me to aspects of the Appellant's
    original application and the Respondent's own policy.

 9. Mr Gifford Head  argued  that  there  was  no  material  error  of  law
    whatsoever within the Judge's decision. The central issue  was  whether
    the Appellant's former wife had been exercising  Treaty  rights  for  a
    period of five years. The Judge dealt with the evidence at paragraph 15
    of his decision and the starting point was the issue to  the  Appellant
    of an EEA Residence Card as a family member of an EEA  national  on  13
    April 2010. On the basis of the evidence that was before him which  was
    in fact two-fold namely a letter from Mamfe  Global  Net  Ltd  dated  6
    October 2014 confirming the Appellant's  wife's  employment  with  that
    firm from 15 April 2014 and payslips in her name for all of the  period
    July to November 2014 the Judge was entitled to come  to  the  decision
    that he did. He too then went on to refer me to issues relating to  the
    Appellant's own policy and the authority that the Judge relied on being
    Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained rights) Syria  [2011]  UKUT  00165
    (IAC).

10. It is important to focus on the grounds upon which permission to appeal
    was granted. They are set out above. It is asserted that the Judge  has
    not adequately considered and reasoned the lack of  evidence  that  has
    been provided by the Appellant to show  his  ex-spouse  was  exercising
    Treaty rights for a continuous period up to the date of 15  April  2014
    and that the Judge should have sought  more  evidence.  The  burden  of
    course was upon the  Appellant  to  prove  his  case  to  the  required
    standard and not for the Judge to either seek more evidence  or  indeed
    adjourn for more evidence. The Judge had to  make  a  decision  on  the
    evidence that was before him. It is also  important  to  recognise  the
    grounds do not  assert  irrationality  or  indeed  disclose  any  other
    argument beyond that I have referred to.

11. The Judge has relied upon Samsam. Paragraphs 30 and 31 of that judgment
    state:-

         "30. In this case the Appellant was the spouse of  an  EU  national
             and a family member under Article 2(2)(a) of the Directive. He
             was therefore entitled to the issue of a first residence  card
             on presentation of his valid passport, a marriage certificate,
             and "the  registration  certificate  or  any  other  proof  of
             residence in the host Member State of the Union  citizen  whom
             they  are  accompanying  or  joining"  (Article  10   of   the
             Directive).

         31.  He satisfied the Secretary of State of these matters  in  2002
             when his first residence card was issued  for  five  years  as
             required  by  Article  11(1)  of  the  Directive.  The  wife's
             registration certificate as an  EU  worker  or  self  employed
             person would have  been  sufficient  evidence  of  her  status
             although other means of proving it  are  permitted.  The  2007
             application form, now before us shows that at least  one  wage
             slip for the wife was presented that was sufficient to satisfy
             the Home Office that  the  wife  was  continuing  to  exercise
             Treaty rights as a worker and hence a further  residence  card
             was  issued  for  five  years  in  November  2007.  This   is,
             therefore, not a case of an  applicant  arguing  that  he  can
             prove that he was exercising residence rights in  2007  merely
             on the strength of having been issued with a card in 2002."

    He has then taken into account the employer's letter and wage slips and
    noted that the Respondent made one enquiry of her own of  the  employer
    namely to call the number provided. However, no enquiry was made of the
    HMRC, given the payslips assert both income tax deductions and national
    insurance contributions were being made. Thus, and  importantly  in  my
    view, the Judge was entitled to  record  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    arguing that his wife was exercising Treaty rights before  2014  merely
    on the strength of his having been issued  with  a  Residence  Card  in
    April 2010.

12. The Judge has then gone on to weigh the totality of the evidence and on
    the civil standard has found that at the time of the  divorce  in  2014
    the former spouse of the Appellant had been  exercising  Treaty  rights
    continuously since the  time  of  the  Appellant's  application  for  a
    Residence Card as the family member of an EEA national in  November  of
    2008. So combining that with the Appellant's employment since  December
    2013 he was satisfied that the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f) were
    met. I find he was entitled to come to that decision which was open  to
    be made on the evidence  that  was  before  him.  The  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal do not identify a material error of law. There  is
    disagreement with the decision that Judge Howard came to which was  one
    that was not outside the range of reasonable responses to the  evidence
    before him.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 8 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard






