
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                shahid nadeem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam of Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect  of  a  decision
    made by First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Pears)  ("FTT")  promulgated  on  5
    April 2016 in which  he  allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's  decision to issue a residence card as the  family
    member of an EEA national under the EEA  Regulations  2006.   (I  shall
    refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" who is  the  appellant
    and to Mr Nadeem as "the Claimant."

2.   In grounds of application for permission to  appeal  the  Secretary  of
    State contended that the FTT was wrong to find  that  the  sponsor  was
    working and that the FTT had not addressed the issue of self-employment
    and Treaty rights.  The sponsor failed to take the necessary  steps  to
    register as self-employed with HMRC and it was argued that  the  burden
    of proof had not been discharged.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    30 August 2016.

4.   In the decision and reasons the FTT dealt with the issue of whether  or
    not the marriage was genuine and subsisting  and  found  that  it  was,
    particularly having regard to the fact that a  child  was  born  on  19
    February 2015.   The  FTT  further  found  that  the  sponsor  provided
    invoices to establish self-employment and found credible evidence  that
    income figures had been provided to his accountant and  to  HMRC.   The
    FTT   further found that there was sufficient evidence to show that the
    business existed and there was current economic activity.

5.   The matter comes before me this morning as an error of law hearing.  Mr
    Norton for the Secretary of State confirmed that  having  reviewed  the
    appeal the Secretary of State has reconsidered  whether  or  not  there
    were errors or grounds to contest the  decision  and  reasons.  It  was
    accepted that page 158 of the Claimant's bundle is documentary evidence
    showing that documents were provided to HMRC.  Mr Norton conceded  that
    the grounds can no longer be sustained.

6.   I am  entirely  in  agreement  with  the  position  now  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State and would have made such a decision  in  any  event,
    had this not been conceded.  I find no material error of  law  and  the
    decision made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The FTT decision shall stand and  the  Claimant's
appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 30.9.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have  decided  to  make  a  no  fee
award consistent with the decision made by the FTT.


Signed                                  Date 30.9.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
