

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20015/2013
     IA/20033/2013
     IA/20026/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2013                            |On 24 January 2014           |
|Approved Ex Tempore Judgment                  |                             |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

                                   Between

                           RIMA VOLTERKUMAR MEKWAN
                         VOLTERKUMAR MANUBHAI MEKWAN
                          ANGEL VOLTERKUMAR MEKWAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Atit Mehta , instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      DECISION, DIRECTION AND REMITTAL

   1. This is an appeal against the Determination of the First-tier Tribunal
      promulgated on 18 September 2013.

   2. On 25 June 2012, the Secretary of State made a  decision  whereby  she
      refused to grant leave to remain to the Appellant Miss Mekwan.  It  is
      common case that the  next  relevant  date  is  23  May  2013,  highly
      surprising though that may seem, since that date represents  the  date
      of service of the Secretary of State's adverse decision.  Next, on  28
      May 2013 the Appellant challenged this by  Notice  of  Appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

   3. In the Notice of Appeal the Appellant explicitly  opted  for  a  paper
      Determination.  Following  this,  on  22  July  2013,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's Secretariat sent a procedural direction  to  both  parties.
      It is common case that both parties received it.  The directions  said
      the following:

         "It is argued by the Respondent that the Appellant does not have  a
         right of appeal under s82 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 because she did not apply for leave to remain until  after
         the expiry  of  his  existing  leave.   This  is  because  a  prior
         application  made  during  the  currency  of  that  leave  was  not
         accompanied by the correct fee".

     It is agreed that the onus of proof was on the Respondent to show  that
      the correct fee was not paid.  Following this narrative the procedural
      direction continued:

         "It  is  therefore  directed  that  the  appeal  be  listed  for  a
         substantive hearing that at that substantive hearing the  issue  of
         validity be decided, and  that  at  least  14  days  prior  to  the
         substantive hearing the Respondent  lodge  with  the  Tribunal  and
         serve upon the Appellant any information showing that  the  correct
         fee was not paid".

   4. The next material development occurred  on  9  August  2013  when  the
      Respondent sent  a  bundle  of  papers  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Interestingly, the covering letter described this as a paper case and,
      furthermore, a date of 19 August 2013 was inserted.  We are  not  sure
      what that date  denotes.   In  any  event,  at  today's  hearing  this
      Tribunal has raised the question of whether the bundle received by the
      First-tier Tribunal from the Secretary of State contained any material
      compliant with the requirement enshrined in the procedural  direction,
      which required "any information showing that the correct fee  was  not
      paid".  It is candidly acknowledged by Mr Tarlow  on  behalf   of  the
      Secretary of State that this information was  not  included.   In  the
      meantime, notwithstanding the clear signal  given  in  the  procedural
      direction that the appeal would be listed for  a  substantive  hearing
      and that the validity of the appeal issue would be  examined  at  such
      hearing and duly determined, the appeal proceeded as a paper exercise.
       This, according to the Determination, was carried out  on  27  August
      2013.

   5. Next, on 16 September 2013 the  Appellant's  solicitors  received  the
      Secretary of State's bundle.  They reacted immediately on 17 September
      2013 by sending the Appellant's bundle to the First-tier Tribunal.  On
      18 September 2013, the Determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      promulgated.

   6. It is abundantly clear from the text of  this  Determination  that  it
      does not comply with the procedural direction.  The latter  enunciated
      that at a substantive hearing the issue of validity would be  decided.
      The exercise of deciding the appeal on paper was  in  breach  of  that
      direction in three fundamental respects.  The first was  that  it  did
      not entail a substantive hearing which would  have  been  inter-partes
      and would have considered all the evidence  and  arguments  from  both
      parties.  The second  was  that  it  did  not  either  investigate  or
      determine the jurisdictional issue of validity  of  the  appeal.   The
      third defect that occurred was that this exercise was carried  out  in
      circumstances where the Secretary of State had not complied  with  the
      requirement to provide any information showing that  the  correct  fee
      was not paid.  Thus the Determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
      highly irregular.  It is not clear how this came about and we  do  not
      purport to attribute blame to any person or agency.  The fact is  that
      all of these  irregularities  materialised.   They  had  a  number  of
      consequences.  One  of  the  fundamental  consequences  was  that  the
      Appellants were deprived of their elementary right to a  fair  hearing
      in several significant respects.

   7. For completeness, we record that the Determination of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was received by the Appellant's solicitors  on  20  September
      2013 and they sought permission to appeal in writing on  23  September
      2013.  This was  duly  granted.   On   7  October  2013,  in  granting
      permission to appeal  the Judge was not privy to much of what we  have
      just rehearsed.  The Judge was, however, alert to what  was  described
      as an arguable material error of law,  which  was  formulated  in  the
      following way.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to consider
      the issue of the validity of the appeal  in  the  first  instance  and
      should have been assisted by information provided  by  the  Respondent
      which appears not to have been provided.  As the inquiry which we have
      conducted  today  demonstrates,  the  irregularities  and   procedural
      improprieties which beset the  procedure  adopted  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and the ensuing Determination were multiple  and  fundamental
      in nature.

   8. For these reasons the Determination of the First-tier Tribunal  cannot
      survive.  It must be set aside  and  we  so  order.   Given  that  the
      Appellants have been deprived of their right  to  a  fair  and  proper
      hearing at first instance, which right when exercised  would  preserve
      their right of appeal with permission to this Tribunal, we are  in  no
      doubt that the appropriate course is not to  remake  the  decision  in
      this forum but is, rather,  to  remit  the  matter  to  a  differently
      constituted  First-tier   Tribunal   for   fresh   consideration   and
      Determination.

   9. We are empowered to give directions about the conduct of that hearing.
       Conventionally, this Tribunal declines  to  do  that  because  it  is
      normally better that the  First-tier  Tribunal  address  its  mind  to
      matters of a procedural nature.   However  given  the  nature  of  the
      irregularities which we have identified and which form the
  10. basis of this decision we will  give  one  procedural  direction:  the
      fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  differently  constituted
      will proceed on a conventional inter-partes basis on proper notice  to
      both parties.





                                    [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:   23 January 2014

















