
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20960/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 31st July 2014                             |On 19th September 2014       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ALHAGIE KANYI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Hussian instructed by Burton & Burton.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish promulgated on  18th  October
        2013 in which he allowed Mr Kanyi's appeal against the  refusal  of
        leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  a  direction  for  his
        removal to Gambia dated 20th May 2013.


     2. The Judge accepted that the key factor in the  case  was  the  best
        interests of the children  and  that  as  there  was  no  realistic
        prospect of them or their mother  returning  to  Gambia  with  him,
        proceeded on the basis they will remain in the United Kingdom.


     3. In paragraph 20 the Judge found:


     20.  Under the respondent's student policy, the wife and children  have
          been admitted from an incompatible culture (practice  of  FGM)  to
   join           the appellant  as  students  dependents  here.  That  same
   incompatible            culture prevents their return. The appellant  now
   plays a daily role in            the lives of the children, seven days  a
   week, the particulars which are           itemised above. They,  and  the
   mother, want him to stay. In these            circumstances it cannot  be
   argued that it is in the best interests of the              children  for
   him  to  have  to  go  and,  therefore,  it   must   be   found   to   be
   disproportionate for him to have to do so.



Preliminary issue



     4. Mr Hussain raised as a preliminary issue the fact the Secretary  of
        State's renewed application for permission  to  appeal  is  out  of
        time. The decision under challenge was promulgated on 18th  October
        2013 and the original application for  permission  to  appeal  date
        stamped 25th October 2013 as the date of receipt by the  First-tier
        Tribunal. This application was refused by a judge of that  Tribunal
        on the 6th November 2013.  The renewed  application  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal was received on 2nd May 2014.


     5. The explanation provided is that although the original  application
        was in time  an  administrative  error  occurred  within  the  Home
        Office.  On 28th April 2014 the Presenting  Officer  who  made  the
        application was informed by  another  department  within  the  Home
        Office that Mr Kanyi's representatives had enquired as  to  whether
        he will be granted leave to remain resulting in checks  being  made
        which established there was no record on the Secretary  of  State's
        CID  internal  case  management  system  of  the  application   for
        permission to appeal having been refused by the First-tier Tribunal
        and no record of that determination having been received.   Further
        checks with HMCTS are said to have disclosed that the decision  had
        been served "by  hand"  in  November  2013  although  there  is  no
        indication as to why the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
        not recorded on the CID system or a copy sent to POU  Angel  Square
        in accordance with normal practice.


     6. It was accepted by Mr Harrison that the application for  permission
        is out of time by a number of months and that it will be  necessary
        to provide good reasons to justify a grant of  permission  at  this
        time. Mr Hussain referred the Tribunal to the decision of the Court
        of Appeal in YD (Turkey) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  52  in  which  the
        Court stated, at paragraph 25,:


              25. It is one  thing  to  say  that  a  power  to  direct  the
   suspension of removal                 directions exists  on  an  "out  of
   time" application. It is quite another to                   say that  the
   court  will  be  ready  to  exercise   this   power   in   any   but   an
   exceptional case, and whether it will do so will largely  depend  on  the
          merits of the substantive application for permission to appeal out
   of                  time......


     7. More recent Tribunal jurisprudence on this issue includes the cases
        of Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission) Egypt  [2011]
        UKUT 00442 (IAC) in which the Tribunal held that  where  permission
        to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  been  granted,  but   in
        circumstances where the application is out of time, an  explanation
        is provided, but that explanation is not considered  by  the  judge
        granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal appeal -  out  of
        time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear  wording
        of rule 24(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005,
        the grant of permission to appeal is conditional, and the  question
        of whether there are special circumstances making it unjust not  to
        extend time has to be considered, and,  Samir  (FtT  Permission  to
        appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003 (IAC) in which it was held that the
        UT may extend time on an application for permission to appeal, even
        if  the  application  was  out  of  time  and  an  application  for
        permission made to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had not  been
        admitted.


     8. In relation to the required 'test', in Ogundimu (Article  8  -  new
        rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC), the  Tribunal  said  that  the
        expectation is that  it  will  be  an  exceptional  case  in  which
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted  where
        the lodging of the application for permission is more than 28  days
        out of time.


     9. There appears to have been a failing within the system which is not
        an uncommon submission within this jurisdiction from the  Secretary
        of State. The starting point with any such application is, however,
        the explanation provided. If the administrative difficulties  arose
        as a result of the refusal of permission by the First-tier Tribunal
        not having  been  served  in  the  normal  manner,  such  that  the
        procedures for recording such a  decision  would  not  be  engaged,
        fault may not lie  with  the  Secretary  of  State.   If,  however,
        handing such documents over is part of  the  normal  procedure  for
        serving the Secretary of State any failures thereafter may be hers.
         Such an explained does not, in isolation, provide  a  satisfactory
        explanation for the delay. This explanation is however the starting
        point and it is also necessary to consider the merits of the appeal
        although having strong merits does not necessarily mean leave  must
        be granted as otherwise those with a good case  may  consider  that
        they are not required to meet  the  time  limits  set  out  in  the
        procedure rules.


    10. It was accepted by Mr Hussain that the  merits  would  have  to  be
        strong to allow the application to be admitted after this time  and
        also that the resources of the Secretary of State were  a  relevant
        consideration. I accept  this  submission  in  principle  and  such
        elements have been taken into account.


    11. To refuse permission at this stage  based  upon  the  Secretary  of
        State's administrative failings will be to preserve a determination
        that is fundamentally flawed.  Paragraph 20 of  the  determination,
        which purports to  be  a  proportionality  assessment,  is  clearly
        defective as it is a decision that appears to have been arrived  at
        solely on the basis  that  in  the  mind  of  the  Judge  the  best
        interests of the children are the determinative factor; rather than
        one of the elements that  need  to  be  considered  as  part  of  a
        properly conducted proportionality balancing exercise,  albeit  one
        of considerable importance as per ZH (Tanzania). On this basis,  to
        preserve the determination as it stands may amount to a fundamental
        breach of the  interests  of  justice.   Permission  to  bring  the
        renewed application is therefore granted out of time on  the  basis
        that this is considered to  be  the  appropriate  exercise  of  the
        Tribunal's discretionary case management powers in relation to this
        element of the case.



Error of law


    12. Mr Kanyi is a Gambia national born on the 2nd February  1973.   The
        Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis that in
        paragraph 18 of his determination the Judge found that Mr Kanyi and
        his wife could not be trusted  to  protect  children  from  FGM  on
        return to Gambia, even though such claim is not substantiated,  and
        thereafter went on to find the decision was  disproportionate.  The
        Secretary of State refers to findings made by  the  Judge  that  Mr
        Kanyi is in fact a man prepared to have his children exposed to FGM
        if they all relocated to Gambia, which is said to indicate that  it
        is not in their best interests to have their father in  the  United
        Kingdom, and that the Judge failed to consider whether the  alleged
        threat on return to Gambia is in fact credible. It  is  stated  the
        Judge's approach to the best interests of the  public  interest  is
        unlawful as the best interests of the children being treated as the
        determinative factor is contrary to case law.


    13. As stated above, paragraph 20 of the  determination  is  defective.
        This was a refusal of an application for further leave  to  remain,
        accompanied by a removal direction  made  pursuant  to  section  47
        Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, on the basis Mr Kanyi
        had not demonstrated that  he  was  able  to  satisfy  any  of  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules.   The  Judge  was  therefore
        required to consider (a) whether Mr Kanyi could, in  fact,  satisfy
        the Rules and, if not (b) whether in accordance with domestic  case
        law it  has  been  established  there  was  a  requirement/need  to
        consider Article 8 ECHR as a freestanding element, and, if so,  (c)
        the outcome of a properly conducted proportionality exercise.


    14. Following a finding the Judge materially  erred  as  he  failed  to
        adequately assess the merits of the case  or,  if  he  did  so,  to
        properly record or give adequate reasons to  support  his  finding,
        the Upper Tribunal proceeded to remake the  decision  by  receiving
        further submissions from the advocates.



Discussion



    15. It was conceded by Mr Hussain that Mr Kanyi is  unable  to  satisfy
        the requirements for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  under
        the Immigration Rules and this basis of the decision  is  therefore
        lawful and correct


    16. It is, therefore, necessary to consider the  merits  of  the  human
        rights claim in accordance with the approach set out by  the  Court
        of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High  Court  in
        Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in  Gulshan
        [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by Shahzad (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
        [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  These judgments have made it  clear  that
        the question of proportionality must be looked at in the context of
        the Immigration  Rules  with  no  need  to  go  on  to  a  specific
        assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that there
        are no particular compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring
        that course to be taken. That approach is consistent with what  the
        Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) and with the approach  of  the
        House of Lords, particularly in cases such as Huang [2007] UKHL  11
        and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In Shahzad it was found that  where  an
        area of the Rules does not have such an express mechanism  such  as
        that found in the deportation provisions,  the  approach  in  Nagre
        ([29]-[31] in particular) and  Gulshan  should  be  followed:  i.e.
        after applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there may  be
        arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is
        it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether
        there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
        under them. The starting point was to look at  the  Rules  and  see
        whether the Applicant was able to meet their requirements. If  not,
        the question arises whether the decision would lead to a breach  of
        Article 8 but in the context  of  whether  there  are  factors  not
        covered by the Rules which  give  rise  to  the  need  to  consider
        Article 8 further. The key question in relation to  the  assessment
        of Article 8 is whether the decision to refuse to grant leave  will
        result in compelling circumstances  giving  rise  to  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the Applicant or any family member, such  as
        to establish an arguable  case  at  this  time.   On  the  material
        provided there was arguably not.  This approach  has  been  further
        confirmed by the Court  of  Appeal  in  the  more  recent  case  of
        Haleemundeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 55.


    17. A further development in relation to this matter  is  that  as  the
        decision is being remade after 28th July 2014 it  is  necessary  to
        apply the provisions of section 117B of the Nationality Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002, as inserted by section 19 of  the  Immigration
        Act 2014.


    18. The factual findings of Judge Frankish are to stand  including  the
        finding this is a family splitting case. It  was  submitted  by  Mr
        Hussain that the exceptional  circumstances  are  that  one  of  Mr
        Kanyi's children has been subjected to FGM,  according  to  medical
        evidence.  Mr Kanyi plays a role in their lives  according  to  the
        evidence  including  transporting  his  son  at  weekends  to  play
        football.  The  child  who  suffered  FGM  is  said  to  have  been
        traumatised as a result, although the medical report  mentioned  by
        Mr Hussain was not provided to  the  Tribunal  and  an  adjournment
        offered to secure the evidence refused on a costs basis.


    19. It is also submitted that the Mr Kanyi's leave was as a post  study
        worker and not as a student and that he has a role to play  in  the
        lives of the children as a father such that it is  disproportionate
        for him to be removed.


    20. When asked to specify the consequences of removal upon the children
        Mr Hussain submitted was (a) the emotional impact upon the children
        which can manifest itself in the children becoming upset, (b)  that
        there will be changes in the routines of the children, (c) that the
        children would not  have  their  father  with  them  and  that  the
        educational well-being of the children may suffer in his absence.


    21. It was also submitted that Mr Kanyi came to the United  Kingdom  in
        2004 and could qualified  on  the  basis  of  ten  years  residence
        shortly after the hearing as he is  resided  lawfully  in  his  own
        right, but this is not determinative as he cannot satisfy the Rules
        which now require twenty years leave.  It  was  accepted,  however,
        that this is not an argument based upon legitimate expectation.


    22. Mr Hussain submitted that if Mr Kanyi  is  removed  the  children's
        mother will become dependent on the State, as she will be unable to
        work as she will have to care for  the  children,  but  that  is  a
        matter for the Secretary of State and many single parents undertake
        full or part time work to accommodate the needs of their children.


    23. The family life relied upon  is  that  between  Mr  Kanyi  and  his
        children only because the evidence before the  court  is  that  the
        relationship  between  him  and  his  wife  has  broken  down.   In
        paragraph 7 of the determination under  challenge  it  is  accepted
        that the parties have separated.


    24. The problem in this case, as with many, is the poor quality of  the
        evidence being relied upon  to  support  the  contention  that  the
        impact upon the children is such  that  the  appeal  must  succeed.
        This is a case in which the mother and father of the children  have
        separated and in which the father  has  contact  to  his  children.
        There is no independent evidence of any  adverse  impact  upon  the
        children  if  their  father  is  removed,  submissions  not   being
        evidence, although I accept that the  effect  on  a  child  loosing
        contact  with  a  parent  with  whom  they  have  a  parental/child
        relationship can be traumatic in some cases. It  is  also  accepted
        that if removal is undertaken there may have  to  be  a  period  of
        readjustment within the family unit in relation to  activities  and
        the role played by the children's mother, but it was not shown this
        could not be achieved. There is  mention  of  previous  behavioural
        issues at school with his son but, again, there is no evidence that
        if these are repeated they cannot be managed with the assistance of
        the school or other services if Mr Kanyi was to be removed.


    25. This is not a case in which Mr Kanyi has  sole  responsibility  for
        the children as  his  role  appears  to  be  limited  to  attending
        parent's evenings, collecting and returning the  children,  and  to
        having ongoing contact.


    26. In  relation  to  section  117B,  this  details  in  an  Article  8
        assessment  the  public  interest  considerations  in  all   cases.
        Section 117B(6) states:


              "in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
   public interest              does not require the person's removal  where
   -


               (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
   relationship with a                   qualifying child, and


              (b) it would not be reasonable to  expect  a  child  to  leave
   United                       Kingdom.


    27.  Section  117D  is  an  interpretation  provision  which  defies  a
        'qualifying child' as a person who is under the age of 18  and  who
        (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has lived in  the  United  Kingdom
        for a continues period of seven years or more,   neither  provision
        of which applies to the children in this case.


    28. The best interests of the children are, in an ideal  world,  to  be
        able to mature and develop within a household containing two loving
        parents who ordinarily will be their mother  and  father.  In  this
        case the parents have  separated  and  the  primary  carer  of  the
        children is their mother with additional support provided by  their
        father which is said to have had a positive impact in  relation  to
        their eldest son.  The best interests of the children in this  case
        are, in fact, to remain with their mother who is able to  meet  all
        their basic physical and emotional needs and in relation to whom it
        has not been shown such needs could not be met in  the  absence  of
        their father. Section 117 provides no assistance  to  Mr  Kanyi  in
        seeking to remain in the United Kingdom and the  lack  of  relevant
        evidence leads to a finding that he has not substantiated his claim
        that as a result of a further separation within this  family  unit,
        his removal will result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  or
        exceptional circumstances. The Judge records a conflict within  the
        evidence that either Mr Kanyi is such a monster that his  wife  and
        children must be protected from him and his  family  to  avoid  the
        daughters being subjected to FGM or secondly  that  he  is  such  a
        marvellous father that it would be  disproportionate  to  make  him
        return to his home state. In relation to the first  issue,  if  the
        children do need protecting from him it cannot  be  in  their  best
        interests for him to remain but if he is the father that he  claims
        to be, that does not mean the appeal must automatically succeed  as
        there is  still  an  evidential  and  legal  burden  that  he  must
        discharge.


    29. Notwithstanding the impact on the children and need to readjust, it
        is my primary finding that Mr Kanyi has  failed  to  discharge  the
        burden of proof upon him to the  required  standard  to  show  that
        there would be any adverse impact upon the children such as to make
        the decision disproportionate if the eventual  consideration  of  a
        freestanding   assessment   under   Article   8   ECHR   was    the
        proportionality of the decision when weighing the situation of  the
        family within the United Kingdom against the legitimate aim  relied
        upon by the Secretary of State, and in considering the way in which
        public interest has to be assessed by virtue of the  new  statutory
        provisions.


    30. It is settled law that Article 8 does not allow  an  individual  to
        choose the place in which they wish to reside. The fact there is  a
        child or children in the United Kingdom is not a trump card and  it
        may be as a result of earlier decisions in  which  such  a  liberal
        interpretation of Article 8 was applied that the Secretary of State
        has now set out her position  in  relation  to  Article  8  in  the
        Immigration Rules and now in statutory  form,  which  reflects  the
        will of Parliament as to how such matters are to be assessed within
        the United Kingdom.  Based  upon  the  material  provided  to  this
        Tribunal, I find the Secretary of State has shown that the decision
        is proportionate, notwithstanding the  separation  of  this  family
        unit.


Decision

    31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. Mr Kanyi's appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    32. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.









Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th September 2014





