
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/20113/2013
                                                               IA/20116/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 29th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   A & C O

                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

An anonymity order applies

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but this  determination  refers  to
    them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  They appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the respondent's refusal of leave to remain as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system  (PBS)  and
    as a dependant.

 3. By determination promulgated on 3rd February 2014 Judge D C Clapham SSC
    dismissed the appeals in so far as taken against  refusal  of  the  PBS
    applications.  No issue is now taken in that respect.

 4. At paragraphs 22 to 32 the  judge  rehearsed  matters  leading  to  the
    appeals being allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He did not cite the
    Immigration Rules related to family and private life.  (The  appellants
    did not apply  under  that  aspect  of  the  Rules,  so  there  was  no
    consideration of it in the decisions under appeal.)   His  decision  is
    based on the medical condition of the appellants' child D, who  has  an
    overactive thyroid gland,  requiring  complex  management.   The  judge
    considered that D's best interests would be served by his remaining  in
    the UK and that while  this  was  not  a  paramount  consideration  the
    proportionality balance was in favour of the appellants.

 5. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on these grounds:

         Failing to give reasons or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  in  a
         material matter

         ...

         (b)  The judge concludes pursuant to medical evidence that it would
             be in the best interests of ...  D ... to remain in the UK and
             receive treatment for his overactive thyroid ...   The judge's
             findings fail to provide any conclusions on comparable care in
             Nigeria  ...   The  onus  would  be  on  the   Appellants   to
             substantiate that there is no provision available  in  Nigeria
             and that this would  amount  to  something  exceptional,  i.e.
             'very compelling' ...

         (c)  ... In the absence of evidence to the contrary  ...  the  best
             interests of the Appellants' child can be realised in  Nigeria
             with the support of his parents.  ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4
             recognises that the  child's  best  interests  are  served  by
             having access to both parents ...  In the absence of  evidence
             to the contrary it is  submitted  that  D  would  be  able  to
             receive health care while this may not be of the same  quality
             as can be expected in the  UK  this  would  not  automatically
             amount to something exceptional.  Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 makes
             plain at paragraph 24:

              There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
             children's best interests to go  with  their  parents  to  the
             Republic of Congo. No doubt it would  have  been  possible  to
             have stated that, other things being equal, it was in the best
             interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
             in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such  benefits
             as  health  care  and  education  which   the   decision-maker
             recognised might  be  of  a  higher  standard  than  would  be
             available in the Congo. But other things were not equal.  They
             were not  British  citizens.  They  had  no  right  to  future
             education and health care in this country. They were part of a
             close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an
             age when their emotional needs could only be fully met  within
             the immediate family unit. Such integration  as  had  occurred
             into United Kingdom society would have been  predominantly  in
             the context of  that  family  unit.  Most  significantly,  the
             decision-maker concluded that they could  be  removed  to  the
             Republic of Congo in the care of their parents without serious
             detriment to their well-being. We agree  with  Lady  Dorrian's
             succinct summary of the position  in  para  18  of  the  Inner
             House's opinion.

         (d)  ... The findings of the judge failed to adequately established
             that there is insufficient provision in Nigeria,  particularly
             in conjunction with ... Zoumbas which holds that while  health
             care might not be comparable this does not entitle a family to
             remain for such reasons.

 6. In a Rule 24 response the appellants  argue  that  the  judge  properly
    identified the public interest in immigration control, and gave  proper
    reasons for his conclusion that this was a good arguable case,  due  to
    the health considerations of the child, for going  outside  the  Rules.
    He reached a proportionality conclusion open  to  him,  for  clear  and
    adequate reasons.   The case did not rely upon  comparison  of  medical
    facilities in  the  UK  and  Nigeria.   There  is  no  legal  principle
    requiring the judge to determine that issue, on  the  authority  of  SQ
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 and AA [2014] CSIH 35.

 7. Mr Young pointed out that the judge made no findings  on  medical  care
    available to D in Nigeria.  He said that it was for the appellants  had
    to establish a case based on relative health care, and they  failed  to
    do so.  It would have been within  judicial  knowledge  that  there  is
    health provision to the level of medical schools and advanced hospitals
    in Nigeria.  There  was  nothing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    indicate any lack of treatment.  AA did not say  that  such  comparison
    was irrelevant.  Rather,  it  was  crucial.   Lady  Clark,  giving  the
    opinion of the Court, said at paragraph 14:

         ... this is a case in  which  it  is  strongly  arguable  that  the
         necessity for medical treatment which is available in  the  UK  and
         the seriousness of the complex cardiac condition of this very young
         child point to the best interests of the child to remain in the UK.
          However one interprets the evidence about  available  health  care
         for the child in Pakistan, it seems  plain  that  the  health  care
         available for the child in the UK is both certain and available ...

 8. And at paragraph 16:

         ... there is a decision to be made about the best interests of  the
         child in the circumstances where the treating doctor and Dr Jeffery
         both consider that this child with  very  serious  and  complicated
         heart defects who has planned treatment available in  the  UK  will
         have a substantial threat to future health and survival if returned
         to Pakistan.

 9. Mr Young turned to SQ, which at paragraph 1  opens  with  reference  to
    health care available in Pakistan:

         ... of a significantly lower quality than that which is  available,
         and that which [the  Appellant]  has  enjoyed,  from  the  National
         Health Service here.

10. And at paragraph 27:

         On the one hand, MQ can pray in aid his lawful entry and status  as
         a child with the protection of the ZH approach. On the other  hand,
         he arrived with his serious medical conditions at an advanced stage
         and, although not an unlawful  entrant,  it  will  be  relevant  to
         consider whether his arrival here was a  manifestation  of  'health
         tourism' ... this country  is  under  no  international  obligation
         always to act as  'the  hospital  of  the  world'.   The  difficult
         question is whether it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  this
         child in the light of all the evidence ...  including  the  medical
         evidence ...

11. Mr Ndubuisi relied upon the Rule 24 response  and  said  there  was  no
    error of law.  The case involved no question of comparison  of  quality
    of treatment available in Nigeria and in the UK.   The  appellants  had
    given evidence before the judge that treatment is available in Nigeria,
    but might be expensive.  However, neither its availability nor its cost
    was relevant.  AA at paragraph 14 was an authority  that  there  is  no
    need for a judge to embark on any comparison.  SQ at paragraphs 24,  26
    and 27 is to similar effect.  Questions  of  comparable  treatment  are
    relevant only to Article 3 medical cases.  In considering Article 8 and
    the best interests of the child, they have no part  to  play.   Zoumbas
    was not a health case but on the general assessment of  proportionality
    where the best interests of  children  are  involved.   The  FtT  judge
    correctly considered the seriousness of the child's condition  and  the
    continued stability of treatment available here, and needed to look  no
    further.  It might even be said that the judge did not go far enough in
    finding factors favourable to the appellants in the Article 8  balance.
    They have been here  for  some  years  and  are  properly  entitled  to
    treatment under the National Health Service.  The determination  should
    stand.

12. If the determination were to be set aside, Mr Ndubuisi did not  seek  a
    remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  He would ask for admission  only  of
    further updating evidence regarding the child D's treatment in the UK.

13. The only potentially significant item is  a  letter  from  D's  medical
    consultant dated 15th July 2014.   This  states  that  his  disease  is
    poorly controlled, and if it remains difficult  to  control  with  oral
    medication he would need to proceed with surgery to remove the  thyroid
    gland, a complex procedure, the expertise to perform  which  safely  is
    available in Edinburgh.

14. Mr Ndubuisi made it clear that the appellant did not offer  to  provide
    any further evidence about treatment  in  Nigeria  because  (a)  it  is
    conceded that treatment is available and (b) the matter is irrelevant.

15. Mr Young  in  response  submitted  that  all  the  cases  referred  to,
    including Zoumbas, make it clear that relative health care is an  issue
    which cannot be left out of consideration.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. This case turns on a straightforward point.  The judge held  (at  least
    in effect), and the appellants continue to argue, that a case based  on
    the best interests of a child  may  succeed  by  showing  a  continuing
    programme of health care in the UK, without reference to care available
    in the destination country.

18. The two sides rely on  the  same  three  cases  for  directly  opposite
    propositions.  Although Mr Ndubuisi reads  them  quite  differently,  I
    think they make it plain that while the  tests  for  health  cases  are
    different in Article 3 and  Article  8  cases,  and  the  threshold  is
    probably  at  its  lowest  in  the  case  of  a  child,  the   relative
    availability of health care is  always  relevant.   To  hold  otherwise
    would be contrary to authority, and would have the absurd  result  that
    if a child has ongoing health care needs which are served  in  the  UK,
    then  he  and  his  family  have  rights  to   remain   notwithstanding
    availability of similar  (or  even  better)  care  in  the  destination
    country.

19. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  errs  in  law,  namely
    absence of any consideration of the issue of comparative  health  care.
    It has to be set aside and remade.

20. The Appellants acknowledge that they have no case under the Immigration
    Rules.  They make no case that the  consequences  of  removal  will  be
    significantly adverse either to D or to any other member of the family.
     Taking account of the best interests  of  the  children  (one  of  the
    younger siblings also has health problems, although not so serious) and
    treating those as a primary but not paramount consideration,  there  is
    nothing to show that the interests of the children  will  be  adversely
    affected in any significant way by return with two caring parents in  a
    stable family unit to Nigeria.

21. Removal is not in any way a disproportionate measure.

22. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the
    following decision is  substituted:  the  appeal,  as  brought  by  the
    appellants to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed  on  all  available
    grounds.



                           [pic]


                           30 July 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
