
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/20426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4th January 2016                  |On 13th January 2016                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MD ABDUL HYE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hasan of Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge  Asjad  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 7th May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born 1st August 1962.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 3rd February 2012  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person settled in this country.  The Claimant had leave which was valid
    until 28th February 2014.

 4. On 21st February  2014  the  Claimant  submitted  form  FLR(M)  seeking
    further leave to remain as the spouse of a person settled in the United
    Kingdom.  His three children also made applications for  further  leave
    to remain.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the Claimant's application on 16th April
    2014 and made a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    Similar decisions were made in relation to his three children.

 6. In giving reasons  for  refusal,  in  relation  to  the  Claimant,  the
    Secretary of State refused the application with reference to  paragraph
    284(ix)(a) of the Immigration Rules which requires  that  an  applicant
    must provide an original English language test certificate in  speaking
    and listening from an English language test provider  approved  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  for  these  purposes,  which  clearly  shows  the
    applicant's name and the qualification obtained,  which  must  meet  or
    exceed level A1 of the Common  European  Framework  of  Reference  (the
    CEFR).  The Claimant  had  provided  an  EMD  (Qualifications)  Limited
    certificate as evidence that he met the English  language  requirement.
    However, EMD was not included in Appendix O of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which outlines which English language test providers  are  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State, and therefore  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    284(ix)(a) were not satisfied.

 7. The Secretary of State then went on to consider the  Claimant's  family
    and private life under Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950  Convention),  which  from  9th  July  2012  was
    considered under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   The  Secretary
    of State decided that Appendix FM could not be satisfied in relation to
    family life, nor could paragraph 276ADE(1) be satisfied in relation  to
    private life.  Therefore the applications of the Claimant and his three
    children were refused.

 8. The Claimant appealed to the FTT, as did his three  children,  and  the
    appeals were heard together on 12th March 2015.   The  FTT  refused  an
    application to adjourn the hearing to enable the  Claimant  to  provide
    evidence that he satisfied  the  English  language  requirements.   The
    Claimant had explained that he had not been able to take a further test
    because the Home Office held his passport, and a certified copy of  his
    passport which had been provided to  him,  was  not  deemed  acceptable
    evidence of identification by the test provider.

 9. The FTT allowed the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's
    decision to refuse was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   This  was
    because the FTT accepted a submission made by Mr Hasan,  on  behalf  of
    the Claimant, that the applications should have been  considered  under
    the Immigration Rules in force as at 8th July 2012, in accordance  with
    transitional  provisions  which  applied  to  persons   granted   entry
    clearance or limited leave to remain under part 8  of  the  Immigration
    Rules prior to the amendment of the rules on 9th  July  2012,  and  who
    subsequently applied for further leave on the same basis.

10. The FTT decision caused the Secretary of State to apply for  permission
    to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  although  the  application   for
    permission to appeal only related to the Claimant, and not to his three
    children.

11. The Secretary of State contended that  the  FTT  had  made  a  material
    mistake of fact. The FTT had found that the only issue  to  be  decided
    was whether the Claimant had passed  the  English  language  test,  and
    found that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with
    the law, because the application should have been considered under  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  at  8th  July  2012  in  accordance  with   the
    transitional arrangements.

12. The Secretary of State pointed out that the reasons for refusal  letter
    dated 16th April 2014  expressly  refused  the  Claimant's  application
    pursuant to paragraph 284(ix)(a) in accordance  with  the  transitional
    arrangements, which was the Immigration Rule in force as  at  8th  July
    2012, and had not considered the English  language  requirements  under
    Appendix FM.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson of the  FTT  on  10th
    July 2015.  Following the grant of permission,  the  Claimant  did  not
    submit a response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

14. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT  had  erred
    in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

15. Mr Hasan confirmed that there had been no response pursuant to rule  24
    of the 2008 Procedure Rules, but indicated that the  Claimant  did  not
    accept that the FTT had erred in law.  I noted that the FTT had made an
    anonymity direction because two of the Appellants before the  FTT  were
    minors.  Mr Hasan confirmed that as the Upper Tribunal was only dealing
    with  the  Claimant,  a  male  adult,  there  was  no  application  for
    anonymity.  Mr Harrison indicated that there was no apparent reason why
    the Secretary of State had only applied for  permission  to  appeal  in
    relation to the Claimant.

16. I then heard submissions in relation to  error  of  law.   Mr  Harrison
    relied upon the grounds contained within the application for permission
    to appeal.

17. Mr  Hasan  accepted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  refused  the
    application with reference to paragraph 284(ix)(a) and  contended  that
    the transitional arrangements meant that the Claimant did not  in  fact
    need to submit a further English language test certificate,  but  could
    rely upon the certificate that had been issued when  he  was  initially
    granted entry clearance.  Mr Hasan could not, when requested,  show  me
    where in the transitional arrangements this was stated.

18. I decided that the FTT had materially erred in law.  The error  was  to
    conclude that the Secretary of State had not dealt with the application
    under the transitional provisions.  The Secretary of State did  act  in
    accordance  with  the   transitional   provisions,   and   specifically
    considered the application with reference to paragraph  284(ix)(a)  and
    therefore the decision of the Secretary of State was in accordance with
    the law.

19. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  FTT  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant.  I had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  Claimant's  three
    children as no application for permission to appeal had  been  made  in
    relation to them.

20. Both representatives indicated that they were in a position to  proceed
    so that the decision could be re-made.

Re-Making the Decision

21. Both representatives agreed that the only reason that  the  application
    had been refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  was  the  absence  of
    evidence, to prove that the Claimant  satisfied  the  English  language
    requirements.   I  observed  that  following  the  FTT   hearing,   the
    Claimant's solicitors contacted the FTT to indicate that  the  Claimant
    had passed his English language test, and the certificate was issued on
    18th March 2015.  The FTT had declined to take  that  certificate  into
    account as it had been received after the FTT hearing had taken  place,
    although before promulgation.

22. Mr Harrison accepted that  as  the  decision  was  being  re-made,  the
    certificate could be admitted into  evidence  if  I  thought  that  was
    appropriate, and he did not object to the  certificate  being  admitted
    into evidence.

23. I took into account that I must consider the circumstances  as  at  the
    date of hearing.  I decided that the  certificate  should  be  admitted
    into evidence.  Mr Hasan had the original certificate.  It  was  issued
    by Trinity College, London to the Claimant, and indicated that  he  had
    achieved level A1 of the CEFR.  The date on the  certificate  confirmed
    that it was issued on 18th March 2015.

24. I indicated that I would reserve  my  decision,  and  issue  a  written
    decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. I have already set out the reasons for setting aside  the  decision  of
    the FTT.  I re-make  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  Claimant,  by
    allowing his appeal.

26. This is because the only issue to be decided is  whether  the  Claimant
    had achieved level A1 of the CEFR.  As there was no  objection  to  the
    Trinity College certificate dated 18th  March  2015  being  taken  into
    account, and because it was accepted by Mr Harrison on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, that this certificate indicated that  the  Claimant
    had achieved the required level of speaking and listening  in  English,
    it was appropriate to allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside in relation to the Claimant.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

There was no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal  and  no  anonymity
order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    6th January 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the Claimant's appeal is allowed I have considered whether to make a  fee
award.  I do not consider it appropriate.  The Claimant had not  passed  the
English language test when the Secretary of State's decision was made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    6th January 2016
