
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/20652/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th July 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Ms Robina Kosar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by Immigration
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of Judge Wyman to allow  the  appeal  of  Ms  Robina
    Kosar, who is the niece of a  European  Union  citizen  exercising  her
    Community Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent applied for an EEA residence card on the ground that she
    was an extended family member. In  order  to  establish  this,  it  was
    necessary for her to show that she  was  either  dependant  upon  or  a
    member of the same household as  the  EEA  citizen.   Contrary  to  the
    earlier finding of the Secretary of State, Judge  Wyman  was  satisfied
    that she met this definition.

 3. Under the heading 'Notice of Decision', Judge Wyman simply stated  that
    the appeal was allowed.  He did not specifically state upon what ground
    he had allowed  it.  However,  the  implication  of  the  lack  of  any
    qualification to his decision to allow the appeal is that he allowed it
    on the ground that the decision was contrary to Ms Kosar's rights as an
    extended family member of an EU citizen exercising Treaty rights in the
    UK.

 4. The law relating to appeals by 'extended family members' is  now  well-
    established. They do not have a right of  residence.   Their  right  is
    simply to have their application for a residence permit considered and,
    in the event of rejection, to be provided  with  written  reasons.  The
    decision whether to grant the permit is entirely within the  discretion
    of the Secretary of State.  That  much  is  clear  from  the  terms  of
    Regulation  17(4)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006, and this was highlighted  by  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC).

 5. Mr Chohan on behalf of the Respondent to this appeal did  not  seek  to
    argue that Judge Wyman had not made an error of  law  in  allowing  the
    appeal on the ground that he did. It follows that the  decision  should
    be set aside and substituted  by  a  decision  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's conclusion that the appellant is not an extended family  member
    is not in accordance with the law. The  Secretary  of  State  must  now
    consider whether to exercise her discretion in  favour  of  granting  a
    Residence Card.

Notice of Decision

 6. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside and is substituted by a  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on the ground that the Secretary of State's finding that the
    appellant does not qualify as an  extended  family  member  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


