

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/20763/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2017                       |On 23 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 [MARIA L.]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Khan instructed by Woodford Rise Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Plumptre ('the Judge') promulgated on 21 October 2016 in which  the
        appellant's appeal against the refusal of an application for  leave
        to remain based on private and family life, due to the  appellant's
        daughter, was dismissed.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Mauritius  born  on  [  ]  1965  who
        entered the UK lawfully as a student with leave valid to 10  August
        2006. An application for  further  leave  dated  4  July  2006  was
        refused on 31  July  2006  with  no  right  of  appeal.  A  further
        application for leave to remain as an unmarried partner made  on  3
        November 2006 was refused on 5 February 2007.

     3. On [ ] 2007, the appellant gave birth to a daughter [J].

     4. On 15 August 2013, the appellant was served with Form  IS.151A  and
        on 10 June 2014 the appellant's case was reassessed  by  the  Older
        Live Cases Unit and the application  again  refused.  On  25  March
        2015, the appellant returned a Statement of Additional Grounds  for
        leave based on private and family life resulting  in  the  impugned
        decision.

     5. The Judge sets out the  immigration  history,  grounds  of  appeal,
        relevant legal provisions and procedural  aspects,  before  setting
        out findings of fact from [14] of  the  decision  under  challenge.
        Relevant findings can be summarised as follows:



             a. The best interests of the  child  are  a  primary  but  not
                paramount consideration. The  immigration  history  of  the
                mother is not the fault of the child. The child was born in
                the UK and has lived here all her life for some nine  years
                at the date of the hearing and is a  qualifying  child  per
                Section 117D (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
                Act 2002 [14].

             b. [J]'s mother the appellant but not her father is liable  to
                removal [17].

             c. It was found to be reasonable to expect [J] to leave the UK
                [17].

             d. [J]'s parents  are  both  of  Mauritian  origin,  born  and
                educated in Mauritius, it is reasonable to expect a measure
                of Creole is spoken at home. [J] is of a sufficiently young
                age to adapt to both life and education in Mauritius [18].

             e. Weight is given to the fact [J] can speak, read  and  write
                French which is widely spoken in Mauritius in  addition  to
                English, both of which taught  in  schools.  The  education
                system in Mauritius is based upon the  British  model.  [J]
                will be able to  access  this  free  education  system  and
                readily adapt to it given it is based on the British  model
                [20].

             f. No evidence was adduced to suggest [J] suffers any  medical
                or physical problems requiring specialist care or schooling
                [21].

             g. When conducting a balancing exercise and whether [J] should
                have the benefit of continuing her education in the  United
                Kingdom at public expense, the observations at paragraph 60
                of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  were  considered
                [23].

             h. The respondent has fully considered the best  interests  of
                the child. Whilst there is no specific reference to Section
                55 in the refusal letter, all relevant  matters  have  been
                considered when answering the question whether or not it is
                reasonable for [J] to return to Mauritius [24].

             i. Any interruption to [J]'s education would not be  any  more
                significant than that faced by any  child  forced  to  move
                from one country to the other. It has not been  established
                [J] would suffer  any  undue  hardship  or  ill  effect  in
                attending a new school in Mauritius [25].

             j. Family members currently live in Mauritius with there being
                no evidence as to why family members could  not  adequately
                support and assist the appellant  and  [J]  on  return.  It
                would be in [J]'s best interest to return to Mauritius  and
                form relationships with her half-brother  half-sister  whom
                it is presumed she has not yet met [26].

             k. [J] will have formed relationships whilst living in the  UK
                that can be maintained from overseas [30].

             l. The appellant cannot satisfy the requirements  of  EX.1.(b)
                for whilst she has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                with her partner [E], a British citizen, the appellant  has
                not established insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
                with [E] continuing outside the UK [31].

             m. No evidence or reasons have been put forward other than the
                appellant's medical  conditions  of  diabetes,  cholesterol
                problems and high blood pressure under exceptional or  more
                correctly compelling  circumstances  for  leave  to  remain
                outside the Rules [32].

             n. The Judge considered the appellants evidence regarding  the
                future  fear  a  return  to  Mauritius  due  to  aggressive
                behaviour of her ex-husband, gave weight  to  the  fact  no
                asylum application had been made, the  fact  the  appellant
                entered the United Kingdom 10 years ago, with  no  reliable
                evidence her ex-husband would be interested in her  due  to
                the passage of time. No further  up-to-date  evidence  from
                the appellant on that aspect  of  the  claim  was  provided
                which was not pursued either in her witness  statement  nor
                in submissions [34].

             o. The appellant cannot remain on the basis of being a  parent
                of a qualifying child  under  Appendix  FM  as  she  cannot
                establish he has sole responsibility for [J] as they  lived
                together as a family unit with [E].

             p. The appellant cannot  meet  the  requirement  of  paragraph
                276ADE as she has not lived in the UK for at least 20 years
                and  there  would  not  be  significant  obstacles  to  her
                reintegration into Mauritius [36].

             q.  Medical  conditions  referred  to  above  are  not   life-
                threatening and cannot meet the high threshold  of  article
                3. Medical treatment is available in Mauritius [38 - 39].

             r.  There  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  threats  from   the
                appellant's ex-husband and nothing to prevent the appellant
                obtaining protection from the police if needed [40].

             s. Significant weight is given to the fact [J]  has  lived  in
                the UK for nine years but her interest, given that she  has
                parents of Mauritian origin who started their  relationship
                in that country, make it reasonable for her to return [43].

             t. Significant weight should be given to the  public  interest
                in effective immigration control [44].

             u. Weight is given to the fact the appellant appears to  speak
                little or no English and inevitably could be a burden  upon
                the taxpayer and less able to  integrate  into  UK  society
                than if she did speak good English [45].

             v. Little weight should be given  to  a  relationship  with  a
                qualifying partner  given  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
                unlawfully and little weight should be given to  a  private
                life  when   the   appellant's   immigration   status   was
                precarious, as was the fact in this appeal [46].

             w. The appellant cannot  be  described  as  being  financially
                independent [47].

             x. The appellant was aware that she would be required to leave
                the UK following the refusal of previous applications under
                her legal status [47].

             y. The appellant's submission that refusal requires the family
                to become broken or separated was rejected as it  was  open
                either to the appellant to return to Mauritius to  make  an
                application to join her partner, a British citizen  settled
                in the UK which would be a matter  of  months  rather  than
                years, or to return to their country of origin if  they  so
                choose. The fact [E] left Mauritius 12 years ago, does  not
                necessarily make it unreasonable for him to return [48].

             z. The appellant is not on state benefits as she is  supported
                by [E] [49].

            aa. There was no need to consider Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
                Rules as all issues raised are being adequately  considered
                under the Rules [50].



     6. The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

     7. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        which was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  The
        operative part of the grant reads:


         2.   It is arguable that the judge erred as set out  in  grounds  1
             and 2 by failing to give specific consideration  to  the  fact
             that the appellant's daughter (date of birth 28 June 2007)  is
             a British citizen born in the UK. The judge refers in  passing
             to a copy of her British passport [12] but otherwise it  makes
             no reference when considering whether it would  be  reasonable
             for the daughter to leave the UK to the fact  that  she  is  a
             British citizen; nationality is a factor which has  weight  in
             itself (see paragraph 4 grounds). The judge  appears  to  have
             taken into consideration that the appellant's  daughter  would
             have the benefit of continuing her  education  in  the  UK  at
             public expense without taking into account that as  a  British
             citizen she is entitled to such education [23].



Error of law


     8. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Jarvis  accepted  the  Judge
        had erred in law.  The wording of the policy  referred  to  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in SF and others (Guidance, post - 2014 Act) Albania
        [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) of not taking a decision in relation to the
        parent or primary carer of a British Citizen child where the effect
        of that decision would be to force the British child to  leave  the
        EU, regardless of the age of that  child,  was  the  same  as  that
        appearing in the respondents earlier policy dated April 2015  which
        is applicable to this decision.

     9. The decision is therefore set aside  to  be  remade  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal.



Discussion


    10. The advocates were able to proceed with the process of remaking the
        decision on the day as  there  is  little  or  no  factual  dispute
        between the parties.

    11. A disagreement that did arise related to  whether  the  Immigration
        Rules and specifically Appendix  FM  has  any  application  to  the
        merits of this appeal.

    12. The application made was for leave  to  remain  under  the  Partner
        Route - 10-year route. The Parent route was not  available  to  the
        appellant as she could not establish sole responsibility  for  [J].
        Appendix FM sets out the requirements for  leave  to  remain  as  a
        partner in the following terms:



        R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to  remain
        as a partner are-

        (a) the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;

        (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for limited or
        indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either

        (c)

        (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal  under  Section  S-LTR:
        Suitability leave to remain; and

        (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section E-LTRP:
        Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or

        (d)

        (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal  under  Section  S-LTR:
        Suitability leave to remain; and

        (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2-
        1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.; and

        (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.



    13. The decision maker concluded that the appellant was unable to  meet
        the requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(d)(iii) as  it  was  not  found  the
        appellant was able to rely upon the exception to the  general  rule
        for leave found in EX.1.

    14. In relation to EX.1, Appendix FM states:



        EX.1. This paragraph applies if

        (a)  (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with a child who-

             (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of  18
             years when the applicant was first granted leave on the  basis
             that this paragraph applied;

             (bb) is in the UK;

             (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously
             for at least the 7 years immediately  preceding  the  date  of
             application; and

             (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
            the UK; or


        (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
        UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
        continuing outside the UK.


        EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
        obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
        faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
        life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
        would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
        partner.



    15. It is accepted the child is under the age of 18, is in  the  United
        Kingdom, and has lived here continuously for at least seven  years.
        The issue in dispute therefore  relates  to  whether  it  would  be
        reasonable to expect [J] to leave the United Kingdom.

    16. It is important to note that EX.1. sets out the Secretary of States
        own view of the situation in  which  an  exception  to  the  normal
        requirement to satisfy the provisions of the Rules applies.  It  is
        accepted it cannot be read in isolation.

    17. Mr Jarvis refers at length to the conduct of the appellant who  had
        overstayed her leave and accepted that the best  interests  of  the
        child would be to remain with both parents but stated that this  is
        not  the  determinative  factor.  It  was  submitted  that  it  was
        proportionate to expect the applicant to leave the  United  Kingdom
        to apply for leave to remain as this  would  lead  to  nothing  but
        disruption. Mr Jarvis relied upon several authorities.

    18. The first is a reference to the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in
        Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72 at [29]. This is a  case  in  which
        the Supreme Court was considering a different issue, namely whether
        the Secretary of State's failure to make a removal decision at  the
        same time as refusing  an  application  for  leave  to  remain,  or
        shortly thereafter, was unlawful. At [29] the Supreme Court find:


             "29.  However, neither  such  general  observations  nor  such
                  incidental effects can be translated  into  an  overriding
                  policy requiring the  Secretary  of  State  to  act  in  a
                  particular way, nor into a  right  for  the  appellant  to
                  insist he does so. It is to be borne  in  mind  also  that
                  exercise of the powers to direct removal, which alone  are
                  at issue in the Patel case,  is  likely  to  involve  both
                  public  cost  and  personal  hardship  or  indignity.  The
                  Secretary of State does not "thwart the policy of the Act"
                  if she proceeds in the first instance on  the  basis  that
                  unlawful over stayers should be allowed to leave of  their
                  own volition  "as  on  the  evidence  the  great  majority
                  do....."



    19. This general proposition is not disputed and indeed underpinned the
        finding of the Supreme Court that the appeals before them  were  to
        be dismissed. Even if there was a requirement by the  Secretary  of
        State for the appellant to leave the United Kingdom  the  exception
        found in EX.1. will still apply if the specific criteria set out in
        that rule are met.

    20. Mr Jarvis also referred to the Supreme Court  decision  in  Agyarko
        and others [2017] UKSC 11 at [51] in which it is stated:


             "51.     Whether the applicant is in the UK  lawfully,  or  is
                  entitled to remain in the UK  only  temporarily,  however,
                  the significance of this consideration depends on what the
                  outcome of immigration control  might  otherwise  be.  For
                  example, if an applicant with otherwise  be  automatically
                  deported as a foreign criminal, then  the  weight  of  the
                  public interest in his or her removal  will  generally  be
                  very considerable. If, on the other hand, an  applicant  -
                  even if residing in the  UK  unlawfully  -  was  otherwise
                  certain to be granted leave to enter, or at  least  if  an
                  application were made from  outside  the  UK,  then  there
                  might be no public interest in his  or  her  removal.  The
                  point is  illustrated  in  the  decision  in  Chikwamba  v
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department."


    21. In Agyarko the appeals focused primarily on the  issues  identified
        at [2] of the judgment which are (1) paragraph EX.1 (b) of Appendix
        FM, which imposed a requirement upon an application  for  leave  to
        remain as a partner where that person was in the UK  in  breach  of
        immigration laws, a  requirement  that  there  are  "insurmountable
        obstacles" to family life with that partner continuing outside  the
        UK and (2) a requirement in  the  Instructions  that  the  must  be
        "exceptional circumstances" for leave to remain to  be  granted  in
        such cases outside the Rules. It is also said the  cases  raise  an
        issue under EU law, relating to the effect of the judgment  of  the
        Court of Justice in Zambrano as well as other issues under domestic
        law.

    22. The issue in this appeal  does  not  relate  to  EX.1  (b)  as  the
        appellant claims a right to remain based upon EX.1(a). The question
        of an individual  applicant  being  expected  to  return  to  their
        country of origin with a view to making an application to  re-enter
        has not been shown to be applicable to a case in which the issue is
        whether it is reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom in a case  in  which  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship exists.

    23. On behalf of the appellant Mr Khan refers to [7-8] of  the  grounds
        seeking permission to appeal where it is written:


             7.   The Upper Tribunal in Sanade and others (British children
                  - Zambrano -  Derici  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC),  further
                  examined the issue of the 'best interests of the child. At
                  paragraph 69 the Upper Tribunal considered the  importance
                  of nationality of the  children  and  its  impact  on  the
                  proportionality exercise. It stated;


                      ... We give particular importance  to  the  fact  the
                      children are British is a strong point  to  the  fact
                      that their future lies in the United Kingdom


             8.   Thus the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph 95, took the matter
                  to its logical conclusion when it stated


                      This  means  that  where  the  child  or  indeed  the
                      remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a
                      citizen of the European Union, it is not possible  to
                      require them to  relocate  outside  of  the  European
                      Union or to submit that it would  be  reasonable  for
                      them to do so.  The  case  serves  to  emphasise  the
                      importance of nationality already identified  in  the
                      decision of the Supreme Court in  ZH  (Tanzania).  If
                      interference with the family life is to be justified,
                      it can only be on the basis that the conduct  of  the
                      person to be removed gives rise to considerations  of
                      such weight as to justify separation.



    24. It was submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  line  of
        authorities clearly show that a British child cannot be expected to
        be removed from the United Kingdom and that in this case it was not
        reasonable to expect the child to do so.

    25. In SF and others, the wording of the Respondents  policy,  accepted
        by Mr Jarvis as reflecting that in the earlier policy, is  set  out
        at [7] in the following terms:


             "Saving cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must
             not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer
             of a British Citizen child where the effect of  that  decision
             would be  to  force  that  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
             regardless of  the  age  of  that  child.  This  reflects  the
             European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.


             ....


             Where a decision to refuse the  application  would  require  a
             parent or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,
             the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would be
             unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU
             with that parent or primary carer.


             In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to
             the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain  in  the
             UK  with  the  child,  provided  that  there  is  satisfactory
             evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


             It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where
             the conduct of the parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
             considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
             child could otherwise stay with another parent or  alternative
             primary carer in the UK or in the EU.


             The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others;


    . Criminality falling below the threshold set out in  paragraph  389  of
      the Immigration Rules;
    . a very  poor  immigration  history,  such  as  where  the  person  has
      repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


             In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision
             maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.
             If the decision-maker is minded to  refuse,  in  circumstances
             where separation would be  the  result,  this  decision  would
             normally be discussed with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
             appropriate, advice may be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
             Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare of the
             child, in order to inform the decision."



    26. Mr Jarvis  also  submitted  that  outside  the  Rules  it  was  not
        necessary to consider section 117B(vi) of  the  2002  Act,  arguing
        this section did not apply, as the wording "expect" had a  specific
        function and meaning and the child was not expected to leave.

    27. Mr Khan submitted section 117B (vi) is a  self-contained  provision
        as all the other factors referred to do  not  apply  and  that  the
        respondent's own guidance did  not  expect  the  child  to  return.
        Therefore, it could not be reasonable for the child to be  expected
        to relocate.

    28. It is important to remember, as stated above, that  section  117A-C
        operate as instructions to courts and tribunals to  be  applied  in
        cases where the balancing exercise is being conducted in  order  to
        determine proportionality under Article 8 ECHR.

    29. Section 117B(vi) states:


             (vi) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where-

                 (a)the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.




    30. The point made by Mr Jarvis is that the  wording  of  this  section
        contains a specific requirement that it would not be reasonable  to
        expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom  and  that  as  this
        condition precedent is not engaged in this case, as the  respondent
        does not expect the child to leave, the section has no application.

    31. If this was a case where the Tribunal considered Article 8 and  the
        requirements of section 117B and Secretary of State's position  was
        that there was no expectation that the child would leave the United
        Kingdom, applying Mr Jarvis' logic, it would mean  the  prohibition
        on removal in subsection (vi) would not apply meaning the statement
        the public interest did not require the individual's removal  would
        have no application. That would suggest the purpose of section  117
        B (vi) is unclear. Is it  a  provision  intended  to  identify,  in
        statutory terms, when  the  public  interest  does  not  require  a
        person's removal which actually has no effect if  the  purpose  for
        which the section was passed, namely to protect a situation where a
        qualifying child is in the United Kingdom, means that statement  as
        to the weight to be given to the  public  interest  no  longer  has
        effect? It appears a nonsense when there is  a  clear  relationship
        between the child remaining and the removal of  the  applicant  not
        being required in this section for it then to be  argued  that  the
        applicant's removal can now go ahead if the Secretary of State  had
        no  intention  of  expecting  the  child  to  leave.  The  relevant
        connection is between the child remaining in the United Kingdom and
        the child's parent being able to remain too.

    32. If the proportionality of the  decision  is  being  considered  all
        relevant factors must be taken  into  account.  These  include,  on
        behalf of the Secretary of State, the Immigration  Rules  which  it
        has been stated reflect the Secretary of States view of how Article
        8 should be interpreted.

    33. The wording in EX.1 (a) (ii) also states it would not be reasonable
        to expect the child to leave the UK but does not contain a specific
        statement similar to that in the statutory provision, although  the
        purpose  of  EX.1  is  to  establish  exceptions   to   eligibility
        requirements for leave to remain meaning, if the required  criteria
        are met, a person will be entitled to remain under the  Immigration
        Rules.

    34. Whether it is reasonable to expect a  child  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom is a question of fact requiring assessment of all  relevant
        issues including the child's legal status. It is not suggested this
        is a case involving criminality. What is not made out is  that  the
        child will be expected to leave the United Kingdom, or the boundary
        of the European Union, for the child has another parent, her father
        in the United Kingdom, who it has not been shown  is  incapable  of
        meeting the child's needs or of supporting the child if the child's
        mother was required to leave the United Kingdom for the purposes of
        making a fresh application, if this was deemed to be an appropriate
        way forward.

    35. It is not disputed as set out in EX.1.(a)(i) that the appellant has
        a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  [J].  The
        wording of the rule is clear. The focus is upon the  applicant  and
        her relationship to the child. The wording of EX.1. does not  refer
        to there being only one parent in the United Kingdom able  to  care
        for the child and clearly reflects a position in which there may be
        two parents both of whom  are  able  to  establish  a  genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship with the child, as is the case  in
        this appeal.

    36. It is accepted that [J] has both parents in United Kingdom and that
        if the appellant is removed the father will remain with her meaning
        [J] will not be required to leave the territory of the EU, but that
        is a principle of EU law  whereas  EX.1  is  a  domestic  provision
        enshrined in the Immigration Rules.

    37. It is arguable that as the requirements  of  EX.1.  are  satisfied,
        warranting it being found the applicant is entitled to benefit from
        the exceptions to the eligibility requirements for leave to  remain
        as a partner, based upon the Secretary  States  own  interpretation
        and policy regarding the weight to  be  given  to  the  appellant's
        position, the appellant is entitled to  succeed  with  this  appeal
        under the Immigration Rules.

    38. In the alternative, if it came down to a consideration of Article 8
        outside the rules, it will be necessary to consider  section  117B.
        In R (on the application of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper
        Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another  [2016]  EWCA
        Civ 705  it  was  held  (notwithstanding  reservations)  that  when
        considering whether it was reasonable to remove a child from the UK
        under rule 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  section
        117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a
        court or tribunal should not simply focus on the child  but  should
        have regard to the wider public interest considerations,  including
        the conduct and immigration history of the  parents.  It  was  also
        confirmed however that if section 117B (6) applies then "there  can
        be no doubt that section 117B (6) must be read as a  self-contained
        provision in the sense that Parliament has  stipulated  that  where
        the conditions specified in  the  sub-section  are  satisfied,  the
        public interest will not  justify  removal."  It  was  additionally
        held, however, that the fact that a child had been in  the  UK  for
        seven  years  should   be   given   significant   weight   in   the
        proportionality exercise because of its relevant to determining the
        nature and strength  of  the  child's  best  interests  and  as  it
        established as a starting point that leave should be granted unless
        there were powerful reasons to the contrary.

    39. In MA the children were nationals of Pakistan. In this case [J]  is
        a British national

    40. The question of whether it is reasonable  for  a  child  to  follow
        their parents to their country of origin is  an  issue  that  needs
        only be considered once. In this  case  the  effect  of  the  child
        having British nationality, the child's  best  interests  being  to
        remain with both parents and strength of the parental  relationship
        have to be considered against  the  argument  the  appellant  could
        return to reapply for entry clearance although  if,  as  the  judge
        identified, the appellant is not financially independent and speaks
        little or no English, although not a burden on the taxpayer as  she
        is supported by her husband, the chances of  succeeding  on  a  re-
        entry application may not be great, making it necessary to consider
        if an extended period of separation maybe disproportionate  to  the
        interference with the mother /daughter bond. It  is  also  arguably
        disproportionate if the effect of the decision had  the  impact  of
        requiring [J] to leave the United Kingdom to maintain contact  with
        her mother which would then infringe the respondent's  policy  with
        regard to not taking removal decisions the  consequences  of  which
        are that the child leaves the territory of the EU, which may be the
        case in relation to a child who needs her mother's  care  when  the
        mother cannot re-enter.

    41. Having considered the  competing  arguments  in  relation  to  this
        matter, I find it has not been made out that the  appellant  cannot
        succeed by virtue of EX.1 under the "Partner" route. On this basis,
        the appeal, which is fact sensitive, must be allowed.


Decision

    42. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    43. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 June 2017












