
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21465/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 7th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                          upper Tribunal judge gray


                                   Between

                                Imtiaz begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Samuel, Counsel instructed byHarrow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, a female citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1945,
    entered the UK on various occasions between February  2005  and  August
    2013 using valid visit visas.  Eventually and on  13th  December  2013,
    the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  That application was refused on 1st  May  2014  for
    the reasons given in a refusal letter of that date.  At the same  time,
    a decision was made to remove the Appellant  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The  Appellant  appealed,
    and her appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin  (the
    Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 19th December 2014.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated 21st December 2014.
     The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 23rd  March
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE and  Appendix  FM
    of HC 395 and those decisions have not been contested in  this  appeal.
    The Judge also dismissed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  He  followed
    the decision given in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and  found  that
    the Appellant had a family life in the UK with her adult  son  and  his
    children, her grandchildren, which would  be  interfered  with  by  her
    removal to such a degree  of  gravity  as  to  engage  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights, but that such interference was proportionate.

 4. Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that  the
    Judge had given insufficient consideration to the  best  interests  and
    welfare of the Appellant's four grandchildren aged  between  14  and  7
    years.  The Appellant had been their "primary female carer for  a  very
    long time".  The Judge  had  not  referred  specifically  to  the  duty
    imposed by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 to consider their best interests.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Samuel referred to the terms of the grant and argued
    that when considering the best interest of the children, the Judge  had
    failed to fully take into account the role  of  the  Appellant  in  her
    grandchildren's lives, particularly  as  some  of  those  children  had
    special needs.  The Appellant had been  the  de  facto  mother  of  her
    grandchildren for a lengthy period of time.  The Judge did not seem  to
    appreciate that the children's other  grandmother  lived  in  Pakistan.
    The mother of the children had mental  health  problems  and  was  only
    allowed to see the children under the supervision of both the Appellant
    and her son.  Without the contribution of the Appellant, it was  likely
    that the children would be taken into care, or that the Appellant's son
    would have to give up his employment to care for them.

 6. In response, Ms Savage referred to the Rule 24 reply  and  argued  that
    there had been no error of law.  The Judge had fully taken into account
    the Appellant's relationship  with  her  grandchildren  and  all  other
    relevant factors at paragraphs 19, 21, and 24  of  the  Decision.   The
    Judge came to findings which were open to  him  and  which  were  well-
    reasoned.  The consideration of the best interests of the children  was
    at least adequate, and the other grounds relied upon by  the  Appellant
    were no more than a disagreement with the findings of the Judge.

 7. We find that we are in agreement with the submissions of Ms Savage  and
    our Decision is that there  was  no  error  of  law  contained  in  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal which Decision is  not  set  aside.
    We come to that conclusion because we  are  satisfied  that  the  Judge
    carried out a proper consideration of  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    Appellant and her family.  As Ms Savage argued, the  Judge  came  to  a
    conclusion that was open to him on the evidence before him and which he
    fully explained.  Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the Judge had failed to treat the best  interest  of  the
    Appellant's grandchildren as a primary consideration, and  it  is  true
    that in the Decision the Judge did not specifically refer to Section 55
    Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.    However,  it  is
    apparent from what the Judge wrote in the Decision that  he  was  fully
    aware of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and her grandchildren,  and  also  the  part  played  by  the
    Appellant in  facilitating  the  children's  access  to  their  mother.
    However, the Judge was entitled to find that there were  no  compelling
    exceptional circumstances in this case and on that basis to dismiss the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 8. Leave was also granted on the basis that it may have been  an  arguable
    error of law for the Judge to refuse an application for an  adjournment
    at the outset of the hearing.  That issue was not pursued by Mr  Samuel
    at the hearing, and we will not deal with it further.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  We do  not  set  aside  that
    Decision and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and we find
    no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
