
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21016/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On 28 June 2013              |
|Prepared 22 May 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ALEKSANDRAS LIESYS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     none
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Tootell  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 21 December 2012 allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Aleksandras
    Liesys against decisions of the Secretary of State made on 20 September
    2012 to refuse leave to remain on the basis that that he did  not  have
    or had  ceased  to  have  a  right  to  reside  in  Britain  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and to make removal directions under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the  appellant  in  this  appeal,  I
    will refer to her in this determination as the respondent  as  she  was
    the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, although  Mr
    Aleksandras Liesys is the respondent in the appeal  before  me  I  will
    refer to him as the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    At the hearing of the appeal there was no appearance by or  on  behalf
    of the appellant.  I am satisfied that the appellant had been  properly
    served with the notice of hearing. The notice had been  served  at  the
    only two addresses of which the Tribunal was aware as well as by fax at
    the fax number which the appellant had given when he had written to the
    Tribunal (sending the letter by fax) after the  last  hearing,  stating
    that he was  no  longer  at  either  of  the   addresses  on  file  but
    requesting that the notice of hearing be sent to him at the fax  number
    given. I therefore considered that it was appropriate for  me  to  hear
    and determine the appeal taking account of the brief  submissions  made
    by Mr Deller.

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania  born  on  28  May  1969.   The
    decisions against which he appealed, made on 20 September  2009  stated
    that he did not have a right of residence under the Regulations  giving
    the reasons that:-

         "You are specifically considered a person who has failed to provide
         satisfactory evidence that  you  are  exercising  your  EEA  Treaty
         Rights.  By this you have failed to supply evidence  that  you  are
         (a) someone who is  full-time  or  part-time  employment  which  is
         genuine and effective; (b) a jobseeker and have a genuine chance of
         being employed; (c) a self-employed person; (d) a student; (e) self-
         sufficient; (f) have been resident  in  the  UK  for  less  than  3
         months; (g) have a permanent residency; (h) are a family member  of
         an EEA national who is exercising their Treaty Rights."


5.    The  grounds  of  appeal  lodged  by  the  appellant  stated  that  an
    appointment had been made for him to attend Wisbech Police  Station  in
    respect of a failure to  provide  satisfactory  evidence  that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights but, on that date, he had been in  Kings  Lynn
    Police Station and unable to attend.  He stated that he was awaiting  a
    new date.  He asserted that he was a jobseeker and had a genuine chance
    of employment and that he was receiving  Jobseeker  allowance  and  was
    actively seeking work.  He had subsequently  broken  his  leg  and  was
    receiving statutory sick pay.  He stated that the plaster cast was  now
    being removed and that he was available for work and would then  be  in
    receipt of Jobseeker's allowance until he found work.  He  stated  that
    he attached documents which might assist.

6.   These  documents  included  a  letter  from  Jobcentre  Plus  about  an
    application for a payment from the social fund, a note from his  doctor
    stating that he was to be off work for one month from 7 August 2012 and
    evidence that he had been in receipt of housing benefit.

7.   The appellant's appeal was determined on the papers before  the  First-
    tier Judge.  Judge  Tootell  set  out  the  relevant  sections  of  the
    Immigration (EEA Regulations 2006) namely Regulations  19,  24  and  5.
    Regulation 19 deals with those who are not entitled to be  admitted  by
    virtue of Regulation 11 if their exclusion is justified on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or  public  health  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 21.  Regulation 24 deals with the removal of those  whom  it
    has been decided should be removed in accordance  with  Regulation  19.
    Regulation 5 deals with the definition of a worker or  a  self-employed
    person who has ceased activity.  Those provisions include EEA nationals
    who have reached the age at which they are entitled to a state  pension
    on the date they cease work or if they have taken early  retirement  or
    if they have pursued activities as a worker or self-employed person for
    twelve months prior to the determination.   A  further  requirement  is
    that they should have resided in the United Kingdom for more than three
    years prior to the termination of work.

8.   Regulation 6 defines a worker but states in  subparagraph  (2)  that  a
    person who is no longer working shall not cease  to  be  treated  as  a
    worker if they are temporarily unable to work as the result of  illness
    or accident, or is duly recorded as being in  involuntary  unemployment
    after having been employed  in  the  United  Kingdom  provided  he  has
    registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office, that  he
    had been employed for one year or more before becoming unemployed,  had
    been unemployed for no more than six months, or  can  provide  evidence
    that they were seeking employment in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  a
    genuine chance of being engaged.

9.   Judge Tootell stated that she considered all the documents before  her,
    noting the appellant's evidence that he had broken his foot and that he
    was not fit for work.  She noted that the appellant had been  receiving
    public funds and said that there was a reference to  previous  payslips
    being forwarded to the Tribunal although those did not appear from  the
    Tribunal file.  She stated that given the evidence which she  had  been
    provided  she  accepted  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant had been employed in the United Kingdom  in  the  past.   She
    therefore stated that she accepted that  he  was  currently  unemployed
    solely due to his injuries which  had  temporarily  incapacitated  him.
    She therefore concluded that the appellant met the requirements of  the
    Regulations and that he had not ceased to exercise Treaty rights.   She
    therefore allowed the appeal.

10.  The grounds of appeal referred to the finding of  the  Judge  that  the
    appellant had not ceased to be a worker and went on to say that "it  is
    submitted is it  arguable  that,  on  the  evidence   provided  by  the
    appellant, this was a finding open to the Judge." Mr Deller   asked  to
    amend the grounds to insert the word "not" before "finding". I accepted
    that there was clearly a typing error in the  grounds  and  I  accepted
    that amendment.   The grounds  went  on  to  say  that  the  judge  had
    recorded that there was evidence that the appellant had been in receipt
    of various public funds prior to his accident but that it was  arguable
    that being in receipt of public funds, including jobseeker's allowance,
    was not in itself evidence that the appellant had been working  in  the
    past.  It was argued that that was a material issue and that it was  an
    error of law for the judge not  to  have  resolved  that  issue  before
    allowing the appeal.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on  25
    January 2013 and on 25 April 2013 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  directed
    that the hearing be limited as the issue as to whether or not there was
    a material error of law.  She also ordered that if  the  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing the Upper Tribunal might  proceed  to  determine
    the appeal in his absence.

 12.    I have considered the file. There is no evidence  therein  that  the
    appellant has worked in Britain nor is there anything to indicate  that
    he could fall into the description of worker under the Regulations.  It
    was a an error for the judge to state that the  she accepted  that  the
    appellant was a worker when there  was no evidence that  he had  worked
    here. She states that evidence had been sent but that she had not  seen
    it.  She was wrong to make a finding of fact on the basis of   evidence
    which was not before her and I consider that that is a  material  error
    of law and I set aside her determination.

13.    I now go on to remake the decision.  The  reality  is  that,  on  the
    evidence there is nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Regulations to be treated as a worker. I  therefore
    find that  this  appeal  must  be  dismissed  on  immigration  grounds.
    Although it has not been argued, I also dismiss this  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

Decision.
This appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds under the Immigration (EEA)
Regulations 2006.
This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date:


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


