
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/21129/2015

                                               ia/21130/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26th April 2017                    |       On 25th May 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                      anna Pavlovica (first Appellant)
                     Veselina Douglas (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOns not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Latvia born on 24th  October  1981.
    The second Appellant, her daughter, is a British  citizen  born  on  30
    June 2013.  Both Appellants received Notices of Decision dated 28th May
    2015 stating that they had no right to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and deciding to  remove  them
    under the provisions of Section 10 Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    The Appellants appealed, and their appeals  were  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colyer (the Judge) sitting  at  the  Nottingham  Justice
    Centre on 3rd June 2016.  He allowed the appeals of both Appellants for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 6th June 2016.  The  Respondent
    sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  26th  January  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal of the second Appellant on the basis  that
    she was a British citizen.  This fact is not in dispute, and  therefore
    I find no error of law in the Judge allowing her appeal.  That decision
    is not set aside.

 4. The Judge allowed the appeal of the first Appellant  because  he  found
    her evidence to be entirely credible and decided that she was the  sole
    carer of an infant British citizen resident in the UK.  The Judge found
    that the decision of the Respondent was not in accordance with the  law
    because as she was not aware that the second Appellant  was  a  British
    citizen, she had failed to consider the best interests  of  the  second
    Appellant, and the Article 8 ECHR rights of both Appellants.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in this conclusion.  He referred to the Grounds of Application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred by not taking  into  account  the  fact
    that the first Appellant was an exempt person as defined by  Regulation
    15A(6)(c) of the EEA Regulations.  The Judge had  not  decided  whether
    the first Appellant was a qualified person.  Further, as  the  decision
    in Zambrano did not apply to the first Appellant because she was an EEA
    national, being a citizen of Latvia, the Judge failed to decide if  the
    Appellant could reside  with  her  daughter  in  Latvia  following  the
    decision in Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - reg. 15A  -  Zambrano)  [2015]
    UKUT 00560 (IAC).  Mr Mills conceded that if Regulation 15A of the  EEA
    Regulations did not apply, the first  Appellant  could  rely  upon  her
    Article 8 ECHR rights, and the Judge further erred in law by failing to
    consider those rights.

 6. The Appellant appeared at the hearing unrepresented.  She indicated  to
    me that she was happy to proceed without representation.   She  made  a
    submission which naturally was not relevant to the points of law argued
    by Mr Mills.

 7. I find errors of law in the decision of the Judge as argued by Mr Mills
    and I therefore set aside the decision in  the  appeal.   As  Mr  Mills
    said, the Judge failed to deal with two issues raised  by  the  appeal.
    He failed to make any decision concerning the first Appellant's  status
    under Regulation 15A of  the  EEA  Regulations,  and  further  made  no
    decision in respect of the first Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal as much evidence
    needs to be taken in respect of the issues raised by the errors of  law
    identified above.  The decision in the appeal will  be  remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice
    Statement.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
first Appellant did involve the making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   24th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
