



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21323/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th February 2014                           |ON 18th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        Miss Abosede Remilekun Ariyo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs C Brewer, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal for the sake of clarity I shall refer to  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department as "the Respondent" and  Miss  Abosede
    Remilekun Ariyo as "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  24th  November  1983.  She
    first entered the United Kingdom in May 2008 with entry clearance as  a
    visitor. On 18th July 2010 she gave birth to her daughter  Annabel,  in
    London. Annabel is a German citizen. This is
    because of her father, Mr Ajulo,  with  whom  the  Appellant  formed  a
    relationship, is a citizen of Germany exercising Treaty rights  in  the
    UK.

 3. On 12th February 2012 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of her private life. The  Respondent
    refused that application having given consideration to the  Appellant's
    family life under Article 8 and Appendix FM and EX1 of the  Immigration
    Rules. Following that consideration the Secretary of State decided that
    the Appellant should be removed by way of directions.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision to the First Tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Dickson) which, in a determination dated 9th December 2013, allowed the
    appeal. The  Respondent  now  appeals  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. Before me Mrs Brewer appeared for the Respondent and  Mr  Hussain,  for
    the Appellant. Mr Hussain conceded that the Judge had materially erred,
    for the reasons outlined in the grant of permission. He  accepted  that
    the Judge had misapplied paragraph EX1. He also accepted  that  in  his
    consideration of that provision, the  Judge  had  omitted  to  consider
    whether the requirement for the child to be a  British  citizen  or  to
    have lived in the UK continuously for at least  seven  years  had  been
    satisfied (in paragraph 31 of the determination).

 6. That concession having been made both representatives agreed  that  the
    determination could not stand; nor could any of the findings of fact be
    preserved as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  adopted  a  wholly
    erroneous approach.

 7. It was agreed by the parties that  a  further  hearing  must  now  take
    place.  Mr Hussain advised that Mr Ajulo would now wish to  attend  and
    give evidence. That evidence would go to the heart  of  the  Article  8
    claim. The Appellant would also give oral evidence.

 8. I canvassed with the parties whether this matter should remain  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. On reflection however, given that none of the  findings
    of fact may stand and the need to make new ones, the appropriate course
    is to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to
    remake the decision.


       DECISION

 9. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  dated  9th
    December 2013 contains errors of law such  that  it  falls  to  be  set
    aside. The appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judge Dickson) to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                               Dated 18th March 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
