
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21385/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th October  2014                            |On 23rd October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              mr muhammad saoud
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Present or Represented
For the Respondent:  Mr M Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant   with  regard
    to  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Devittie)
    promulgated on 6th December 2012 by which he dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to
    remain  as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant.

 2. The path by which this case came to the Upper Tribunal has  been  long.
    After the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal the Appellant sought
    permission to appeal. That was refused by a  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 21st December 2012. The Appellant  then  made  a
    renewed application to the Upper Tribunal which was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Latter on 9th January 2013.

 3. The Appellant then sought  Judicial  Review  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Latter's decision. Permission was granted on 4th June 2013 and on  29th
    November 2013, there having been  no  request  by  either  side  for  a
    substantive hearing; an order was made quashing the decision  of  Judge
    Latter.

 4. The effect of  the  High  Court  Order  is  that  the  matter  remained
    outstanding before the Upper Tribunal awaiting a decision on whether to
    grant  permission  to  appeal.  Permission  was  granted  by  the  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal, CMG Ockelton on 16th July 2014.

 5. Thus the matter came before me. My first task is to decide whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and if so whether and to  what
    extent the determination should be set aside.

 6. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant. It  is  quite
    clear from the court file that the Appellant was served with Notice  of
    Hearing  at  the  address  that  he  has  provided  to  the   Tribunal.
    Furthermore, his representatives were also served. When no-one attended
    I caused my clerk to contact the representatives  who  said  that  they
    were without instructions. On the basis that there was  no  explanation
    for the Appellant's absence nor any application for  an  adjournment  I
    proceeded.

 7. The case before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  an  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision, taken on 21st December  2012  to  refuse
    the Appellant leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post  Study  Work)  Migrant
    under the PBS system. The Appellant had sought  to  rely  on  a  degree
    awarded on 6th July 2012 by Anglia Ruskin University, after the date of
    his application but before the date of the Respondent's decision.

 8. The grounds  argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  no  adequate
    consideration to a legitimate expectation that the Appellant  would  be
    able to submit evidence, at a later date, that he had been awarded  his
    degree. He was unable to produce it with his application because it did
    not then exist as it had not then been awarded to him.

 9. The grounds argued  that  there  is  nothing  in  section  85A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which could logically lead
    to the conclusion that "at the time of making" an application must mean
    "at the date an application is first  made"  and  that  the  policy  on
    evidential flexibility should have been applied.

10. The arguments raised in the grounds have now been resolved against  the
    Appellant in the case of Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA  Civ  754.  It  is  now
    clear that the required documents have to be submitted to the Secretary
    of State with the application. It is not  good  enough  that  they  are
    submitted later. In this case the Appellant could  not  have  submitted
    his degree award because he had not been awarded it at the date of  his
    application.  The  Appellant  could  not  win  his  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules and thus the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    error of law. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20th October 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
