
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21218/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2017                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SUHENA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Popal (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mrs Suhena Begum is, accordingly,  the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State the respondent.

2.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  her  human  rights
    claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey ("the judge") in a
    decision promulgated on 12th December 2016.  The judge found  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the rules") in Appendix FM were
    met regarding leave to remain for partners, as were the requirements of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The judge went on to find that even  if
    the  requirements  of  the  rules  were  not  met,  the  case  revealed
    exceptional circumstances, such  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    disproportionate.

3.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal,  contending  that  the
    judge materially erred in  his  assessment  of  whether  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in  Bangladesh  were  shown  to  be
    present.  The author of the grounds drew attention to the analysis made
    by the Court of Appeal in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ  440.   The  evidence
    before the Tribunal showed that the circumstances  in  the  appellant's
    case  were  not  exceptional  and  did  not  constitute  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing abroad.

4.   In the alternative, the judge made no findings  about  the  possibility
    of there being a temporary separation, while  the  appellant  left  and
    made an entry  clearance  application.   The  judge  noted  a  lack  of
    evidence supporting the  claim  that  her  mother-in-law  required  the
    appellant's care but even if care were required, the evidence  did  not
    show that this could not be temporarily provided by  the  local  social
    services authority  under  the  community  care  scheme,  perhaps  with
    assistance from the rest of the family.

5.   Finally, it was contended in the grounds that the judge's reasoning  on
    financial independence and section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act was  flawed.
    He took into account the appellant's contribution to the  care  of  her
    mother-in-law and the impact removal would have on the family  and  the
    broader community, but as there was a lack  of  evidence  showing  that
    care was in fact required to the extent  claimed,  the  assessment  was
    unsustainable.  In finding that the appellant was not likely  to  be  a
    burden on the UK taxpayer,  the  judge  applied  the  wrong  test,  the
    relevant threshold being whether she was financially independent.   The
    evidence showed that she was not and so any finding that it was in  the
    interests of the economic wellbeing of  the  United  Kingdom  that  she
    should have leave was flawed.

6.   Permission to appeal was initially refused  but  granted  by  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge, on 25th September  2017.   He  drew  attention  to  the
    stringency of the insurmountable obstacles test.   On  the  facts,  the
    circumstances  did  not,  arguably,  meet   the   required   threshold.
    Moreover, the decision was arguably unclear on what  the  circumstances
    were that permitted the judge  to  find  that  they  were  exceptional.
    Reliance upon the appellant's presence as relieving the taxpayer of the
    burden  of  providing  care  for  her  mother-in-law  may   have   been
    unsupported by the evidence and wrong in principle.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Mills, for  the  respondent,  said  that  the  judge  made  two  key
    findings.  First, he found that there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing abroad and that the requirements  of  the  rules
    were met in this context.  Second, even if the  requirements  were  not
    met, there were exceptional circumstances present which showed that the
    Article 8 assessment outside the rules fell in the appellant's  favour.



8.   Dealing with the first finding, paragraphs EX.1 and EX.2  set  out  the
    appropriate test  and  the  relevant  paragraph  in  the  decision  was
    paragraph 14.  The  facts  found  were  not  capable  of  amounting  to
    insurmountable obstacles.  Agyarko was worth recalling.  The spouse  in
    that case was a British citizen who had  spent  all  her  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and did not wish to leave.  The  Court  of  Appeal  said
    that insurmountable obstacles were simply not shown and in that  regard
    the Supreme Court upheld that view.  In  contrast,  the  judge  in  the
    present appeal thought that the test was met.

9.   The spouse in the present appeal spoke some  Bengali  and  had  parents
    from Bangladesh.  The facts did not disclose that he would be returning
    to an alien culture.   The  other  key  aspect  of  the  insurmountable
    obstacles  assessment  concerned  the  care  to  be  provided  to   the
    appellant's mother-in-law.  At paragraph 7 of the decision,  the  judge
    found that the appellant was spending 24 hours with  her  mother-in-law
    but the evidence did not, in fact, show that she needed such  extensive
    support.  No doubt the care provided by the  appellant  was  convenient
    because it freed up her mother-in-law's husband, her father-in-law,  to
    enable  him  to  work  in  Cornwall.   If  the  appellant  returned  to
    Bangladesh, her father-in-law might well have to change the location of
    his employment.   However, the rules provided an elevated threshold and
    her father-in-law's preference was not capable of meeting the  relevant
    test.

10.  So far as the assessment  outside  the  rules  was  concerned,  it  was
    apparent that the same facts found by the judge could not in themselves
    show exceptional circumstances,  or  that  the  decision  under  appeal
    amounted to a disproportionate response.

11.  Ms Popal said that the findings in paragraph 7 of the  decision  showed
    what was exceptional in the case.  The appellant's  mother-in-law  gave
    oral evidence.  The Secretary of State might disagree with the outcome,
    but the judge heard the evidence and gave it  due  weight.   There  was
    extensive medical evidence showing the appellant's mother-in-law's  ill
    health.

12.  So far as Agyarko was concerned, the income threshold under  the  rules
    was also an issue in that case and the question for the Court of Appeal
    and the Supreme  Court  was  whether  it  was  too  harsh.   Here,  the
    appellant and her sponsor were able to meet the income threshold.

13.  Also relevant was the decision of the  House  in  Lords  in  Chikwamba.
    There was no public interest in the appellant leaving and returning  to
    Bangladesh in order to apply for entry clearance.  Paragraph 15 of  the
    decision contained the judge's conclusion regarding the  rules,  before
    he then moved to  make  an  assessment  outside  them.   As  Lord  Reed
    explained in the Supreme Court judgment in Agyarko, a fair balance  was
    required to be struck and  a  structured  approach  to  proportionality
    taken.  The judge went through the components of the appeal,  including
    the appellant's circumstances and those of her mother-in-law.   Without
    her  support,  the  mother-in-law  would  be  in   difficulties.    The
    appellant's husband met the income requirements of the rules.  This was
    not a case where there was simply one factor in play.   Ms  Popal  said
    that the appellant's status was an  important  issue.   She  had  leave
    extended by section 3C of the 1971 Act.  An  in  time  application  for
    further leave was rejected because of  a  fee  issue  but  the  correct
    application was made  within  28  days  of  that  time.   The  decision
    contained no material error of law.

14.  Mr Mills  said  in  reply  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  was
    manifestly  not  a  disagreement  with  the  outcome.    The   relevant
    thresholds were not applied.  It  was  clear  from  the  Supreme  Court
    judgment in Agyarko that the proportionality assessment was required to
    be informed by factors which included the rules and section 117A  to  D
    of the 2002 Act.  The Supreme Court upheld the stringent test regarding
    insurmountable obstacles and the need  for  exceptional  circumstances,
    where family life was precarious.  That was the  case  in  the  present
    appeal, the appellant being an overstayer.  The evidence did  not  show
    that the requirements of the rules were met or that  the  mother-in-law
    required sufficient care to show that  exceptional  circumstances  were
    present.  This was not least because  care  was  available  from  other
    family members or from the local authority.  The  public  interest  was
    not outweighed by the employment and other preferences of the family.

15.  Mr Mills said that the judge commented on the  appellant's  immigration
    status at paragraphs 1 and 2 of the decision and again at paragraph 18,
    but declined to make  a  finding  about  the  earlier  application  and
    whether it was made in time or not.  This was a  material  omission  as
    the appellant's status was important,  not  least  in  the  context  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Ms Popal responded that any  error  here
    was not material.  If the appellant were an overstayer, that would  not
    be a significant factor in relation to paragraphs EX.1 and EX.2 of  the
    rules or the wider Article 8 assessment.   The  judge  noted  that  her
    status was a matter of dispute but the  decision  was  clear.   In  the
    alternative, if the judge had found in favour of the appellant that she
    had section 3C leave, that would have given even greater force  to  her
    case.

16.  Mr Mills said that the matter of the appellant's status  was  important
    and in declining to make a finding on this, the  judge  was  unable  to
    decide on the proper weight to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    removing overstayers.  The issue remained unresolved although  relevant
    to section 117B and, therefore, to the overall assessment  outside  the
    rules.  After all, if the appellant were present in the United  Kingdom
    lawfully and the income threshold met, she might be in  a  position  to
    meet the relevant requirements of the rules and have no need to rely on
    paragraph  EX.1.   The  Secretary  of  State  found  that  she  was  an
    overstayer and this was plainly a material factor.

17.  In a brief discussion on the appropriate venue if an error of law  were
    found, the two representatives  agreed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should remake the decision, not least because the Secretary of  State's
    challenge was on the basis of a  lack  of  evidence  showing  the  true
    extent of the mother-in-law's ill health and the care she required.


Decision on Error of Law

18.  The decision has been prepared with characteristic concision by a  very
    experienced judge.  With some regret, however, I conclude that Mr Mills
    has shown that there is a material error of law.  In substantial  part,
    this is the result of matters beyond the control  of  the  judge.   The
    decision was completed and  promulgated  on  1st  February  2017.   The
    following day, the Supreme Court gave judgment in Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
    11.  Mr Mills is right  to  say  that  the  Supreme  Court  upheld  the
    stringency of the significant obstacles test considered by the Court of
    Appeal.  The Supreme Court judgment also added important  and  relevant
    further guidance, drawing  on  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  and,  in
    particular, Jeunesse (2015) 60 EHRR 17.  This  bears  directly  on  the
    domestic expression of the  phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles",  which
    appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the rules and  which  is
    now defined in paragraph EX.2.

19.  At paragraph 16 of the  decision,  the  judge  identified  the  factors
    explaining his finding  that  insurmountable  obstacles  were  present.
    These were that the appellant's husband has no basis in Bangladesh, has
    not worked there and has no evident family support network to help  him
    settle, find accommodation or make a  life  there.   The  Secretary  of
    State's view that the appellant would have the necessary wherewithal to
    support him was unsustainable.  The judge found that the husband barely
    speaks Bengali and has only the experience of living and working in the
    United Kingdom and that there should  be  no  assumption  that  he  had
    developed a level of understanding of Bangladeshi culture  and  customs
    by reason only of his relationship with the appellant.  On this  basis,
    the judge found that he could have no confidence in the notion that the
    appellant would be able to support and  assist  her  partner,  so  that
    family life might be continued to a reasonable standard in  Bangladesh.



20.  There is some force in Mr Mill's broad submission  that  the  facts  in
    Agyarko are sufficiently similar in important respects,  compared  with
    those in the present appeal, to show that the insurmountable  obstacles
    test could not be met,  accepting  of  course  the  judgments  are  not
    properly reached by means of mere analogy.  What is  important  is  the
    Supreme Court's guidance on the correct approach, at paragraphs  42  to
    48  of  the  judgment.   Lord  Reed  confirmed  that   the   expression
    "insurmountable obstacles" employed by the Grand Chamber in Jeunesse is
    a stringent test.  It was not met  where  what  was  proposed  was  the
    relocation of a family  from  Holland  to  Suriname,  even  though  the
    children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary  school,  were  Dutch
    nationals who had lived in  Holland  all  their  lives  and  had  never
    visited and who would experience a degree  of  hardship  if  forced  to
    move.  The applicant's partner in Jeunesse was in full-time  employment
    in the Netherlands.

21.  The Supreme  Court  noted  that  EX.1(b)  applies  in  cases  where  an
    applicant for leave to remain under the partner route is in the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration laws, so that insurmountable obstacles
    to  family  life  continuing  abroad  will  be  required  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules.  The meaning of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    in EX.2 was found to  be  consistent  with  the  meaning  derived  from
    Strasbourg case law, so that, overall, an appellant could  not  succeed
    unless able to show very serious difficulties in continuing family life
    outside the United Kingdom, which could not be overcome or would entail
    very serious hardship.  Even where  such  difficulties  do  not  exist,
    leave to  remain  might  be  granted  outside  the  rules  so  long  as
    "exceptional circumstances" are  present,  meaning  those  which  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  individual,  such
    that refusal would not be proportionate, as expressed in the  Secretary
    of State's own guidance.  This approach was found by the Supreme  Court
    to be compatible with Article 8.  Lord Reed expressly held that in  the
    absence  of   either   "insurmountable   obstacles"   or   "exceptional
    circumstances" it is not  apparent  why  refusal  of  leave  should  be
    incompatible with Article 8.

22.  Another salient feature of the analysis is the importance of  assessing
    the  precariousness  of  family  life  in  these  cases.   Again,   the
    particular emphasis  this  is  given  by  the  Supreme  Court  was  not
    available to the judge.   Where  family  life  is  created  when  those
    involved are aware that the immigration status of one of them  is  such
    that the persistence of that family life within the host state from the
    outset would be "precarious", it is likely only to  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances that removal  of  the  non-national  family  member  will
    constitute a  violation  of  Article  8.   "Precariousness"  is  not  a
    preliminary hurdle to be overcome but family life  established  in  the
    knowledge that a person's stay is unlawful or  precarious  affects  the
    weight to be given to it in the balancing exercise.   The  significance
    of this factor depends on what the outcome of immigration control might
    otherwise be.  The public interest has greater weight where what is  in
    issue is the automatic deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal,  compared
    with, on the other hand, a person who is certain to be  granted  leave,
    at least if an application were made from outside the  United  Kingdom,
    even if residing in the United Kingdom unlawfully, so that in that case
    no public interest exists in removal.  This is the point illustrated by
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

23.  It is appropriate at this point to turn to the  judge's  assessment  of
    the appellant's immigration status.  This was contested, as the  letter
    giving reasons for the adverse decision makes clear.   The  appellant's
    response to the Secretary of State's finding that she was an overstayer
    when she made her latest application was  to  assert  that  an  in-time
    application made on 2nd May 2014 on a spousal basis was wrongly refused
    on the basis of non-payment of a fee.  The judge noted  the  issue  but
    found that he could not resolve it, save that he noted the  appellant's
    denial that she was an overstayer and found her reasons supporting  her
    claim not to have been working in breach of her terms of  entry  to  be
    credible and sustainable.  He was satisfied that the  issues  were  not
    determinative.

24.  They were, however, material.  The precariousness of family life  forms
    an important part of the "insurmountable obstacles"  test,  both  under
    the rules and in an Article 8  assessment  outside  them,  as  Jeunesse
    makes clear.  The relevance of the appellant's  immigration  status  is
    also a factor that bears on the public interest in her removal for  the
    purpose of making an entry  clearance  application  from  abroad,  even
    supposing that the remaining requirements of the rules relating to  the
    income threshold and so on, are met.

25.  Precariousness is also material to the public  interest  question,  the
    factors set out  in  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  falling  to  be
    considered in the overall assessment.  At paragraph 17 of the decision,
    the judge took the statutory framework into account,  noting  that  the
    appellant would develop her English language skills and was not  likely
    to be a burden  on  UK  taxpayers.   Her  parents-in-law  were  British
    nationals and her father-in-law was working and making a  contribution.
    The support given by the appellant prevented a burden  falling  on  the
    health and social services.   However, the level  of  care  appears  to
    have been resolved without assessment of  the  support  available  from
    other family members, including the appellant's father-in-law, who  has
    chosen to work a very  considerable  distance  from  the  family  home.
    There is also force  in  Mr  Mills'  submission  that  section  117B(3)
    requires an assessment  of  financial  independence,  rather  than  the
    saving of costs which might otherwise fall on others.

26.  In summary, the Secretary of State's challenge to the decision  is  not
    simply  a  disagreement  with  the  outcome.   The  stringency  of  the
    insurmountable obstacles test having been made  clear  by  the  Supreme
    Court, the judge's assessment of the evidence,  in  the  light  of  the
    findings of fact made at paragraph 14, did not show that  the  relevant
    threshold was met.  This is so in relation to the  rules  in  paragraph
    EX.1(b), defined by EX.2,  and  for  the  purposes  of  the  assessment
    outside the rules, regarding  whether  exceptional  circumstances  were
    shown in the case.  The status of the appellant at the  time  she  made
    her application for leave was a material factor bearing on  the  weight
    to be given to the public interest.

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   It  will  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House before a judge  other
    than Judge Davey.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, by a judge other than Judge  Davey.
 Case management will be for the First-tier Tribunal but my initial view  is
that a time estimate of three hours is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date     5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no anonymity direction or order and  none
has been applied for.  I make no order or direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date     5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell

