
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/21737/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 3 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               rexford oppong
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Dias, Dias Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S. Taylor, promulgated on 1 August  2016,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Mr.  Oppong  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis of his
    family and private life.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to Mr. Oppong as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "I am satisfied that there are arguable errors of law in  the  decision
    in that the Judge may have used the wrong  test  in  his  finding  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to the return of the Appellant  and
    Sponsor to Ghana.  Further, the Judge, in his  findings  did  not  take
    account of the previous decision in this matter as to the length of the
    Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom as he should have  done  in
    accordance with the starred decision in Devaseelan."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
    full reasons would follow.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Nath relied on the grounds of appeal.  He referred me to  paragraph
    [21] of Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 as referred to in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He submitted that the judge had made no reference to the  fact
    that the Appellant's wife had spent 46 years in  Ghana.   Further,  the
    judge had not given reasons for departing from the previous decision in
    the Appellant's case in accordance with the case of Devaseelan.

 6. Mr. Dias relied on his skeleton argument.  The judge had been aware  of
    the test that had to be applied and the decision was balanced.  Agyarko
    made it plain in paragraphs [23] and [24] that  the  immigration  rules
    should be interpreted in a sensible and practical way, and that it  was
    not an absolute requirement in the context of making a wider Article  8
    assessment outside of the immigration rules.  The judge had been  aware
    of the Appellant's wife's Ghanaian citizenship.  This was nothing  more
    than a dispute as to the facts.

  7. In relation to the third ground, and the case of Devaseelan, the  judge
     was aware that there was a previous decision in the  Appellant's  case,
     and had heard evidence from the Appellant's wife enabling him to depart
     from the previous findings.  However, Mr. Dias accepted that the  judge
     had not given reasons for departing from the findings of  the  previous
     judge.  He accepted that he had not identified a  particular  piece  of
     evidence that had led him to depart from  this  conclusion,  if  indeed
     there was such evidence.  However  this  was  only  one  point  in  the
     assessment of the evidence and this error was not enough,  or  of  such
     weight, to undermine the whole decision.  If the previous decision  was
     taken as a starting point, the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom
     since 2007, which was still a significant amount of time.

 8. In response Mr. Nath submitted  that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for all but two of the last 26
    years.  While it would have been a  substantial  period  of  time  from
    2007, this was not the same as 26 years.  That the judge had considered
    the Appellant's length of residence as being of such a  length  tainted
    much of the decision.  Taking this into consideration together with the
    fact that the Appellant's spouse had spent 46 years in Ghana,  and  the
    fact that the wrong legal test had been used, the  decision  could  not
    stand.

Error of Law Decision

 9. Having found that the Appellant meets the suitability  requirements  of
    the immigration rules, the judge turns to consideration of whether  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph EX.1, [13].  He states:

    "In considering paragraph EX1, I note that the appellant is married  to
    a UK citizen and they have submitted  documentary  evidence  of  living
    together and a shared lifestyle, including a shared  bank  account  and
    shared accommodation.  Both attended the hearing to give oral  evidence
    of the relationship.  I am satisfied that the appellant and sponsor are
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  While both the  sponsor  and
    appellant are citizens of Ghana, the sponsor is a  UK  citizen  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK,  she  has  three
    jobs in the  UK  and  has  submitted  ample  documentary  evidence  her
    earnings [sic].  The appellant has only been in Ghana for  two  out  of
    the last twenty six years and  I  find  that  the  combination  of  his
    circumstances and the sponsor being a UK citizen are  such  that  there
    would be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant having a family life
    with the sponsor outside of the UK."

10. This is the full extent of the judge's consideration of whether or  not
    there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    continuing their family life outside of the United Kingdom.

11. I have considered paragraph 21 of Agyarko.  This states:

    "The phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' as used in this paragraph of the
    Rules clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome by an applicant  for
    leave to remain under  the  Rules.   The  test  is  significantly  more
    demanding than a mere test of whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    a couple to continue their family life outside the United Kingdom."

12. I was referred by Mr. Dias to paragraphs 23 and 24 of Agyarko, and  for
    completeness I set them out here:

    "For clarity, two points  should  be  made  about  the  'insurmountable
    obstacles' criterion.  First, although it involves a stringent test, it
    is obviously intended  in  both  the  case-law  and  the  Rules  to  be
    interpreted in a sensible and practical rather than  a  purely  literal
    way.

    Secondly, the 'insurmountable obstacles' criterion is used in the Rules
    to define one of the preconditions set out in EX.1(b) which need to  be
    satisfied before an applicant can claim to be entitled  to  be  granted
    leave to remain under the Rules.  In that context, it is not  simply  a
    factor to be taken into account.  However, in the context of  making  a
    wider Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it  is  a  factor  to  be
    taken into account,  not  an  absolute  requirement  which  has  to  be
    satisfied in every single case across the whole range of cases  covered
    by Article 8."

13. The judge has stated in paragraph 13  that  he  does  not  consider  it
    "reasonable" to expect the Sponsor to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The
    reason given for this is that she is a UK citizen, she has  three  jobs
    in the UK and has submitted ample documentary evidence of her earnings.
     Beyond this there is no consideration of her circumstances.  The judge
    has made reference to the fact that she is a citizen of Ghana,  but  he
    has made no reference to the amount of  time  that  she  has  spent  in
    Ghana.  He has stated only that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    her to leave the United Kingdom.

14. Paragraph EX.2 sets out a definition of "insurmountable obstacles".  It
    states:

    "For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    means the very significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

15.  The  judge  has  not  set  out  any  reasons  why   there   would   be
    "insurmountable obstacles" as required by paragraphs EX.1 and EX.2.  He
    has not referred to the wording used in paragraph EX.2 at  all.   There
    is no reference to any "significant difficulties" which  could  not  be
    overcome, and no reasons given for why the  Sponsor  would  face  "very
    serious  hardship".   The  only  finding  is  that  it  would  not   be
    "reasonable" for her to leave the United  Kingdom.   Agyarko  makes  it
    clear that the test is significantly more demanding than this.

16. I find that the judge  has  failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  when
    assessing whether paragraph EX.1 applies.

17. In relation to the  Devaseelan  point,  when  finding  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles, the judge states that it is  the  combination
    of the Appellant's circumstances and the fact  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Sponsor to leave the United Kingdom.  However,
    the judge has failed  to  take  into  account  the  findings  of  Judge
    Nightingale, and therefore he has found that  the  Appellant  has  only
    been in Ghana for two  out  of  the  last  26  years.   These  are  the
    "circumstances" of the Appellant that he has taken into account.  Given
    that Judge Nightingale found that the Appellant had  been  continuously
    resident in the United Kingdom only since May 2007, the finding that he
    had been absent for only two of the last 26 years  was  not  a  finding
    that the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  without  giving  reasons  for
    departing from the previous decision.

18. It was accepted by Mr. Dias at the hearing before me  that  no  reasons
    had been given for departing from the previous  decision,  and  I  find
    that this is an error of law.  Mr. Dias submitted  that  this  was  not
    enough to mean that the entire decision could not  stand.   However,  I
    find that this is a material error given the weight which the judge has
    attached to the Appellant's length of residence in the United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant's circumstances are one of  the  two  reasons  given  for
    finding that paragraph  EX.1  applies,  yet  the  findings  as  to  his
    circumstances were not open to the judge.

19. The judge was aware that the Sponsor was also a Ghanaian citizen.   The
    fact  that  she  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana  is  very  relevant  to  the
    consideration of whether or  not  she  and  the  Appellant  would  face
    insurmountable  obstacles  on  return  to  Ghana.   She   already   has
    citizenship of the country where it is  considered  by  the  Respondent
    that she could establish a family life  with  the  Appellant.   However
    there  is  no  consideration  given  to  this  at  all.   There  is  no
    consideration given to the fact that she has spent 46 years of her life
    in Ghana.  I find that the failure  to  consider  this  when  assessing
    paragraph EX.1 is an error of law.

20. Accordingly, I find that the judge has failed to apply the correct test
    as set out in paragraph  EX.1,  he  has  failed  to  give  reasons  for
    departing from the previous decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the case of Devaseelan, and he has failed to take  into
    account relevant matters when making  the  assessment  under  paragraph
    E.X.1.  I find that these amount to material errors of law.

21. There was no Home Office Presenting Officer present at  the  appeal  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant said  that  he  would  like  to
    produce fresh evidence which would go to the core of his claim to  have
    been here since 1998, contrary to the findings of Judge Nightingale.  I
    have taken account of the Practice Statement dated  10  February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.

23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 31 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

