
[pic]
IAC-AH-dH-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21159/2014
                                                               ia/21163/2014
                                                               IA/21166/2014
                                                               IA/21169/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 15th March 2016                  |On 31st March 2016                      |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                ASLAM PERVEZ
                                FARIDA ASLAM
                               SAMREENA ASLAM
                                 RAFIA ASLAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Burney Legal
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd June 2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first and second Claimants
    are the parents of the third and fourth Claimants who are sisters.  The
    third Claimant was born 25th November 1997 and therefore  was  a  minor
    when the Secretary of State's decision was  made  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain.  The fourth Appellant was born on 12th January 1994.

 4. The Claimants applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  based
    upon their family and private lives.  The applications were refused  on
    30th April 2014 and the appeals heard together by the FtT on  28th  May
    2015.

 5. The FtT considered firstly the third Claimant and  allowed  her  appeal
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  The  FtT  found  that  the  third
    Claimant was under 18 years of  age,  had  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for at least seven years at the date of application, and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave this country.

 6. The FtT then  considered  the  first  and  second  Claimants.   It  was
    conceded on  their  behalf  that  they  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The FtT allowed their appeals under  Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention)
    outside the Immigration Rules with reference to section 117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)  concluding
    that the public interest did  not  require  their  removal.   This  was
    because they had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    the third Claimant, and the FtT had already found that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the third Claimant to leave the United Kingdom.

 7. The FtT then considered the fourth Claimant, who is an adult, and found
    that her appeal could not succeed with reference to Article 8 under the
    Immigration Rules.  The FtT allowed her appeal under Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules, noting that her  family  members  had  succeeded
    with their appeals.  The FtT found that it would be unjustifiably harsh
    for the fourth Claimant, in those circumstances, to be removed from the
    United Kingdom.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal contending that the FtT had misdirected itself in law by using
    the third Claimant child as "a trump card" in allowing  the  appeal  of
    all the Claimants.  Reliance was placed upon  paragraph  39(iv)  of  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The Secretary  of  State  also  contended
    that the FtT had erred by not considering EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874, and in particular paragraph 60.   It  was  contended  that  if
    parents who did not have leave to remain, were removed, then  it  would
    be entirely reasonable to expect children to go with them.   Permission
    to appeal was granted, and directions issued that  there  should  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

Error of Law

 9. At a hearing on 27th January 2016 I heard submissions from both parties
    regarding error of law.  It was contended on behalf of  the  Claimants,
    that the FtT had not erred in law.  I set out below my conclusions  and
    reasons for finding an error of law and setting aside the  decision  of
    the FtT;

         20.  I am persuaded that the FtT erred in law and that the error is
             material, for the following reasons.

         21.  The third Claimant was dependent upon her parents, and the FtT
             found this as a fact at paragraph 30 of the decision.   In  my
             view, the  FtT  did  not  follow  the  guidance  given  in  EV
             (Philippines) and for  ease  of  reference  I  set  out  below
             paragraph 58;

                  'In my judgment, therefore, the assessment  of  the  best
                  interests of the children must be made on the  basis  that
                  the facts are as they are in real world.   If  one  parent
                  has no right to remain, but the other parent does, that is
                  the background against which the assessment is  conducted.
                  If neither parent has the right to remain,  then  that  is
                  the background against which the assessment is  conducted.
                  Thus the ultimate question will be, is  it  reasonable  to
                  expect the child to follow the parent  with  no  right  to
                  remain to the country of origin?'

         22.  The FtT did in fact set out in summary  at  paragraph  21  the
             guidance given in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197  (IAC)  in  the
             following terms;

                  'As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.'

         23.  The  Supreme  Court  in  Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74  stated  in
             paragraph 25 which is set out in part below;

                  'It must be recalled that  the  decision  maker  began  by
                  stating the conclusion and then set out the reasoning.  It
                  was legitimate for the decision maker to ask herself first
                  whether it would have been  proportionate  to  remove  the
                  parents if they had no children and then,  in  considering
                  the best interests of the children in the  proportionality
                  exercise,  ask  whether  their  well-being  altered   that
                  provisional balance.'

         24.  The FtT did  not  follow  the  approach  set  out  above,  but
             considered firstly the child of the family in isolation.   The
             FtT should, according to the authorities above, firstly assess
             the status of the parents, and thereafter  assess  whether  if
             the parents had no right to remain, it would be reasonable for
             the child to follow them to Pakistan.  I find that the  flawed
             approach has infected the findings  in  relation  to  all  the
             Claimants, and therefore the decision of the FtT must  be  set
             aside and will be re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   When  I
             announced that I would be reserving my decision  on  error  of
             law, I canvassed the views of the representatives as  to  what
             would be the appropriate course if a material error of law was
             found.  There is no need for further evidence.  It was  agreed
             there  would  be  a  further  hearing,   to   enable   further
             submissions to be made in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)  and
             Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

10. The hearing was adjourned to enable me to prepare  my  decision.   Full
    details of the application for  permission  to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission, and the submissions made by both parties are  contained  in
    my decision dated 1st February 2016.

Re-Making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 15th March 2016

Oral Submissions

11. Mr Iqbal relied upon paragraph 276ADE(v) which is set out below, as his
    primary submission on behalf of the third and fourth Appellants;

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment).

12. Mr Iqbal pointed out that the third Appellant was born on 25th November
    1997, and the fourth Appellant 12th January 1994,  and  both  had  been
    residing in the United Kingdom since 4th October 2004.  Therefore as at
    the date of the hearing, both had spent at least half  of  their  lives
    living continuously in the UK.

13. Mr Iqbal placed reliance upon section 85(4) of  the  2002  Act  on  the
    basis that the Tribunal could take into account  the  circumstances  at
    the date of hearing.  It was accepted that this provision could not  be
    satisfied by any of the Appellants at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to remain.

14. As an alternative submission made on behalf of the third Appellant,  Mr
    Iqbal  relied  upon  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  submitting  that   in   the
    circumstances it would not be reasonable to expect the third  Appellant
    to leave the United Kingdom, as she had been living in this country for
    in excess of seven years at the date of application.  I  was  asked  to
    take into account the  evidence  that  the  third  Appellant  had  been
    educated in this country and was  thoroughly  integrated  into  British
    society.

15. In relation to the  first,  second  and  fourth  Appellants,  Mr  Iqbal
    confirmed  that  their  appeals  rested  upon  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, as did that of the third Appellant,  if  her  appeal
    failed under paragraph 276ADE.

16. Mr Iqbal pointed out that the first  and  second  Claimants  have  five
    children in total, all of whom are in the United Kingdom.   The  eldest
    daughter is married to a British citizen and has  leave  to  remain  on
    that basis.  The next daughter in age, has been granted refugee status.
     The Claimants also have a son, although Mr Iqbal stated  that  he  was
    uncertain of the son's immigration status.

17. Mr Iqbal submitted that the third and fourth Claimants live with  their
    parents and have done so since coming to the United Kingdom.  They  are
    a close knit family and family life exists which engages Article 8.   I
    was asked to find that it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    Claimants from the United Kingdom,  and  take  into  account  that  the
    fourth Claimant is engaged to a British citizen, and  to  consider  the
    principles in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39, in particular paragraph 12.

18. Mr Wilding submitted that paragraph  276ADE(v)  could  not  assist  the
    third  or  fourth  Appellants,  because  the  circumstances   must   be
    considered at the  date  of  application,  not  the  date  of  hearing.
    Neither had lived in the United Kingdom for at least half  their  lives
    when the application for leave to remain was made in June 2012.

19. Mr Wilding accepted that the third Claimant could rely  upon  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) because at the date of application she was under 18 and  had
    lived in the United Kingdom for in excess of seven years.   However  Mr
    Wilding submitted that the  question  of  reasonableness  must  not  be
    viewed in isolation and all relevant circumstances must be  taken  into
    account.  There is an education  system  in  Pakistan,  and  the  third
    Claimant would have  no  difficulties  with  language.   She  would  be
    returned with other family members.  I was therefore asked to find that
    it would be reasonable for the third Claimant to return to Pakistan.

20. As to Article 8 outside the rules, Mr Wilding pointed out  that  family
    and  private  life  had  been  developed  in  unlawful  and  precarious
    circumstances.  Considerable weight should be given to  the  fact  that
    none of the Claimants can satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I  was  asked  to  find  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions
    proportionate and to dismiss the Claimants' appeals.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. I have taken into account all the evidence placed before the  Tribunal.
    The Claimants' bundle of documents is extensive containing sections  A-
    H.   I  have  taken  into  account  the  submissions   made   by   both
    representatives.  I set out below a summary of the facts upon  which  I
    base my decision.

23. The first Claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on  8th  August  2002.
    He had leave as a visitor valid until 19th January 2003.  He overstayed
    without leave.

24. The second, third and fourth Appellants entered the United  Kingdom  on
    4th October 2004 with leave as visitors, which leave  was  valid  until
    2nd March 2005.  They also remained without leave.

25. While in the United Kingdom both the first and  second  Claimants  have
    worked without permission.  The first Claimant  initially  applied  for
    leave to remain in order to care for his adult  brother  who  lives  in
    this country.  That application was made in May  2003  and  refused  in
    September 2004.

26. There then followed further applications made for leave to  remain  all
    of which were refused.  There has been a previous appeal hearing  which
    took place on 18th May 2009.  This involved the  first  Appellant,  who
    appealed against a decision made on 19th  February  2009  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  At that hearing both the first and second Claimants
    gave evidence.  The judge found that the first Claimant had  lied  with
    regard to important parts of his evidence, and at  paragraph  25  found
    that he had "deliberately flouted  the  immigration  policies  of  this
    country, in order to secure education for his  children  and  work  for
    himself".

27. Notwithstanding dismissal of that appeal, the Claimants remained in the
    United Kingdom and made further applications for leave to  remain.   An
    application made on 26th June 2012 was refused on 18th July  2013  with
    no right of appeal.   The  Claimants  then  commenced  judicial  review
    proceedings which resulted in a consent order dated 5th December  2013,
    whereby the Secretary of State agreed to reconsider the claim.

28. The claim for leave to remain was reconsidered on 30th April 2014.  The
    Respondent did not accept that the Claimants could satisfy any  of  the
    provisions of Appendix FM in relation  to  family  life,  and  did  not
    accept that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE could be satisfied.   It
    was accepted that the third Claimant had lived in the United Kingdom in
    excess of seven years, but  the  Respondent's  view  was  that  it  was
    reasonable for her  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  her  parents.   The
    Respondent did not accept that there were any exceptional circumstances
    which would justify granting leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules based on Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

29. I accept that while in the United Kingdom, both the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants have  been  educated.   The  third  Appellant  is  still  in
    education undertaking A levels.  I accept that the fourth Appellant  is
    engaged to a British citizen although they do not live together.

30. The Claimants live together, with another sister, Komal who is  now  28
    years of age, and who has been  granted  refugee  status.   The  eldest
    daughter of the family, Sana, who is 30 years of age,  lives  with  her
    husband who is a British citizen.  No evidence  was  given  as  to  the
    current immigration status of the first and second Claimant's son.

31. I accept that the first, third and fourth Claimants have  not  returned
    to Pakistan since their arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  second
    Claimant has stated that she returned once to visit her relative who is
    ill.

32. As the Claimants rely upon family life, I firstly consider Appendix FM.
     It is accepted on behalf of the Claimants, that  they  cannot  succeed
    with reference to Appendix FM and I make a finding accordingly.

33. The first and second Appellants do not contend that their  appeals  can
    succeed with reference to paragraph 276ADE, and again I make a  finding
    confirming that.

34. The fourth Appellant does not rely upon paragraph 276ADE(vi) but places
    reliance upon (v).  I do not accept that the fourth Appellant can  rely
    upon paragraph  276ADE(v)  because  the  relevant  time  that  must  be
    considered, is the date of application.  That is 26th  June  2012.   At
    that time, the fourth Claimant had not spent at  least  half  her  life
    living continuously in the UK.   I  reject  Mr  Iqbal's  argument  that
    section 85(4) of the 2002 Act means that in this case evidence  can  be
    considered at the date of hearing.  That is not the case, as the fourth
    Claimant contends that she can succeed under the Immigration Rules, and
    in order to satisfy the Immigration Rules, she must have lived at least
    half her life in this country at the date of application.  It is common
    ground that at that times, he could not succeed and I so find.

35. The third Claimant relies upon paragraph 276ADE(iv).   She  is  now  an
    adult, but was under 18 years of age at the date of application.  I  do
    not view her case in isolation.  My starting point is to  consider  the
    circumstances of the family as a  whole.   The  third  Claimant   as  a
    child, is dependent upon her parents.  She does not live  independently
    from them.  It is therefore relevant that I assess the circumstances of
    the parents, the first and second Claimants.

36. I have set out those  circumstances  earlier.   The  first  and  second
    Claimants have lived illegally in the United Kingdom since 19th January
    2003 in the first Claimant's case, and 2nd March  2005  in  the  second
    Claimant's case.  Both have flouted the  Immigration  Rules,  and  have
    worked without permission.

37. If the first and second Claimants did not have children, I  would  have
    no hesitation whatsoever in finding that they had no right to remain in
    the United Kingdom, and their appeals would be dismissed.

38. In my view, in the  absence  of  children,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions in relation to the first and second Claimants are lawful  and
    proportionate.

39. I must however consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
    third Claimant to  follow  her  parents  to  Pakistan.   This  involves
    considering her best interests as a child.  I must consider whether  my
    finding in relation to the third Claimant, affects my provisional  view
    that it would be proportionate for the first and  second  Claimants  to
    return to Pakistan.

40. The Supreme Court in paragraph 10 of Zoumbas stated  in  summary,  that
    the best interests of a child are an integral  part  of  an  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.  The best interest of a  child  must  be  a
    primary  consideration,  although   not   always   the   only   primary
    consideration, and the child's best interests do not have the status of
    a paramount consideration.   Although the best interests of a child can
    be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no
    other consideration can be treated as inherently more significant.

41. It is important to understand a child's circumstances, and what  is  in
    the child's best interest, before deciding whether those interests  are
    outweighed  by  other  considerations.   There  must   be   a   careful
    examination of all relevant factors, and a child must not be blamed for
    matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct  of
    a parent.

42.  In  my  view  it  is  helpful  to  set  out  paragraphs  34-37  of  EV
    (Philippines);

         34.  In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here, and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35.  A decision is to what is in the bests  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age,  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here, (c) how long they
             have been  in  education,  (c)  what  stage  of  education  is
             reached, (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return, (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be, (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country, and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36.  In a sense the Tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question, is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  state  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the  child's  best  interest  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interest to remain, but  only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully.

43. I now apply the factors set out in paragraph  35  above  to  the  third
    Claimant.  She arrived in the United Kingdom at 6 years of age, and  at
    the date of application for leave to remain  was  14,  she  was  16  at
    refusal, 17 when she appeared before the FtT, and is now  18  years  of
    age.

44. She has been here since October 2004, approximately  eleven  years  six
    months.

45. The third Claimant has been in education since  her  arrival,  and  her
    education has reached what I would describe as an advanced and critical
    stage in that she is undertaking A levels.  According to  the  evidence
    within the Claimants' bundle, she should now be in her second year of A
    levels.

46. In my view the third Claimant has become  very  considerably  distanced
    from Pakistan, in that she has not lived in that country since  October
    2004.  Her connection with Pakistan may be  renewable  if  she  returns
    with her parents and sister, but I accept that  her  main  language  is
    English and that she is not fluent in  reading  and  writing  Urdu,  so
    there would be some linguistic difficulties in adapting to life in that
    country and carrying on with her education.  I do not find  that  there
    would be medical difficulties.  There is mention within the  Claimants'
    bundle of the third Claimant being treated for depression, but there is
    no up-to-date evidence indicating that treatment is  still  continuing,
    and in any event if such treatment was needed it would be available  in
    Pakistan.

47. I do not find that removal to Pakistan would interfere with  the  third
    Claimant's family  life,  as  it  is  proposed  to  remove  the  family
    together.  The third Claimant is not a British citizen.

48.  Having  considered  the  factors  set  out  in  paragraph  35  of   EV
    (Philippines),  I  must  then,  in  accordance  with  the  guidance  in
    paragraph 36 consider how emphatic an answer is given to  the  question
    as to whether it is in the best  interest  of  the  third  Claimant  to
    remain.  In view of the considerable length  of  time  that  the  third
    Claimant has lived here, and the advanced stage of her  education,  and
    the fact that I consider that she has no close ties with Pakistan, I am
    satisfied that it  can  be  said  to  be  overwhelmingly  in  her  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom.

49. The evidence contained within the Claimants'  witness  statements,  and
    the documentary evidence in the Appellant's bundle, indicates that  the
    third Claimant  is  thoroughly  integrated  into  British  culture  and
    lifestyle, and all her meaningful education has been  in  this  country
    and taught in the English language.

50. I therefore have to balance my conclusion that it is very much  in  the
    best interests of the  Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    against countervailing considerations, which are the behaviour  of  her
    parents, who brought her to the United Kingdom as a visitor,  and  then
    deliberately decided to remain in  this  country  illegally.   Findings
    made at the earlier appeal hearing in 2009 in  relation  to  the  first
    Claimant acting deceitfully are maintained.  Without doubt,  the  first
    and second Claimants have a poor immigration  history.   I  place  very
    significant weight upon the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    controls, which is in the public interest.

51.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  principles  in  Zoumbas  and   EV
    (Philippines) and find that there are distinctions which can be  drawn,
    when the circumstances of the third  Claimant  are  compared  with  the
    children considered in those cases.  The third Claimant is  older,  and
    had acquired in excess of seven  years'  residence  and  therefore  was
    eligible to have her claim  considered  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    which was not the case with the children considered in Zoumbas  and  EV
    (Philippines).

52. I have therefore conducted a balancing exercise,  taking  into  account
    the importance of maintaining effective immigration  control,  and  the
    poor immigration history of the  third  claimant's  parents,  but  also
    taken  into  account  the  principles  set  out  in  Zoumbas,  and   EV
    (Philippines) in particular the principles set out in paragraphs 34-37.
     My conclusion is that despite the strong weight to  be  given  to  the
    need to maintain immigration control, that does not  tip  the  balance,
    and it is overwhelmingly in the  third  Claimant's  interest  that  she
    should not return to Pakistan where she has  virtually  no  connection,
    and I therefore conclude that it has been proved on behalf of the third
    Claimant,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  appeal
    succeeds under paragraph 276ADE(iv).

53. I turn then to consider the first and second Claimants.   It  has  been
    conceded that their appeals cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.
     The fact that they cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules  carries
    significant weight.

54. I take into account the principles in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387,
    and in particular paragraph 33 in which it is  stated  that  compelling
    circumstances would need to be identified to  support  a  claim  for  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the new Immigration Rules.

55. In considering Article 8 outside the rules,  I  adopt  the  five  stage
    approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  This  involves  answering
    the following questions;

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved.

56.  The first and second Claimants have established family life  with  the
    third and fourth Claimants in the United Kingdom.  This  has  not  been
    disputed by the Secretary of  State.   They  have  also  established  a
    private life since they arrived in 2002 and 2004 respectively.

57. I am satisfied that Article 8 is engaged.   Any  proposed  interference
    with the family and private lives of the first and second Claimants  is
    in accordance with the law as they cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules
    that must be satisfied in order to be granted  leave  to  remain.   Any
    proposed interference is necessary  in  the  interests  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control, which is  in  the  public  interest  and
    necessary to protect the economic well-being of the country.

58. The issue relates to proportionality.  I take into account section 117B
    of the 2002 Act.  This  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  I place little  weight
    upon the private lives established by the first and  second  Claimants,
    because they have been established when  their  immigration  state  was
    initially precarious, as they only had leave to  enter  and  remain  as
    visitors, and thereafter established while  they  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

59. As previously recorded, if the first and second Claimants did not  have
    children, their appeals would  fail.   However  I  have  to  take  into
    account section 117B(6) which is set out below;

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

60.  At the date of the Secretary of State's decision, the  third  Claimant
    was a qualifying child because she had lived in the United Kingdom  for
    a continuous period in excess of seven years and was under 18 years  of
    age.  I accept that the first and second claimants have a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her.

61. The first and second Claimants are not liable  to  deportation,  and  I
    have taken into account Treebhawon and Others (section 117B(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 674 (IAC) the head note of which is set out below;

         (i)  section 117B(6) is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are not,  liable  to  deportation.   In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1)(3).

         (ii) section 117B(4) and (5) are not parliamentary prescriptions of
             the public interest.  Rather, they operate as instructions  to
             courts  and  Tribunals  to  be  applied  in  cases  where  the
             balancing exercise is being conducted in  order  to  determine
             proportionality under Article 8 ECHR in cases where either  of
             the factors which they identify arises.

62. It would not be proportionate to separate the third Claimant  from  her
    parents.  It is not reasonable to expect the third  Claimant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  Therefore I conclude that because  of  the  family
    life that is in existence between the third Claimant and  her  parents,
    their appeals must succeed with reference  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The view may be taken that  the  first  and  second
    Claimants have profited, from a deliberate flouting of the  Immigration
    Rules and a determination to remain in the United Kingdom  even  though
    the only leave they were ever granted was as visitors  for  an  initial
    six month period.  Their behaviour has been taken fully  into  account,
    but the overriding factor is that for the reasons given earlier, it  is
    not reasonable to  expect  the  third  Claimant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, and therefore it would be  disproportionate  to  separate  her
    from her parents, and that is  why  their  appeals  are  allowed.   The
    compelling of circumstances are that if the appeals  were  not  allowed
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, this may result  in  the
    third Claimant having to leave the United Kingdom, notwithstanding that
    she satisfies paragraph 276ADE(iv).

63. Turning to the fourth Claimant, who is now  22  years  of  age,  it  is
    perhaps surprising that  no  reliance  is  placed  on  her  behalf,  on
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) which would entail her proving, on  a  balance  of
    probabilities,  that  she  is  aged  18  years  or  above,  has   lived
    continuously in the UK for less than twenty years, but there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration into  Pakistan.   However
    it was conceded that she did  not  rely  upon  this,  and  I  therefore
    consider her appeal in relation to Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

64. If the fourth Claimant now made an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    based on her private life, then she would, it would seem,  be  able  to
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(v) because she is aged  between  18  and
    25, and has now spent at least half her life living continuously in the
    United Kingdom.  It is, for reasons explained earlier, not open  to  me
    to consider sub-paragraph (v) in this  appeal  because  the  continuous
    period of residence must have been achieved at the date of application.



65. It is clear that the fourth Claimant has established her  private  life
    in the United Kingdom since her arrival in 2004.  She has been educated
    here, I accept she undertakes voluntary work, I also  accept  that  she
    would wish to carry on with education,  and that she is engaged  to  be
    married.

66. However her private life has been established while she has been in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully, and therefore pursuant to section 117B(4) of
    the 2002 Act, little weight should be given to that private life.

67. I am satisfied that the fourth Claimant has established a  family  life
    with her parents and the siblings with whom she lives.  This is despite
    the fact that she is now an adult.

68. The Court of Appeal  in  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  indicated  at
    paragraph 25 that a family life that would  engage  Article  8  is  not
    established between an adult child and parent or other siblings  unless
    something more exists than normal emotional ties.   However,  case  law
    has moved on, and this issue was considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and in paragraph  56  it  was  accepted
    that the judgment in Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in
    the past and should be read in the light of subsequent decisions of the
    domestic and Strasbourg courts.  It was pointed out that  it  has  been
    recognised that family life may continue between parents  and  a  child
    even after the child has attained a majority (Etti-Adegbola [2009] EWCA
    Civ  1319).   The  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  there  is  no  general
    proposition that Article 8 can never be engaged with  regard  to  adult
    children, and that rather than  applying  a  blanket  rule,  each  case
    should be analysed on its own facts, as each case is fact-sensitive.

69. This was approved by the Court of Appeal in Gurung  and  Others  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8 and in paragraph 50 reference was made to the need  in  find
    in addition to the usual emotional bonds between parents and  children,
    a requisite degree of emotional dependence.

70. Although the fourth Claimant is engaged to be  married,  she  does  not
    live with her fianc�, and lives with her parents, the  third  Claimant,
    and her sister  who  has  been  granted  refugee  status.   The  fourth
    Claimant has always lived with her family.  She was separated from  her
    father only when he left to come to the United Kingdom in 2002, and the
    family was subsequently reunited approximately two years later.

71. The fourth Claimant has lived with her family  in  this  country  since
    October 2004, and is supported by her parents.   There  is  no  'bright
    line' which means that when an individual reaches the age of 18,  there
    is no longer  family  life.   I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  mutual
    dependence between the fourth Claimant and her  siblings  and  parents.
    As I have concluded that the  other  family  members  are  entitled  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  I  do   find   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to cut off the fourth Claimant  from  her  family  and
    force her to return to Pakistan, alone, which would mean returning  her
    to a country that she left almost twelve years ago.  I have found  this
    to be an extremely difficult case to consider, in relation to  all  the
    Claimants, but after careful consideration my view is that  the  appeal
    of the fourth Claimant should be allowed under Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  I conclude that compelling circumstances do  exist,
    those being that if she is forced to return to Pakistan, she  would  be
    separated from her family upon whom she is dependent, and she would  be
    forced to live alone  in  a  country  to  which  she  has  very  little
    connection.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The  first  Claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv).

The appeals of the second, third and fourth Claimants  are  dismissed  under
the Immigration Rules.

The appeals of the second, third and fourth Claimants are allowed  on  human
rights grounds, pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.




Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.






Signed                              Date: 18th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There are no fee awards.  Evidence was presented to the  Tribunal  that  was
not before the initial decision maker.






Signed                              Date: 18th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

