
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21382/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                     |On 1 December 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M C L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Scott-Baker)  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    respondent against the decision made on  28  April  2014  refusing  him
    leave to remain in the UK and to give directions for his  removal.   In
    this decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the DRC born on 20 May 1993.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 14 February 2003  with  his  three  older  sisters.   They
    claimed asylum on 25 February 2004 accompanied by their older  brother,
    who was already in the UK.  The appellant's oldest sister claimed to be
    16 but her age was disputed and she  was  treated  as  an  adult.   The
    appellant and his two other sisters were treated as accompanied  minors
    and their asylum claims were dealt with accordingly.

3.   On 23 April 2004 the appellant was served with a form treating  him  as
    an illegal entrant.  His asylum claim was refused on 16  November  2006
    and a subsequent appeal was dismissed on 9 May 2007.  On 28 May 2007 he
    made further representations which were considered under  para  353  of
    the  Rules  and  refused  on  16  September  2011.   Following  further
    submissions made on 28 November 2011 the appellant was identified as  a
    foreign national offender under Operation Nexus on 8  August  2012  and
    detained.  On 20 August 2012 he was released on immigration  bail.   On
    21 January 2013 the appellant's further submissions were considered and
    refused.  Further submissions were made on 20 February 2013 and 4 April
    2013 which were refused on 13 September 2013.  Yet further  submissions
    were made on 25 September 2013 which were refused on  16  October  2013
    but that letter was withdrawn and replaced with a fresh refusal  letter
    dated 1 November 2013.  On 6 December 2013 judicial review  proceedings
    were lodged and further submissions were made on 27  January  2014.   A
    decision to refuse leave to remain and to remove was made on  28  April
    2014, the subject of the present appeal.

4.   It was the respondent's view that the appellant did not qualify  for  a
    period of leave to remain under the Rules introduced on 9 July 2012  as
    he fell within the provisions of S-LTR.1.6 in that

         "his presence was not conducive to the public  good  based  on  his
         conduct (including convictions which did not fall within paragraphs
         S-LTR.1.3 to  1.5),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,
         making it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK".

    The appellant had two convictions in the UK for robbery and  possession
    of an offensive pointed blade when a minor but the respondent also took
    into account information supplied by the  Metropolitan  Police  as  the
    appellant had been identified as  a  foreign  national  offender  under
    Operation Nexus, a joint partnership  between  immigration  enforcement
    and the police to target the increasing  number  of  high-harm  foreign
    national and immigration offenders in London.  Further, the  respondent
    was not satisfied that removing the appellant  would  be  a  breach  of
    article 8.  In so far as there was any  interference  with  his  family
    life, removal would be for the prevention of disorder and crime, one of
    the permissible aims under article 8(2) and it was  not  accepted  that
    his removal would result in a breach of his right to private life.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    respondent relied  on  evidence  in  the  form  of  two  Nexus  bundles
    containing witness statements from a number of  police  officers.  This
    evidence is summarised by the judge at [41] - [86].  She heard evidence
    from the appellant, who adopted his witness statements and gave further
    oral evidence summarised at [88] - [149].  The appellant also relied on
    a report dated 21 November 2014 from an independent social worker and a
    psychological assessment in a report dated 21 April 2015.

6.   The judge noted that there was no dispute that the  appellant  had  two
    convictions, the first for robbery in 2009 when he was aged 15 where  a
    14 year old had been threatened by the appellant and another man with a
    knife and robbed of his cash, necklace and bracelet.  The appellant and
    his co-accused were both convicted,  the  appellant  receiving  a  nine
    month referral order with an  order  to  pay  costs  and  compensation.
    Secondly, the appellant was found guilty  of  possessing  an  offensive
    weapon in 2010 following an incident when he was found on the street in
    possession of a large kitchen  knife  wrapped  in  a  plastic  bag  and
    concealed in his jacket.  He was charged and received  a  twelve  month
    youth rehabilitation order.

7.   The judge took into account the fact  that  the  respondent  relied  on
    police records  which  showed  that  the  appellant  had  come  to  the
    attention of the police on 71 occasions between 20 January 2009 and  14
    September 2013.  He had been arrested on fifteen separate occasions  on
    suspicion of offences including criminal damage, five offences  against
    the person, five thefts, two public order offences and possession of  a
    knife but he had not  been  prosecuted.  That  was  often  because  the
    victims were unwilling to cooperate with the police  due  to  his  gang
    association and no further action could be taken.  She also  noted  the
    evidence that he had been seen wearing a green  bandana  and  had  been
    encountered in the company of other males known to be  members  of  the
    "Dem Africans" Gang which fell under the umbrella of  the  Green  Gang.
    Thirty associates had been listed all of whom had criminal  convictions
    for a range of serious offences  including  theft,  robbery,  burglary,
    possession of knives and firearms, possession of class A drugs, assault
    and criminal damage.  Three of his siblings were known  to  the  police
    for shoplifting offences and a further two siblings were believed to be
    associated with gang members who had convictions for robbery,  carrying
    weapons and possession/distribution of drugs and firearms.

8.    The  judge  commented  that  the  appellant  had  not   received   any
    convictions resulting in a term of  imprisonment  of  at  least  twelve
    months and was not the subject of a deportation order and therefore did
    not fall to be considered under S-LTR.1.2 - 1.5.  She referred  to  the
    71 occasions between 20 January 2009 and 14  September  2013  when  the
    appellant had come to the attention of the police  but  said  that  she
    accepted that on most occasions he had been encountered whilst  in  the
    companionship of known individuals, which was evidence  of  association
    and character but  not  per  se  evidence  of  criminality.   She  also
    accepted that the police had an interest in him and  had  attended  his
    home on a number of occasions but commented that, whilst  the  evidence
    established that the police had an interest in the  appellant,  it  was
    not  evidence  of  further  criminal  behaviour.    The   judge   dealt
    specifically with recorded incidents in 2013 but found that they  could
    not be regarded as evidence of criminal gang-associated  activities  as
    distinct from the last of the 2012 entries, that of 9  May  2012  which
    she  did  accept  as  evidence  of  gang-related   association.    She,
    therefore, found that the respondent  had  not  established  any  gang-
    related activity or association by the appellant since the incident  of
    9 May 2012, three and a half years before the hearing.

9.   The judge summarised her findings as follows:

         "191.    I find that in considering the evidence in the round  that
             as at the date of decision in April 2014 there was  sufficient
             evidence before the respondent to indicate that the  appellant
             had indeed matured and was attempting to distance himself from
             the gangs.  The social worker's report had  been  produced  to
             the respondent prior to the decision.  The evidence  available
             at the hearing before me reinforced the appellant's claim that
             he had indeed matured and was  no  longer  involved  in  gang-
             related activities or conduct."

10.  When considering within the context of  proportionality  the  issue  of
    whether  excluding  the  appellant  for  reasons   of   character   and
    association was conducive to the public good the judge said:

         "203.    ... During his young life he has resorted to  gang-related
             activities  with  his  peers  and  was  involved  in  criminal
             activities  and  certainly  came  to  the  attention  of   the
             authorities.  He has however  matured  and  has  realised  the
             errors of his ways and the evidence before me shows that he is
             achieving this.  Clearly it is a process and to  date  he  has
             been successful.  It is of note that his offending  has  never
             been of such a level that  any  probation  workers  have  been
             involved with him and therefore there is no  OASys  Report  or
             pre-sentence report before me to  indicate  the  risk  of  his
             reoffending in the future.  The  lack  of  past  offending  is
             therefore to his credit but to his detriment in that there  is
             no documentary evidence  as  to  the  rehabilitation  that  he
             claims to have experienced over the last few years."

11.  When considering the application under the Rules  it  was  conceded  by
    the Presenting Officer that the appellant had satisfied the requirement
    of para 276ADE(1)(v).  In the light of the judge's findings relating to
    suitability the appellant therefore came  within  the  Rules.   In  the
    alternative, the judge went on to  consider  article  8,  finding  that
    there would be a significant interference to the appellant's  right  to
    family and  private  life.   The  respondent's  decision  would  be  in
    accordance with the law as he had no basis on which to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and removal  would  be  for  the  purpose  of  effective
    immigration control.  When  considering  proportionality  she  reminded
    herself of  the  requirements  of  ss.117A  -  B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She accepted from  the  psychological
    assessment and the social worker's report that the effect of removal on
    the appellant and his immediate family would  be  immense.   The  judge
    then said:

         "205.    The past history  of  the  appellant  has  been  carefully
             considered.  He has accepted that he had been  in  a  gang  or
             gangs in the past but he has realised the error of  his  ways.
             The subsequent evidence of this can be taken into  account  in
             considering article 8 and I note that there is no intelligence
             on the appellant since September 2013, two and  a  half  years
             ago or material intelligence since May 2012."

12.  She found that the decision  to  remove  would  not  be  proportionate,
    commenting that on this basis the appellant should be given  a  limited
    period of leave but adding as a warning note that any  further  act  of
    criminality, or indeed association, might well render him  at  risk  of
    deportation proceedings and his claim to have reformed would have  been
    shattered.

The Respondent's Grounds for challenging the Decision

13.  In the grounds  of  appeal  the  respondent  raises  three  grounds  of
    appeal: ground 1, failing to  give  reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on material matters in relation to the  suitability  criteria,
    ground 2, making a material misdirection of law  in  relation  to  para
    276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi)  and  ground  3,  failing  to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters relating  to  article
    8.

14.  I can dispose briefly of ground 2 relating  to  para  276ADE(1).   This
    ground asserts that the Tribunal erred in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    para 276ADE(1)(v) on the basis that the appellant had  spent  at  least
    half  his  life  in  the  UK.   It  was  submitted  that  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules the appellant must also meet the requirements
    of para 276ADE(1)(vi), which had not been considered, and further  that
    as required by (vi) there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into the DRC.  As Mr  Staunton  accepted,  this
    ground is entirely misconceived.  It is clear that subparas (i) to (vi)
    are alternatives, the relevant subparagraphs ending with  "or"  but  in
    any event at the hearing before the judge it was conceded at [195] that
    the appellant had satisfied the requirement of  para  276ADE(1)(v)  and
    the issue of subpara (vi) was not an issue raised in  the  respondent's
    decision letter.  There is therefore no substance in ground 2 (paras  8
    to 10) of the grounds.

15.  I now turn to ground 1.  The  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  in
    relation to the suitability criteria is particularised in paras 1  -  6
    of the grounds.  In para 1 it is argued that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for the finding that the appellant's case  did
    not fall for refusal under S-LTR.1.6, arguing that whilst the judge had
    found at [191] that the appellant had  attempted  to  distance  himself
    from gangs and had matured, she  found  at  [203]  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence as  to  the  rehabilitation  he  claimed  to  have
    experienced.  As there was no independent evidence to  corroborate  the
    appellant's claim to be rehabilitated, the Tribunal's findings were, it
    is argued, wholly inadequate.  There was no adequate evidence  why  the
    Tribunal found the appellant to be credible.  The police had  submitted
    evidence that he had continued to associate with gang members  in  2013
    and 2014 after his claim to have left  gang  life  behind.   There  was
    sufficient evidence to show that he was still  associating  with  gangs
    and negative  influences  and  had  not  reformed.   The  Tribunal  had
    completely ignored that at para 59 the psychological assessment of  the
    appellant had found that he remained a present and moderate risk  while
    he continued to live in the same  area  and  may  return  to  the  same
    lifestyle and continue to associate with gangs.  Whilst  the  appellant
    might claim that he had been unable to move, there had been no  reasons
    preventing him from doing so and that even if  he  had  not  associated
    with gangs since 2012 as the Tribunal had found at [187], the judge had
    failed to take into consideration that he might have tried  to  improve
    his behaviour due to his outstanding application rather than any desire
    to change.

16.  I am not satisfied that there is any substance in  the  various  issues
    raised in this ground.  There is  no  contradiction  of  any  substance
    between the judge's finding in [191] and  the  comment  in  [203]  that
    there was no documentary evidence as to the rehabilitation  he  claimed
    to have experienced.  In [203], the point the judge was making was that
    the appellant's rehabilitation was a process and to date  he  had  been
    successful.  She was also entitled to note, as  was  indeed  the  case,
    that his offending had never been of such a level  that  any  probation
    workers had been involved with him and therefore there  were  no  OASys
    Report  or  pre-sentence  reports  to  indicate  the  risk  of   future
    reoffending.  The comment that the lack of past offending was therefore
    to his credit but that it was  to  his  detriment  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence as to rehabilitation can only be read as a comment
    that the absence of such reports  meant  that  there  was  no  positive
    evidence of rehabilitation or the prospects of reoffending  that  might
    otherwise have been in such reports.

17.   However,  the  judge  did  have  the  psychological  assessment  which
    expressed the view that the process by which  the  appellant  chose  to
    leave the gang showed a  surprising  amount  of  insight  and  that  he
    presented as being fully aware of the seriousness of the gang lifestyle
    and of the violence it produced.  It was acknowledged that  whilst  the
    appellant continued to live in his home locality, there remained a risk
    that he would be exposed to his previous lifestyle and could choose  to
    return to it and a risk that police intelligence continued to build  on
    him being present in the area in certain  places  with  certain  people
    that indicated the risk was increasing.  The author therefore  set  the
    risk factor as partially present and moderately  relevant  due  to  the
    appellant's stated desistence but  it  had  also  been  suggested  that
    residing in the same area did serve  as  a  protective  factor  as  the
    police  were  aware  of  him  and  therefore  his  actions  were  being
    monitored.  To this extent the risk of  future  reoffending  was  dealt
    with in the psychological report and it was for  the  judge  to  decide
    what weight to attach to it.

18.   The  ground  argues  that  there  was  no  independent   evidence   to
    corroborate the appellant's claim to  be  rehabilitated  and  that  the
    Tribunal's  findings  are  wholly  inadequate.   However,  the  judge's
    decision  must  be  read  as  a  whole.   She  took  into  account  the
    independent social work report and the  psychological  report  together
    with her findings in  relation  to  the  appellant's  activities.   The
    judge's finding that the appellant had matured and  was  attempting  to
    distance himself from gangs [191] was a finding of fact  properly  open
    to her.  It is also argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence that the appellant continued to associate with gang members in
    2013 and 2014 but these issues were specifically  considered  in  [187]
    where the judge dealt with the reports for 2013 explaining why she  did
    not consider that this was evidence of gang-related association.

19.  It is further argued that the psychological  evidence  found  that  the
    appellant remained a present and moderate risk while he  lived  in  the
    same area.  In fact as set out in [159] the report says that one of the
    risk factors potentially relevant to  reoffending,  problems  with  the
    appellant's living situation  was  "partially  present  and  moderately
    relevant".  Here the judge correctly summarised para 6.17(iii)  of  the
    report where it was also  said  that  the  risk  factors  were  largely
    historical and that there were a high number of protective factors.  It
    is then argued that there had been no reason preventing  the  appellant
    from moving from his home area but he had failed to do so  but  at  the
    hearing that issue was considered by the judge, the presenting  officer
    noting that the appellant was trying to move away from gangs but  still
    living in his local area but also accepting that  the  evidence  showed
    that it was difficult for him to arrange to move  away  [179].   Whilst
    this was not a formal concession by  the  presenting  officer,  it  was
    clearly a  sensible  point  that  he  was  making,  not  least  as  the
    appellant's accommodation was provided by Social Services and  to  this
    extent he had a limited, if any, choice about where he lived.

20.  Paragraph 2 of ground I appears to  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the evidence from the police appropriately and that there  was
    clear evidence that the appellant  had  been  involved  in  undesirable
    conduct and in criminal activity which included violence  but  on  many
    occasions charges were  not  pursued  as  the  victims  withdrew  their
    allegations.  The appellant, so it is argued, had admitted  involvement
    in offences for which he had not yet been arrested or that had not been
    proceeded with [44(25)] and that therefore it was wholly inadequate for
    the  Tribunal  to  find  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    criminality when there  was  substantial  evidence  of  involvement  in
    criminal activities.  However, the issue for the judge was whether  the
    respondent had established that the application should be refused under
    the suitability grounds at S-LTR.1.6.  When reaching this decision  the
    judge took into account the appellant's convictions, both when he was a
    minor.  She dealt with the evidence in the incident reports at [183]  -
    [187].  It was accepted at the hearing that the evidence  was  historic
    [188].  It was for the judge to assess what inferences  could  properly
    be drawn from the evidence and whether and to what extent there was any
    substance in the appellant's assertions that  he  had  broken  free  of
    involvement with gangs and was attempting to rehabilitate  himself.   I
    am satisfied that the judge properly directed herself on the law citing
    the principles set out in Farquharson  (removal  -  proof  of  conduct)
    [2013] UKUT 00146, which reflects the guidance given by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Al-Sirri v Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 222.

21.  Paragraph 3 of ground I seeks to challenge the emphasis placed  on  the
    social worker's report to demonstrate that the  appellant  has  matured
    and is no longer involved in gangs.  It is argued that the  report  was
    unreliable as it relied on the appellant telling the social worker that
    he had not been in trouble since 2010  when  he  had  continued  to  be
    involved in criminality in 2011 - 2013.  The  social  worker  had  also
    found that the appellant had no family in the DRC whereas  his  parents
    remained there and he had failed to inform her that he was  in  contact
    with them.  It is further argued that the appellant sought  to  deceive
    the Tribunal about his involvement with gangs, claiming no  involvement
    since 2011 which the Tribunal had found not to be true and  his  family
    had also sought to deceive the authorities  about  contact  with  their
    parents, showing that they were not credible  and  that  these  matters
    cast serious doubts upon  the  appellant's  assessment  by  the  social
    worker. However, as already referred to in relation to paras 1 and 2 of
    this ground, the appellant's convictions were in 2009 and 2010.   I  am
    not satisfied that there is any substance  in  the  argument  that  the
    social worker was misled by the appellant or that an experienced social
    worker would have been unaware that the appellant might wish to  put  a
    gloss on his account of events to her.  There  was  extensive  evidence
    before judge about the appellant's involvement in gangs and it was  for
    her to assess what weight  should  be  given  to  the  social  worker's
    report.

22.  Paras 4 to 6 of ground I argue that  the  appellant  has  at  no  point
    expressed remorse for his behaviour and that his attitude  suggests  he
    sees himself as  a  victim  and  even  if  he  has  not  reoffended  or
    associated with gangs  since  2012,  he  has  demonstrated  undesirable
    conduct and it is proportionate to remove him  because  of  a  risk  of
    reoffending and causing possible harm to the  public.   However,  these
    grounds raise issues of fact and in substance, like the other  grounds,
    are seeking to reargue issues of fact.  There is  nothing  to  indicate
    that these factors were not  taken  into  account  by  the  judge  when
    assessing the evidence.

23.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge was entitled to find  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of para 276ADE(1) and  that  the  appeal
    fell to be allowed under the Rules.  In  these  circumstances  I  shall
    deal relatively shortly with ground 3, which  seeks  to  challenge  the
    judge's reasoning when  allowing  the  appeal  in  the  alternative  on
    article 8 grounds.  It is argued at para 12 that the  judge  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for her finding  on  proportionality  and  was
    wrong to find at [197] that the appellant and his family had lost touch
    with his parents whereas he had admitted [31] that they were in contact
    with them.  However, it was not in dispute that the appellant  and  his
    siblings had had contact with their  parents  in  2008.   This  is  not
    inconsistent with them subsequently losing contact.  In this context at
    [197] the judge said: "I accept the evidence concerning the appellant's
    parents and that they and the family have lost touch with them."   This
    paragraph also argues that the appellant's siblings  failed  to  attend
    the hearing or provide any evidence and this casts serious doubts about
    their claims regarding their close relationship but this wholly ignores
    [3] - [4] where the judge said that she heard oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's family members identifying his three sisters.  She recorded
    that there was no summary of the evidence in the determination but  the
    witnesses spoke in one voice stating that they were a close family unit
    in the UK and had no ties now to the DRC.

24.  In para 13 it is argued that the social worker  was  not  qualified  to
    make the assessment that the appellant could not return to the  DRC  as
    her report was based on inadequate facts and there  was  no  sufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that the appellant  and  his  family  would  be
    emotionally harmed if he were to be removed.  It is further argued that
    emotional harm was not sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh or that there would be compelling  circumstances  and  the
    consequences referred to are nothing more  than  the  ordinary  effects
    separation would have on any  family.   Whatever  the  merits  of  this
    paragraph as a submission of fact, I am not satisfied  that  it  raises
    any arguable point of  law  capable  of  successfully  challenging  the
    judge's analysis and her conclusions under article 8.   The  judge  was
    entitled to  rely  on  the  psychological  assessment  and  the  social
    worker's report when considering the effect of removal on the appellant
    and his immediate family.

25.  Finally, at para 14 the respondent argues that  the  finding  at  [202]
    that the appellant was not financially independent was due entirely  to
    his own making and he  had  shown  no  desire  or  attempts  to  obtain
    employment; he was  not  financially  independent  and  his  precarious
    immigration status should be held against him and further he had been a
    burden to taxpayers through the constant encounters he had had with the
    police and the courts.  However, there was evidence of the  appellant's
    attempts to obtain voluntary work as a first step to putting himself in
    a position to obtain employment should he be granted leave to remain as
    set out by the judge at [122] - [123].  Again, I am not satisfied  that
    this ground raises any arguable point of law capable of undermining the
    judge's assessment of the evidence in relation to proportionality.

26.  In summary,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly open to her for the reasons she gave.  It may well
    be that a different Tribunal might have reached a  different  decision.
    There was evidence more than capable of supporting a finding  that  the
    presence of the appellant in the UK was not  conducive  to  the  public
    good because of his conduct, character and associations but it was  for
    the  judge  to  decide  whether  that  had  been  established  in   the
    appellant's particular circumstances.

27.  In the light of the fact that his convictions were when  the  appellant
    was a minor, the evidence of  gang  involvement  was  historic  to  the
    extent that the judge accepted that he had not been  involved  in  such
    activities since May 2012 and the fact that the judge accepted that the
    appellant had dissociated himself from  gangs  and  to  date  had  been
    successful provides a reasonable and rational basis on which she  could
    properly conclude that the position had been reached when  it  was  not
    shown that the appellant's presence was not  conducive  to  the  public
    good.  As I have already indicated, in substance, the grounds  seek  to
    reopen and reargue issues of fact where the judge has reached  findings
    and conclusions properly open to her for the reasons she gave.



Decision

28.  For these reasons the grounds do not satisfy me that  the  judge  erred
    in law such that the decision should  be  set  aside.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision therefore stands.  The anonymity order  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal remains in force


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
