
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21228/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th February 2014                           |On 4th March 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mr Alex Boateng Omari
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders (Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr F Bajwa (Bajwa & Co Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, Mr Alex Boateng Omari is a national of  Ghana  born  on
    5th December 1980.  He was granted leave to enter the UK as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 13th April 2010 until 25th August 2012.


 2. On 5th April 2012 he applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant but his application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 21st September 2012 under paragraph 245FD  and  a
    decision to remove was made under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.


 3. The basis for that  refusal  was  that  the  Respondent  had  made  his
    application under Tier 1 on 5th April 2012 however from  verifying  the
    date of award the documentation provided  confirmed  the  date  of  the
    award was 24th July  2012.   The  decision  cited  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of NO (Post-Study Work - award needed by date of  application)
    Nigeria [2008] UKIAT 0054 that the applicant must have been awarded the
    qualification at the date of the application and that  the  Immigration
    Rules state that the date of the award must be within the twelve months
    directly prior to the date of the application and the date of the award
    is after that date.   The  claimed  points  under  Appendix  B  English
    language were refused due to the failure to meet  the  requirement  for
    the eligible award.


 4. He exercised his right to appeal  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parker) in a  determination
    promulgated on  19th  December  2012.   He  set  out  his  findings  at
    paragraphs 6-13 as follows:

         "6.  I have had regard to all the evidence before me including that
             submitted at the hearing.  I have considered the  evidence  of
             the  Appellant's  qualification.   A  letter  from  Roehampton
             University  dated  25th  July  2012  was   included   in   the
             Respondent's bundle at C1.  It was addressed to the  Appellant
             at an address in Italy.  The letter stated:


                  'Dear Mr Omari,


                  I am pleased to inform you that  the  Postgraduate  Awards
                  and  Progression  Board  met  on  24th   July   2012   and
                  recommended that you be  awarded  a  masters  in  business
                  administration (merit) ...'

         7.   Although this document was included in the Respondent's bundle
             it could not have been submitted with the  application  as  it
             postdates the date of the application.


         8.   Further evidence of the Appellant's qualification included his
             academic   profile   which   was   printed   from   Roehampton
             University's database.   This  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
             successfully completed his masters in business  administration
             at the City Banking College and that  his  last  modules  were
             passed  in  February  2012.    However   the   'status   date'
             (presumably the date upon  which  the  paper  is  printed)  is
             recorded as 24th July 2012.  There was nothing on the  profile
             to confirm what was meant by  'status  date'.   The  Appellant
             further submitted a letter dated 4th April 2012 from the  City
             Banking College which reads as follows:


                  'This serves to confirm that the above  commenced  classes
                  on  12th  April  2010  and  completed  the  University  of
                  Roehampton master in business administration programme  on
                  23rd February 2012.


                  This will be  further  confirmed  about  his  progress  at
                  University Examinations Board which will be held  in  July
                  2012.  Thereafter he will be awarded his certificate.'


             Attached to  this  were  marking  sheets  in  respect  of  the
             Appellant's dissertation and  which  was  signed  off  by  the
             markers on 22nd February 2012 and 16th February 2012.


         9.   An extract of the policy, from partway through paragraph 62 to
             paragraph 68 was submitted and relied upon by  the  Appellant.
             It reads as follows:


                  'We will not accept provisional certificates.


                  If the certificate has yet to  be  issued,  the  applicant
                  will be unable to provide the original certificate of  the
                  award.  In these circumstances the applicant must provide


                  (ii) an original letter from the institution at which  the
                      applicant   studied    towards    his/her    eligible
                      qualification.  The letter must be an original letter
                      (not a copy) on the official letter-headed  paper  of
                      the UK institution at which  the  applicant  studied.
                      It must have been issued by  an  authorised  official
                      and must confirm the:


                         . applicant's name;


                         . title of the qualification;

                         . date of the award (as defined in paragraph 79  of
                           the guidance notes);

                         . the body awarding the qualification;

                         . explain why the applicant is  unable  to  provide
                           their original certificate of award; and

                         . confirm that the certificate will be issued.'


         10.  I have  considered  whether  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
             Appellant of his qualification is adequate so as to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules and/or policy  guidance.
             Whilst I am satisfied that the Appellant completed his  course
             in February 2012, the decision by the awarding body  to  award
             his qualification was not made until July  2012.   The  letter
             dated  4th  April  2012  from  his  college  states  that  the
             Appellant completed his programme on 23rd  February  2012  but
             goes on to say (verbatim):


                  '... This will be further confirmed about his progress  at
                  University Examinations Board which will be held  in  July
                  2012.  Thereafter he will be awarded his certificate.'


         11.   This  paragraph  is  not  particularly  literate  or   clear.
             However, it appears that the Examinations Board would meet  in
             July 2012 to 'confirm his progress' and a certificate would be
             awarded thereafter.  In the letter, dated 25th July 2012, from
             the Appellant's college (at C1 in the Respondent's bundle)  it
             is stated that the Postgraduate Awards and Progression Board:


                  'met on 24th July 2012 and recommended that you be awarded
                  a masters in business administration (merit).'


         12.  I find that this is evidence that no final decision  was  made
             as to whether or  not  the  Appellant  would  be  awarded  his
             qualification until the meeting of the Board.   Accordingly  I
             am not satisfied that this is a situation where the  Appellant
             had been awarded his qualification but  had  not  been  issued
             with a certificate by the time he applied for further leave to
             remain.  I am not satisfied  that  he  has  been  awarded  his
             qualification  at  the  date  of  the   application   as   the
             Examination/Postgraduate Awards and Progression Board had  not
             met - and did not meet until several months later.


         13.  I further note  that  the  Respondent's  policy  requires  any
             letter from the institution to  explain  the  reason  why  the
             applicant was unable to provide the  original  certificate  of
             award.  The letters from Roehampton University confirm,  inter
             alia,  that  no  certificate  (original  or   otherwise)   was
             available as the qualification had not been awarded.  I am not
             satisfied that  the  policy  assists  this  Appellant  as  his
             college had not decided to award his  qualification  when  the
             application was made."

 5. Thus he dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human
    rights grounds (at paragraphs 14-15).


 6. He did not deal with  the  appeal  against  removal  decision  made  in
    respect  of  him,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal the decision and  permission
    was refused by FFT Judge  Sommerville  on  17th  January  2013  but  on
    further submission to the Upper Tribunal,  permission  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 22nd March 2013.

 8. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Monson), and the Respondent secured a decision in  his  favour  in  the
    Upper Tribunal in respect of his appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, because that Tribunal followed the approach adopted  by  Blake
    J, President and Upper Tribunal Judge Coker in Khatel and Others (s85A;
    effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC).

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against the determination of the Upper Tribunal.   At  the  time
    she did so, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    granted by the Upper Tribunal in respect of Khatel.   The  Respondent's
    grounds of application reiterated the critique of Khatel  contained  in
    the grounds of application submitted in that case.

10. As set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  Others
    (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC) at paragraphs  3-
    5, 200 applications for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    were made by the Secretary of State  in respect  of  determinations  of
    the Upper Tribunal, allowing  appeals (or dismissing  the  Respondent's
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the Secretary of State  against  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, applying Khatel.

11. Since it was known that permission to appeal in Khatel had been granted
    (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the hearing
    in  that  court),  it  was  considered  appropriate  to  consider   the
    Respondent's permission applications once the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal became known.

12. On 25th June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of State's
    appeal against the Upper Tribunal's determinations in  Khatel  and  the
    cases of three other immigrants: Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    754.

13. As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the Respondent had applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to Rule 45(1)(b) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to  appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision  in  accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-




                             ...


                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a  material  effect  on  the
                      decision."

14. The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and re-make the decisions in the appeals by dismissing them.
     The directions made plain that the Appellants would be (or continue to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

15. Further directions were sent out by the Upper Tribunal as  follows:  On
    21st January 2014, the Tribunal  issued  directions  in  the  following
    terms:


    1.   Any directions previously given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  these
         proceedings are hereby revoked.


    2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing in the Upper
         Tribunal on the basis that the issues  to  be  considered  at  that
         hearing will be as follows:


         (a)  whether the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  made  by
             reference to the determination in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;
             effect of continuing application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),
             should be set aside in light of the judgment of the  Court  of
             Appeal in Raju and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 (as to  which,  see  Nasim  and
             Others (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]  UKUT  00610
             (IAC));


         (b)  if so, whether there is an error of law in  the  determination
             of the First-tier Tribunal, such that the determination should
             be set aside; and


         (c)  if so, how the decision in the appeal against the  immigration
             decisions should be re-made (see Nasim and Others).


    3.   The party who was the Appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         directed to serve on the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent,  no
         later than seven days before the forthcoming hearing,  all  written
         submissions and written evidence (including witness statements)  on
         the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon which they  will  seek  to
         rely at that hearing (where necessary, complying with  Rule  15(2A)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

16. In compliance with those  directions  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    further evidence and submissions  were  received  by  the  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Respondent on 17th February 2014.

17. Thus the appeals were listed before the Upper Tribunal.

18. At  the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Mr G Saunders,  a  Senior  Presenting  Officer  and  the
    Respondent by Mr F Bajwa, who appeared for the  Respondent  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Saunders on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    submitted that he relied upon the grounds that had  been  provided  and
    that on the basis of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Raju  and
    Others taken with the most recent Upper Tribunal decision in Nasim  and
    Others (1 and 2) the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules  as
    the eligible date of the award was in July 2012 and  that  he  had  not
    been awarded the eligible award in  the  preceding  twelve  months  (in
    accordance with the decision of Raju).  He further submitted  that  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal should be set aside.  In respect of  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  the  conclusions  reached
    relating to the Immigration Rules and on human rights  grounds  however
    he conceded that the judge had failed  to  deal  with  the  Section  47
    removal point which the Secretary of State accepted was  unlawful.   In
    respect of that decision Judge Parker noted that the award had not been
    made until July 2012 and gave adequate reasons which were open  to  him
    on the documentation to reach that view.   Whilst  he  had  passed  his
    examinations before the application, the correspondence referred to  by
    the judge and analysed demonstrated that he had not  been  awarded  the
    qualification  until  July  2012  and  thus  he  could  not  meet   the
    Immigration Rules.  Thus he invited the Tribunal if  necessary  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and re-make the  decision
    by dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules, on  human  rights
    grounds but allowing the appeal only on the ground that the Section  47
    removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

19. Mr Bajwa on behalf of the Respondent had provided  documentation  prior
    to the hearing upon which he sought  to  rely.   It  consisted  of  the
    following documents, an extract from the Home  Office  policy  guidance
    and in particular paragraph 79 of that guidance, an  extract  from  the
    Roehampton University website showing the results of the  Appellant  in
    February 2012, and results from City  Bank  College  in  February  2012
    showing that he had passed his dissertation.

20.   He submitted that the decision of the Upper Tribunal proceeded on the
    basis that the case of Khatel  should  have  been  applied  however  he
    submitted that the Respondent's case had  not  been  argued  on  Khatel
    principles but on the basis of the policy guidance relying on paragraph
    79.  On the facts  of  this  case  Mr  Bajwa  submitted,  the  evidence
    demonstrated that the Respondent had passed his course in February 2012
    as evidenced by the  college  results  and  the  online  University  of
    Roehampton results.  In addition, the letter from the college dated 4th
    April 2012 confirmed that he was entitled to an MBA and any meeting  to
    be held in July 2012 was a  mere  formality.   Such  Examination  Board
    meeting could only be seen as a formality as in this  Appellant's  case
    there was no other work that was outstanding therefore when the  letter
    stated "further to be confirmed and  thereafter  will  be  awarded  his
    certificate" merely underlined that that was the end of the process  in
    formal terms but that  before  the  date  of  the  application  he  had
    completed his course.  Thus he submitted the Upper Tribunal should have
    considered the policy guidance and had it done so  would  have  allowed
    the appeal on those grounds and in those circumstances the decision  of
    Raju and Others can be distinguished from this particular appeal.

21. Mr Bajwa also submitted a copy of a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Frankish) after a hearing on 5th December 2012 relating
    to another Appellant.  Mr Bajwa submitted that this appeal in which  he
    appeared on behalf of that particular Appellant who also undertook  the
    same course as the present Respondent, was found to have satisfied  the
    Rules on the basis that the decision of NO could be  distinguished.  In
    that case the Appellant had yet to complete and pass  his  dissertation
    whereas the Appellant had completed his course by 23rd February and all
    the results had been provided and that as noted at paragraph  13:  "The
    college letter dated  4th  April  2012  records  that  the  Appellant's
    qualification was in the bag, it depended upon  no  contingencies,  the
    Examination Board meeting in July 2012 was a mere formality".  Thus  Mr
    Bajwa submitted that an Appellant on the same facts had had his  appeal
    allowed.  Notwithstanding that  determination  he  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that he had met the Rules by relying on  the
    policy guidance at paragraph 79 and therefore was entitled  to  succeed
    under  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  confirmed  that  there  were   no
    submissions to be made in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

22. Mr Saunders by way of reply  reiterated  that  the  documentation  only
    demonstrated that the qualification  would  be  awarded  in  July.   He
    further submitted that if the meeting  of  the  Board  in  July  was  a
    "formality" it was a necessary one on which the award was made and that
    if the guidance meant that the date of the award was at such a point in
    time it would have said so.  In those circumstances he  submitted  that
    the Upper Tribunal decision was wrong in law and that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be upheld.

23. I reserved my determination that I now give.


24. The relevant Rule, paragraph 245FD reads as follows:-

         "To qualify for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
         Migrant, an Applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.
         Subject to paragraph 245FE(a)(i),  if  the  Applicant  meets  these
         requirements, leave to remain will be granted.   If  the  Applicant
         does not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.


         Requirements:


         (a)  The Applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds of refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.


         (b)  The Applicant must not  previously  have  been  granted  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant.


         (c)  The Applicant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraph
             66-72 of Appendix A."


25. Paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A were as follows:-

         "ATTRIBUTES FOR TIER 1 (POST-STUDY WORK) MIGRANTS


         66.  An Applicant for entry clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier
             1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75   points   for
             attributes.


         67.  Available points are shown in Table 10.


         68.  Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.


         Table 10


         |Qualifications                                      |Points      |
|The Applicant has been awarded:                     |20          |
|                                                    |            |
|(a) a UK recognised bachelor or postgraduate degree,|            |
|or                                                  |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) a UK postgraduate certificate in education or   |            |
|Professional Graduate Diploma of Education, or      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(c) a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a        |            |
|Scottish institution                                |            |
|(a) The Applicant studied for his award at a UK     |20          |
|institution that is a UK recognised or listed body, |            |
|or which holds a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the|            |
|Points Based System, or                             |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) If the Applicant is claiming points for having  |            |
|been awarded a Higher National diploma from a       |            |
|Scottish Institution, he studied for that diploma at|            |
|a Scottish publicly funded institution of further or|            |
|higher education, or a Scottish bona fide private   |            |
|education institution which maintains satisfactory  |            |
|records of enrolment and attendance.                |            |
|                                                    |            |
|The Scottish institution must:                      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(i) be on the list of Education and Training        |            |
|Providers list on the Department of Business,       |            |
|Innovation and Skills website, or                   |            |
|(ii) hold a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the     |            |
|Points Based System.                                |            |
|The Applicant's period of UK study and/or research  |20          |
|towards his eligible award were undertaken whilst he|            |
|had entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to     |            |
|remain in the UK that was not subject to a          |            |
|restriction preventing him from undertaking a course|            |
|of study and/or research.                           |            |
|The Applicant made the application for entry        |15          |
|clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study|            |
|Work) Migrant within 12 months of obtaining the     |            |
|relevant qualification or within 12 months of       |            |
|completing a United Kingdom Foundation Programme    |            |
|Office affiliated Foundation Programme as a         |            |
|postgraduate doctor or dentist.                     |            |
|The Applicant is applying for leave to remain and   |75          |
|has, or was last granted, leave as a Participant in |            |
|the International Graduates Scheme (or its          |            |
|predecessor, the Science and engineering Graduates  |            |
|Scheme) or as a Participant in the Fresh Talent:    |            |
|Working in Scotland Scheme.                         |            |


         QUALIFICATION: NOTES


         69.  Specified documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  the
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  Foundation  Programme  Office  affiliated  Foundation
             Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.


         70.  A qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'
             on the date on which  the  Applicant  was  first  notified  in
             writing, by the awarding institution, that  the  qualification
             had been awarded."

26. The Respondent's Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) published policy guidance, as
    in force immediately before  6th  April  2012.   The  relevant  extract
    relied upon by Mr Bajwa is as follows:


         "Date of eligible qualification/Completion date of  United  Kingdom
         Foundation Programme.


         78.  An applicant can claim 15 points if the eligible qualification
             was obtained within the 12 months immediately  before  his/her
             application for entry clearance or leave to remain under  Tier
             1 (Post-Study  Work)  or  if  his/her  application  for  entry
             clearance or leave to remain is being made within 12 months of
             completing  a  United  Kingdom  Foundation  Programme   Office
             affiliated Foundation Programme as a  postgraduate  doctor  or
             dentist.


         79.  The date of award is taken as the date on which the  applicant
             was first notified, in writing, by the  awarding  institution,
             that the qualification has been  awarded.   This  notification
             may have been made in writing, directly to the  applicant,  or
             by the institution publishing details of the award, either  in
             writing (for example, via  an  institution  notice  board)  or
             electronically (for example, on  the  institution's  website).
             Where  the  notification  was  not  in  the  form  of   direct
             correspondence  to  the  applicant,  we  will  require  direct
             confirmation of the date of  award  from  the  institution  in
             writing.


         80.  We do not accept the date of award as the date of graduation.


         81.  Providing the date of award of the eligible  qualification  is
             no more than 12 months before  the  date  of  application,  15
             points will be awarded for this attribute.


         82.  Applicants may submit  an  application  for  leave  to  remain
             before the completion of his/her Foundation Programme provided
             that he/she will complete the Foundation  Programme,  no  more
             than 30 days after submitting this application


         Documents required


         83.  In order to score 15 points for this attribute, the  specified
             evidence the applicant must provide is:


             a)   original document  from  the  institution  at  which  the
                  applicant studied towards his/her  eligible  qualification
                  or  Foundation  Programme  as  a  postgraduate  doctor  of
                  dentist (where the applicant is applying within 12  months
                  of this period).


             The letter must be an original letter (not  a  copy),  on  the
             official  letter-  headed  paper   of   the   United   Kingdom
             institution at which the applicant studied.  It must have been
             issued by an authorised official and must confirm the:


                  .    applicant's name;

                  .    title of the qualification;


                  .    start and end dates of the  applicant's  period/s  of
                      study and/or research for this qualification  at  the
                      United Kingdom institution; and  date  of  award  (as
                      defined in paragraph 79 of these guidance notes).


         84.  If the applicant has already provided an  original  letter  in
             support of points claimed for the other attributes,  then  the
             same letter is acceptable  as  evidence  in  support  of  this
             attribute,   providing   it   contains   all   the    required
             information."

27. There  is  no  dispute  concerning  the  facts  of  this  appeal.   The
    Respondent embarked upon a Masters in Business  Administration  at  the
    City Banking College full-time for a period of one year.  He  completed
    his studies culminating in a dissertation on 23rd February  2012.   The
    oral evidence that he gave before the First-tier Tribunal was that  the
    results from the final examinations are not uploaded onto the college's
    website straightaway and that when he applied for further leave on  5th
    April 2012, his marks were not available online.  Mr Bajwa has provided
    a copy of the Respondent's academic profile (such report  created  12th
    November 2012) in which he states demonstrates that those marks for his
    two modules in February 2012 were uploaded to the website, albeit at  a
    later date and not before the date of his application.  As noted by the
    First-tier  Judge,  the  academic  profile  printed   from   Roehampton
    University's database confirms that he successfully completed  his  MBA
    at the City Banking  College  and  the  last  modules  were  passed  in
    February 2012 but the "status date" was recorded  as  24th  July  2012.
    There is nothing on the profile  to  confirm  what  was  meant  by  the
    "status date".

28. It is therefore submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the  academic
    profile in conjunction with the letter dated 4th April 2012  from  City
    Banking College demonstrates that prior to the date of the  application
    he had been notified of his award.

29. At this point it is necessary to set out the letter of 4th  April  2012
    from City Banking College.  It reads as follows:-

         "This serves to confirm that the above commenced  classes  on  12th
         April 2010 and completed the University  of  Roehampton  master  in
         business administration programme on 23rd February 2012.

         This will be further confirmed about  his  progress  at  University
         Examinations Board which will be held in July 2012.  Thereafter  he
         will be awarded his certificate."

30. It is  further  necessary  to  consider  a  document  that  is  in  the
    Respondent's bundle at C1 from the Appellant's college.  That  document
    states that the Postgraduate Awards and Progression Board:-

         "... met on 24th July 2012 and recommended that you  be  awarded  a
         masters in business administration (merit)."

31. I have considered that evidence in the light  of  the  guidance  relied
    upon by Mr Bajwa and in  particular  paragraph  79  of  that  guidance.
    Having done so, I do  not  accept  the  submission  that  paragraph  79
    demonstrates that the Respondent, having been notified by  way  of  his
    academic profile online, meets the Immigration Rules by showing that he
    has been awarded his qualification.  It is plain from reading paragraph
    79 that it states: "The date of award is taken as the date on which the
    applicant was first notified, in writing, by the awarding  institution,
    that the qualification has been awarded."  The information set out  and
    notified to the Respondent by the academic profile online  merely  sets
    out that he has passed his dissertation but that  does  not  show  that
    "the qualification has been awarded".  The letter of 4th April 2012  is
    clear as to the position namely that whilst he had completed the course
    on 23rd February 2012, his  progress  at  the  University  Examinations
    Board which was to be held in July 2012 was said  to  be  the  relevant
    date because it noted "thereafter he will be awarded his  certificate".
    Furthermore the letter  at  C1  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle
    demonstrates that the Postgraduate Awards and Progression Board met  on
    24th July 2012 and recommended that the Appellant be awarded a  masters
    in business administration.  Paragraph 79 was specifically  dealt  with
    by the Upper Tribunal in the decision of Nasim and Others at paragraphs
    77 to 81 of that determination.  The Tribunal considered the meaning of
    the word "award" and reached the conclusion that  it  was  sufficiently
    established at paragraph 79 of the guidance.  The Tribunal said this:-

         "79. With regard to Mr Jafar's argument that  the  meaning  of  the
             word 'award' is unclear, we consider that this is sufficiently
             established at paragraph 79 of the Guidance.  The date of  the
             award is as set out: the date on which the applicant was first
             notified, in writing, by the awarding  institution,  that  the
             qualification has been awarded.  This has to be seen  together
             with paragraph 80, which makes it clear that the date  of  the
             graduation is not accepted as the date of the award.  Although
             these matters are concerned with dates of  award  rather  than
             definition of the term 'award', it seems  to  us  sufficiently
             clear that what is referred to here is the conferring  of  the
             degree, whether in person or in absentia, on  the  person  who
             has fulfilled the requirements of  that  degree.   We  do  not
             accept that the terminology employed in the  May  2012  CI  at
             paragraph 6 (see [16] above) is other  than  a  paraphrase  of
             paragraph 79 of the policy guidance set out above.   It  would
             be surprising if a Casework Instruction  issued  on  23rd  May
             2012 concerning applicants who had applied  before  6th  April
             2012 prior to  their  qualification  being  awarded  would  be
             intended to differ materially from the terms of Guidance which
             was in force immediately before 6th April 2012."

32. Therefore it is plain from the decision of the Tribunal in  Nasim  that
    the notification in writing must be by the awarding  institution  "that
    the qualification has been awarded".  The evidence in  this  case  does
    not demonstrate the qualification was  awarded;  that  did  not  happen
    until July 2012 merely that he had passed his examinations.  For  those
    reasons,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  submissions  of   Mr   Bajwa
    demonstrates that he met the policy  guidance  and  that  he  had  been
    awarded the eligible qualification before he had made  his  application
    on 5th April 2012.

33. Mr Bajwa has  also  relied  upon  a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Frankish)  in  which  an  Appellant   in   the   same
    circumstances as the present Respondent had his appeal allowed  on  the
    argument that had been advanced  by  Mr  Bajwa  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the argument that he has advanced  before  this  Tribunal.
    The challenge on the basis of "inconsistent decision making" was  dealt
    with by the Upper Tribunal in the decision of Nasim and Others (Article
    8) [2014] UKUT 0025  (IAC)  at  paragraphs  30  to  36.   As  noted  at
    paragraph 32, the Tribunal consider that the Appellants in the  appeals
    had not begun to  make  out  their  case  in  respect  of  inconsistent
    decision making and at paragraph 34 found that  the  evidence  did  not
    demonstrate a systemic inconsistency in relevant decision making by the
    Respondent.  I would similarly record that there is no evidence  before
    this Tribunal to come anywhere near to demonstrating that there was any
    systemic  inconsistency  in  the  relevant  decision  making   by   the
    Respondent or indeed by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  fact  that  one
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal  on  similar  facts
    does not mean that the decision was necessarily a correct one  in  law.
    There is no further  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  as  to  what  has
    happened  to  that  particular  appeal  and  that  by  itself,   cannot
    demonstrate that this Respondent is able to meet the Immigration Rules.



34. For those reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was wrong in law because the Respondent could not satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules  because  he  could  not  show  that  he  had
    obtained the eligible award within twelve months of  last  being  given
    leave.  The application having been made on  5th  April  2012  but  the
    eligible qualification not being awarded until July  2012.   For  those
    reasons and having reviewed the decision of the Upper Tribunal  on  the
    basis of the  submissions  that  had  been  advanced  by  Mr  Bajwa,  I
    therefore set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

35. I now turn to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  grounds
    advanced on behalf of the Respondent in respect of the dismissal of his
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal mirror those submissions  which  have
    been made by Mr Bajwa before this Tribunal on the  basis  that  of  the
    evidence provided that he had passed his examinations by 23rd  February
    2012 and therefore before the date of the application, and  the  policy
    guidance at paragraph 79 demonstrated that it having been  uploaded  to
    the website demonstrated that he had been notified of the  award  prior
    to the application.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has  been
    set out earlier in this determination.  Whilst the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not have the advantage of the determination in Raju and  Nasim  and
    Others, it is plain from reading those findings  of  fact,  which  were
    open to the judge to make on the evidence, correctly states the law  as
    it now is.  The judge was not satisfied that he had  been  awarded  his
    qualification before the date of the application  as  the  Postgraduate
    Awards and Progression Board had not met and did not do so  until  July
    2012.  He found, as this Tribunal, that the policy did not  assist  the
    Appellant as the college did not award  the  qualification  until  July
    2012 when the Board met.  For those reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision was right to dismiss the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

36.   Similarly, the First-tier Tribunal dealt with human rights.  Mr Bajwa
    has confirmed that the  Respondent  does  not  advance  any  Article  8
    grounds therefore the findings made at paragraph 14  would  remain  and
    the appeal was rightly dismissed on human rights  grounds.   Where  the
    First-tier Tribunal fell into error was that the Tribunal did not  deal
    with the Section 47 removal.  In  those  circumstances  I  re-make  the
    decision dismissing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  on  human
    rights grounds but allowing the appeal that the Section 47 removal that
    was made was not in accordance with the law.



Decision

The decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside.  The decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and re-made as follows:-

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds but the appeal against the removal directions under  Section  47  is
allowed as it is not in accordance with the law.






Signed                              Date 3/3/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


