
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21349/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 02 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR KHALID SATTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Liaquat, Anderson Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal against a decision by Designated Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal J G Macdonald dismissing an appeal under paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules.

 2) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He most recently  entered  the
    UK in 1986.  He appeals against a decision dated 21 May  2015  refusing
    him leave to remain.

 3) The Designated Judge accepted that the appellant has lived  in  the  UK
    continuously  for  at  least  20  years  prior  to  the  date  of   the
    application, which was 30 March 2015.  The judge  had  before  him  the
    appellant's own evidence  and  documentary  evidence,  including  birth
    certificates for the appellant's  children,  born  in  1986  and  1991.
    There was an Initial Writ at the instance  of  his  ex-wife  indicating
    that the parties separated around 1 May 1995.  Inland Revenue documents
    showed the appellant was in the UK from 1996.  There were also  written
    statements supporting the appellant's length of residence.

 4) Having found the appellant has been living continuously in the  UK  for
    at least 20 years up to the date of application, the judge then went on
    to consider if there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration back into Pakistan.  The Designated Judge found that  there
    were no such obstacles and dismissed the appeal  under  this  provision
    and then under Article 8.

 5) The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  points  out  that  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), where the evidence shows  that  an  appellant
    has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years,  the  appellant
    does not also require to show that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into the country to which the appellant  would
    be removed.  This test applies under paragraph 286ADE(1)(vi).   It  was
    contended that the Designated Judge fell  into  error  by  imposing  an
    additional test  on  the  appellant  beyond  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  A challenge was also made  to  the  decision  under
    Article 8.

 6) Permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  Designated  Judge  had
    arguably erred in relation to the application at paragraph 276ADE.

 7) A rule 24 response dated 24 October 2016 on behalf  of  the  respondent
    stated  that  the  respondent  did  not  oppose  the  application   for
    permission to appeal and asked for the appeal to  be  determined  at  a
    fresh hearing.  Having accepted that the appellant had been in  the  UK
    for more than 20 years the judge did not have to consider whether there
    were significant obstacles to reintegration.

 8) At the hearing before me both  parties  were  agreed  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed outright under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) on the  basis
    of the Designated Judge's finding  as  to  the  appellant's  length  of
    residence in the UK.   It was observed that at the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  31  that  both
    parties gave the impression that there was both a  test  of  20  years'
    residence and a test of very significant  obstacles  to  re-integration
    but clearly both the Tribunal and, seemingly, the parties as  well  had
    fallen into error.

 9) The findings of fact made by the Designated Judge are  not  challenged.
    The position is  that  the  appellant  has  shown  that  he  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least 20 years prior to the date  of  the
    application and accordingly the requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)
    is satisfied.  On this basis the appeal should  be  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.



DECISION

10) The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error or a point of law.

11) The decision is set aside.

12) The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.



Anonymity Order

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  No  application
was made before me for an order and I see no reason of substance for  making
such an order.

Fee Award        (Note: This is not part of the decision)

I have not been asked  to  make  a  fee  award.   It  appears  that  as  the
appellant was legally aided he was exempt from paying  a  fee.   Accordingly
as no fee has been paid or is payable, no fee award is made.


Signed                                             Date 2nd December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

