
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21637/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Victoria Law Courts,          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Birmingham                             |                                     |
|On 19 January 2016                     |On 1 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                             vrutin tarunchandra

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representative - Mr C Decker (McKenzie
friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is now a  Portuguese  citizen,  having  formerly  been  a
    citizen of India.  He was born on 2 June 1992.

 2. On 14 March 2014 he made an application for a residence card confirming
    a permanent right of residence.  His mother made the same  application.
    Both applications were refused in decisions dated 28 April 2014.

 3. The appellant and his mother appealed against those decisions and their
    appeals came before the First-tier Tribunal on 6 October 2014,  whereby
    the appeals were dismissed.

 4. The appellant's mother has now been issued with a  permanent  residence
    card and accordingly her appeal is not before me.

 5. The appellant's appeal is predicated on the basis of  the  exercise  of
    Treaty rights of his  father,  Tarunchandra  Geichande,  a  citizen  of
    Portugal.   The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   the   evidence
    established that he had acquired permanent residence by the exercise of
    Treaty rights. Accordingly, the appellant could not  acquire  permanent
    residence through him.  The particular facts are best illustrated  with
    reference to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. At [11] the judge noted that the documentary evidence showed  that  the
    sponsor came to the UK in March 1998.  He ceased work in  January  2003
    and had therefore been working for a period of just under  five  years.
    The claim on behalf of the appellant was that he was unable to continue
    working because of incapacity, having had an accident at work in  2003.



 7.  The  judge  went  on  to  conclude  however,  that  the  evidence  was
    inconsistent in terms of the sponsor's ability to work.  She noted that
    in the application forms the appellant and his mother had said that the
    sponsor was permanently incapacitated.   However,  in  her  appeal  the
    appellant's mother had said that he  had  had  a  temporary  period  of
    unemployment due to illness.  At the hearing, the first  appellant  had
    said  that  his  father  had  stopped  work  because  of  diabetes  and
    hypertension, not because of an accident that had happened at work.

 8. The First-tier judge concluded  therefore,  that  not  only  was  there
    inconsistent evidence as to whether the appellant's father's incapacity
    was permanent or not but also  as  to  whether  it  was  caused  by  an
    accident at work.  She stated at [15] that it was reasonable to suppose
    that if he had medical conditions preventing him from working he  would
    have sought  medical  assistance  and  therefore  could  have  provided
    independent medical evidence to support  the  claim.   She  found  that
    there was no such evidence before her.  She decided therefore, that  it
    had not been established that the sponsor  was  temporarily  unable  to
    work as the result of illness or accident, as  required  by  regulation
    6(2)(a) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations").

 9. With reference to reg 5, she accepted that he had been working  for  at
    least 12 months, in fact nearly five years, before he stopped work  and
    that he had resided in the UK  for  more  than  three  years  prior  to
    ceasing employment.  She found that reg 5(2)(b) and (c) were satisfied.
     She went on to find at [17] however, that the sponsor did not  satisfy
    the requirement of reg 5(3)(a) because the appellant had not discharged
    the burden of proof in terms of  whether  or  not  the  incapacity  was
    permanent.  She did accept that he had lived in the UK  for  more  than
    two years before he ceased employment (reg 5(3)(b)(i)).

10. At [18] the judge  further  concluded  that  because  of  the  lack  of
    evidence of the sponsor having comprehensive  sickness  insurance,  the
    appeal  failed  on  that  basis  also  (presumably  in  terms  of   the
    requirement for the appellant as a student to have such insurance).

11. The judge accepted that the appellant's  mother,  the  first  appellant
    before her,  had  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  obtained  Portuguese
    nationality and had thus acquired EU  rights  of  her  own  as  an  EEA
    national.  She declined however, to take that into account in terms  of
    the appeal in relation to the appellant's mother.

    Submissions

12. Mr Decker acted as a McKenzie friend for the appellant.   He  confirmed
    that he was indeed a friend of the appellant and was not being paid for
    his assistance.  He said that he was not  legally  qualified,  although
    was presently a law student.  He said  that  he  had  never  acted  for
    anyone else in  proceedings  before  a  Tribunal.   He  had  known  the
    appellant for about two years.  Mr Mills  had  no  observations  on  Mr
    Decker being permitted to provide assistance  to  the  appellant.   The
    appellant confirmed his wish for Mr  Decker  to  assist  him.   In  the
    circumstances, I allowed Mr Decker to assist the appellant.

13. The original grounds seeking permission to appeal in  relation  to  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  refined  in  the  renewed
    grounds, permission  then  being  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Mr Decker explained that his  arguments  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant could be further narrowed.

14. It was argued firstly that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  take  into
    account material evidence, namely evidence of the appellant's  father's
    national insurance payments as set out at D1 of the appellant's bundle.
     That record of his father's  national  insurance  contributions  shows
    that between 1998 and 2005 class  1  national  insurance  contributions
    were paid by his employer.  The appellant's father had arrived  in  the
    UK in 1998 and had stopped work in 2003 as a result  of  illness.   The
    national insurance contributions showed that he was nevertheless  still
    classed as a worker.

15. Secondly, at [16] of the decision  the  judge  was  wrong  to  use  the
    present tense in stating that it had  not  been  established  that  the
    appellant's father "is temporarily unable to work as the result  of  an
    illness or accident" when the question should have been whether he  was
    previously unable to work as a result of  illness  or  accident.   That
    argument it was said related to reg 15(1)(b).

16. The appellant's father had acquired permanent residence in  2003.   The
    appellant himself had been in the UK since January 2002.   Accordingly,
    by 2007 he had acquired five years' residence in  accordance  with  the
    EEA Regulations.  He was aged 15  at  the  time  and  was  therefore  a
    dependent relative.

17. It was argued thirdly, that the judge at [17] had mistakenly  concluded
    that it had to  be  established  that  reg  5(2)  and  (3)  had  to  be
    satisfied,  whereas  those  are  not  separate  requirements.    Having
    concluded that reg 5(2)(b) and (c) were satisfied,  the  judge  had  no
    need to go on to consider reg 5(3).

18. In terms of reg 5(2)(a)(ii), the appellant's  father  was  entitled  to
    take early retirement because of a  medical  condition.   It  followed,
    that reg 15(1)(c) was satisfied, the appellant's father having  been  a
    worker or self-employed person who had ceased activity.

19. Mr Mills accepted  that  the  judge  had  made  an  error  at  [17]  in
    apparently concluding that the regulations at 5(2) and (3), and so  on,
    were conjunctive.  The judge had accepted that reg 5(2)(b) and (c) were
    satisfied but wrongly thought that the appellant also needed to satisfy
    reg 5(3)(a).  Having been satisfied as to reg 5(2)(b) and (c), all  she
    needed to consider then was reg 5(2)(a)(ii) in terms of ceasing work to
    take early retirement.  On  that  basis  the  appeal  could  have  been
    allowed because the appellant's father had acquired permanent residence
    in 2003, and the appellant subsequently in 2007.

20. Mr Mills submitted that it was difficult to disagree with the  argument
    that reg 5(2)(a) applied in his case.  If the judge had considered  reg
    (5)(2)(a)(ii) it is difficult to see that she would have  come  to  any
    view other than that the appellant's father had taken early retirement.
     Accordingly, her findings in relation  to  the  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence in terms of whether the  appellant's  father  was  permanently
    incapacitated or not, were not relevant.

21. Although it could be said that there was some room for  an  alternative
    view in terms of what  amounts  to  "early  retirement",  there  is  no
    authority on the point.  The fact is that he has not worked since 2003.
     If the judge had considered reg 5(2)(a) it could not be said that  she
    would not have found  in  the  appellant's  favour.   Accordingly,  the
    appellant's father would have acquired permanent residence in 2003  and
    the appellant himself in 2007, by reason of his five years as a  family
    member who had resided in the UK  with  his  father  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.

22. It was conceded therefore, that the First-tier Judge had made an  error
    of law and that the  decision  should  be  set  aside,  being  re-made,
    allowing the appeal under reg 15(a) and (b).

    My conclusions

23. In the light of the concession on behalf of the  respondent  before  me
    that there is an error of law in the  judge's  decision  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside, and  that  the  decision  should  be  re-made
    allowing the appeal, I can express my conclusions shortly.

24. Reg 5(1)-(3) provides as follows:

        5.- "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"


        (1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person  who  has
        ceased activity" means an EEA
        national who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or
        (5).


        (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-
        (a) terminates his activity as a worker or self-employed person and-


        (i) has reached the age at which he is entitled to a state  pension
        on the date on which
        he terminates his activity; or
        (ii) in the  case  of  a  worker,  ceases  working  to  take  early
        retirement;
        (b) pursued his activity as a worker or self-employed person in the
        United Kingdom for at least twelve months prior to the termination;
        and
        (c) resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than  three
        years prior to the
        termination.


        (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
        (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker or
        self-employed person as a result of a permanent incapacity to work;
        and
        (b) either-
        (i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than two
        years prior
        to the termination; or
        (ii) the incapacity is the result of an  accident  at  work  or  an
        occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in full
        or in part by an institution in the United Kingdom.

25. Reg15(1)(a)-(d) provides as follows:


        15.- Permanent right of residence


        (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in  the
        United Kingdom permanently-
        (a) an EEA national who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
        accordance with these
        Regulations for a continuous period of five years;
        (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
        national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
        national in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
        period of five years;
        (c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;
        (d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who  has
        ceased activity;

26. The First-tier Judge accepted that reg 5(2)(b) and (c)  were  satisfied
    in terms of the length of time that the appellant's father had  been  a
    worker or self-employed person in the UK (12 months), and that  he  had
    resided in the UK continuously for more than three years prior  to  the
    termination of his employment.  The evidence before the judge was that,
    one way or another, the appellant's father  had  ceased  employment  in
    2003.

27. Mr Mills conceded that the evidence suggested  that  in  terms  of  reg
    5(2)(a)(ii) he had ceased working, and it could not be  said  that  his
    having done so did not amount to "early retirement", whether or not his
    ceasing to work was as a result of a temporary or permanent incapacity.



28. On that basis, it was conceded that the whole  of  reg  5(2)  was  met.
    That was sufficient to mean that the appellant's father was a worker or
    self-employed person who had ceased  activity  because  the  conditions
    specified in reg 5(1) relating to paragraphs (2), (3), (4) or (5),  are
    alternatives.

29. The appellant's father therefore, had acquired permanent  residence  in
    2003, when he ceased working, being under reg 15(a) an EEA national who
    had resided in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  That was sufficient to mean that  the
    appellant himself qualified for permanent residence under reg 15(1)(b),
    being the family member of an EEA national, not himself  being  an  EEA
    national, who had resided in the UK with the EEA national in accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

30. There was no dispute about the evidence that the appellant had  resided
    with his father for that period of time, and that in the  circumstances
    it was in accordance with the Regulations.  The effect of that is  that
    the appellant had himself acquired permanent residence in, or by, 2007.

31. "Family member" includes under reg 7(1)(b) direct descendants under the
    age of 21, which the appellant was in 2007.

32. In the alternative, the appellant is  entitled  to  confirmation  of  a
    permanent right of residence under reg 15(1)(d) as the family member of
    a worker or self-employed person who had  ceased  activity,  which  the
    appellant's father  had  (reg  15(1)(c)).   In  that  circumstance  the
    appellant was not required to establish residence  in  accordance  with
    the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

33. As Mr Mills conceded,  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  appellant's
    father's ceasing employment was as a result of temporary  or  permanent
    incapacity.  In either case, the period by which he was short  of  five
    years' employment (by three months) was filled, having  regard  to  the
    evidence that he had taken early retirement under reg 5(2)(a)(ii).

34. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge  erred
    in law.  I set aside her decision, and re-make the  decision,  allowing
    the appeal.

    Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the decision re-made,
    allowing the appeal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I was invited to make a fee award in favour of  the  appellant  although  no
sum was specified by the appellant. As I have allowed  the  appeal,  and  on
the assumption that a fee has been paid or is  payable,  I  have  considered
making a fee award and have decided to make to make a fee award of  any  fee
which has been paid or may be payable, but only in respect of the  appellant
that is the subject of the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      16/03/16


