
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21795/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th March 2016                        |On 14th April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    Mr AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Lambeth Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Jamaica,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 21 May 2013
    to remove him  from  the  UK.   A  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman and Ms  L  Schmitt  (the
    Panel) dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 10
    August  2015.  The  Appellant  now  appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. The issue in this appeal is the interpretation of section 117B  (6)  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The   relevant
    provisions of section 117 for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal  are  as
    follows;



      "Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations






      117A Application of this Part

      (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and

           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998.

      (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard-

           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
           and

           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.

      (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

      (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
      interest.

      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
      independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

      (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

           that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.

      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

      (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

      ...


      117D Interpretation of this Part

      (1)In this Part-

           "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
           Rights;

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

              (a) is a British citizen, or
              (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
              of seven years or more;
      ..."


 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Respondent  says  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK in  1999  using  a  false  name,  returned  to
    Jamaica, and re-entered in 2002 using his current name and  failing  to
    declare his previous name. The Appellant denies  this  saying  that  he
    entered the UK for the first time in 2002 using his  current  name  and
    has been here ever since. The Appellant has had  two  relationships  in
    the UK from which he has had three children. He  married  JO  in  March
    2003 and was granted leave to  remain  and  then  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of that marriage. In the meantime the  relationship
    ran into difficulties and the Appellant met NB who became pregnant  and
    had the couple's son (R) in June 2006. The  Appellant  then  reconciled
    with his wife who gave birth to the couple's daughter in 2009 and after
    that the relationship ran into difficulties  again  and  the  Appellant
    moved out. In this year the Appellant was granted a residence order  in
    relation to R and he was his son's primary carer from 2010 until  2012.
    Following his application for  a  driving  licence  the  Appellant  was
    charged with  and  convicted  of  giving  false  information  or  using
    deception in order to obtain his immigration status (in connection with
    his entry to  the  UK  in  1999)  and  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment. In the meantime JO gave  birth  to  the  couple's  second
    child (a son) in March 2012. Following his release from prison  in  May
    2013 the Appellant was reunited with his wife and children but left  to
    live with NB again in July 2013. They  have  since  separated  but  the
    Appellant has an ongoing relationship with his son R,  saying  that  he
    sees him  three  times  a  week.  As  a  result  of  a  non-molestation
    injunction taken by JO the Appellant does not see the two children from
    his marriage but intends to obtain a contact order in relation  to  the
    children.  There was evidence before the Panel from the police  setting
    out details of reports of domestic violence incidents  investigated  by
    the police over a number of years  and  a  number  of  convictions  for
    cannabis offences.

 4. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer conceded that the Appellant has a subsisting relationship  with
    a qualifying child (his son, R) and that it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK [65]. The issue for  determination  by
    the Panel was therefore identified as being that  the  Appellant  would
    qualify under section 117B (6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, 'unless it had a narrower meaning that (sic)  appeared
    on the face of it' [65]. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  wider
    factors should be taken into account in considering  section  117B  (6)
    [64] whereas the Appellant's representative submitted that section 117B
    (6) clearly meant that that it was not in the public interest to remove
    the Appellant.

 5. The Panel considered the evidence before it including a  report  by  an
    independent social worker which concluded that the Appellant's child  R
    is a 'vulnerable child' whose best interests are for  his  relationship
    with his father to  continue  both  because  of  the  nature  of  their
    relationship but also to provide stability and continuity in  terms  of
    the child's  emotional  development  [79].  The  Panel  considered  the
    Appellant's criminal convictions which they summarised as by and  large
    amounting to 'possession of cannabis or on one occasion  possessing  it
    with intention to supply, on another occasion possession  of  a  bladed
    article in a public place' [81]. The  Panel  also  considered  a  large
    number of  reports  in  relation  to  domestic  incidents  between  the
    appellant and JO and NB as a result of  which  the  independent  social
    worker acknowledged that  it  would  not  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests for the Appellant  to  live  with  either  woman.  The  Panel
    expressed concern about the Appellant's influence on his son  in  light
    of his ongoing  use  of  drugs  and  his  lack  of  skills.  The  Panel
    considered the Appellant's situation under Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and concluded;

           "92.  ...  We  do  not  accept  that,   when   considering   the
           proportionality balance into which historically and on  European
           jurisprudence everything on either side is  taken  into  account
           and weighed, that Section 117B (6) can  have  been  intended  to
           mean, that regardless  of  the  appellant's  character,  history
           generally, criminality and other factors, so long as  he  has  a
           subsisting relationship with a qualifying child who it  was  not
           expected reasonably could leave  the  United  Kingdom,  he  must
           succeed.

           93. We conclude that paragraph 117B(6) means simply  that  where
           there are no other factors militating against the appellant, and
           he has a subsisting relationship with  a  child  who  meets  the
           other criteria then on that basis it would not be in the  public
           interest to remove him. If we are wrong about that,  as  already
           said, it is clear the appellant must succeed".

 6. In considering proportionality the Panel weighed against the  Appellant
    his seven criminal convictions, the fact that he has otherwise come  to
    the attention of the police, the fact that he is  unable  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, he has built up relationships in the UK whilst  here
    without leave, and that he has continued to deny that he  was  involved
    in deception.  The  Panel  said  that  it  was  not  as  clear  as  the
    independent social worker  that  the  Appellant's  influence  on  R  is
    necessarily for the good  but  nonetheless  weighed  the  child's  best
    interests in the Appellant's  favour.  The  Panel  concluded  that  the
    Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant was proportionate to  the
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of effective immigration control  and
    the protection of the public good and dismissed the appeal.

 7. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused by the
    First-tier Tribunal but granted by the Upper Tribunal on renewal on the
    grounds that it is arguable that the Panel erred at paragraphs  92  and
    93 of the decision as their  findings  are  arguably  contrary  to  the
    guidance provided by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Treebhawon  and  others
    (section 117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC)  (promulgated  after  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  case)  as  the  three
    conditions set out  in  section  117B  (6)  were  found  to  have  been
    satisfied. It was considered arguable that the Panel erred in assessing
    the proportionality of the  decision  by  reference  to  the  remaining
    provisions of section 117 and in not finding section  117B  (6)  to  be
    determinative.

Error of Law

 8. In the rule 24 response and  in  oral  submissions  before  me  it  was
    contended on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the  decision  in
    Treebhawon,  being  an  error  of  law  decision  and   therefore   not
    appealable, should not have been reported and should not  therefore  be
    followed. It is contended that the approach to section 117B (6) set out
    in the decision  of  Treebhawon  is  not  one  intended  by  Parliament
    because, whilst section 117  sets  out  factors  to  be  considered  in
    approaching the question of the public interest, it does not mean  that
    courts should not have regard to other  factors  including  the  public
    interest factors that do not require removal. It is contended that  the
    Tribunal must have regard to the Immigration Rules. Reliance is  placed
    on the decision in Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412
    (IAC) where it was held that the list of  considerations  contained  in
    section 117B and section 117C of the 2002 Act  is  not  exhaustive  and
    that a court or tribunal is entitled to take  into  account  additional
    considerations, provided that they are relevant in the sense that  they
    properly bear on the public interest question.  It  is  contended  that
    whilst the public interest may not require a person's removal where the
    factors in section 117B(6) apply, absent any countervailing factors, it
    may nevertheless permit removal where such factors are in play.

 9. At the hearing Mr Kotas relied on  the  unreported  decision  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Southern  in  the   case   of   GES   (Appeal   number
    IA/45698/2014) promulgated on 21 December 2015. Mr Khubber objected  to
    reliance being placed on this unreported case as the Secretary of State
    had not complied with the Practice direction. I allowed the decision to
    be admitted and I allowed Mr Khubber a  period  of  7  days  after  the
    hearing to make any additional written submission on the decision which
    he did.

10. Mr Khubber submitted that the correct interpretation  of  section  117B
    (6) is at the heart  of  this  case.  He  relied  on  the  decision  of
    Treebhawon and submitted that section 117B (6) is determinative of  the
    public interest question as the statute is  unequivocal.  He  submitted
    that section 117B (6)  is  consistent  with  existing  legislation.  He
    submitted that the decision of the Panel  is  flawed  as  it  conflated
    questions 4 and 5 of the steps set out in R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27. He submitted that the submissions of the  Secretary  of
    State which distinguish between the removal being permitted rather than
    required misunderstands  the  fifth  Razgar  question  which  considers
    proportionality and asks what is required. Mr  Khubber  submitted  that
    the decision in GES does  not  eclipse  Treebhawon  as  the  facts  are
    different in that case.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the Panel made its decision before the decision
    in Treebhawon so  could  not  be  criticised  for  not  following  that
    decision. He submitted that the child in this case would  not  have  to
    leave the UK if his father was to be removed and that  therefore  there
    would be no expectation that the child would have to follow his  father
    from the UK. He submitted that it cannot be right that section 117B (6)
    is determinative as an  assessment  of  proportionality  must  look  at
    everything. He submitted that here, reliance on  section  117B  (6)  as
    determinative would exclude a litany of criminality on the part of  the
    appellant and that cannot be a proper proportionality assessment.

12. In response Mr Khubber submitted that the Panel's decision records that
    the Secretary of State conceded that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's child to leave the UK and there is no  challenge
    to that concession or the findings based on it. He submitted that there
    is a distinction between removal and deportation  in  consideration  of
    criminality and that, as this is not a deportation,  section  117B  (6)
    applies.

13. There was no challenge to the findings of fact. In light of the way  in
    which the First-tier Tribunal decision was made, acknowledging that  if
    a narrower interpretation of section 117B  (6)  was  correct  then  the
    appeal should succeed, the parties agreed that if I were to follow  the
    decision in Treebhawon, the appeal should be allowed on  the  basis  of
    the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  otherwise  it  should  be
    dismissed on the basis that there is no error in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

14. The question issue considered in Treebhawon was identified at paragraph
    14 of the decision in that case as follows;

      "In a case where a Court or Tribunal decides that a person who is  not
      liable  to  deportation  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
      relationship with a qualifying child, as defined in  Part  5A  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended, and it would
      not be reasonable to expect such child to leave  the  United  Kingdom,
      with the result that the two conditions enshrined in  section  117B(6)
      are  satisfied,  is  this  determinative  of  the   "public   interest
      question", namely the issue  of  proportionality  under  Article  8(2)
      ECHR?"

15. This is the same question considered by the Panel in the instant appeal
    and the answer to that question determines whether the Panel  took  the
    correct approach to proportionality.

16. The Tribunal in Treebhawon considered section 117B (6) and concluded;

           "18.     The resolution of the second ground of appeal turns  on
           how  we  construe  section  117B(6),  considered  in  its   full
           statutory context. In performing this  exercise,  we  derive  no
           assistance from the construction which we have given to  section
           117B(4) and (5). We consider it instructive to juxtapose section
           117B(6) with its three public interest siblings, namely  section
           117B(1), (2) and (3). Section 117B(6), notionally, follows these
           three  provisions  sequentially.  Notably,  Parliament  has  not
           established any correlation  between  section  117B(6)  and  the
           other three sibling public interest provisions.  In  particular,
           section 117B(6) is not expressed to be "without prejudice to" or
           "subject  to"  any  of  the  other  three  related   provisions.
           Furthermore, section 117B(6) is formulated in unqualified terms:
           in cases where its conditions are satisfied, the public interest
           does not require the removal from the United  Kingdom  of  the
           person concerned. In this respect also  it  different  from  its
           siblings, which contain no comparable instruction.

           19.     The next notable feature of the new statutory regime  is
           that in section 117B (6) Parliament has chosen to  differentiate
           between those who are, and who are not, liable  to  deportation.
           It has provided a separate and special dispensation for  members
           of the  latter  class.  This  is  harmonious  with  one  of  the
           overarching themes of Part  5A,  which  is  to  subject  foreign
           criminals who are liable to deportation to a more  rigorous  and
           unyielding regime. In the case of those who are  not  liable  to
           deportation, Parliament has chosen to recognise that, where  the
           specified conditions are  satisfied,  a  public  interest  which
           differs from those public interests expressed in Section 117B(1)-
           (3) is engaged. The  most  striking  feature  of  this  discrete
           public interest is its focus  on  one  of  the  most  vulnerable
           cohorts in society, namely children. The focus is placed on  the
           needs and interests of these vulnerable people. Furthermore, the
           content of this public interest differs markedly from the  other
           three, all of which are focused on the interests of society as a
           whole. In enacting Section 117B(6), Parliament has given  effect
           to  a  public  interest  of  an  altogether  different  species.
           Notably, this new statutory provision is closely related to  and
           harmonious with what has been decided by the Upper Tribunal in a
           number of cases, namely that there is  a  free  standing  public
           interest in children being reared within a stable  family  unit.
           The effect of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is, of course,  that  this
           discrete public  interest  must  yield  to  more  potent  public
           interests in certain circumstances.

           20.     In section  117B(6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three
           conditions, namely:

            (a) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

            (b)  such  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
            relationship with a qualifying child, namely a  person  who  is
            under the age of 18 and is a British citizen or  has  lived  in
            the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  seven  years  or
            more; and

            (c) it would not be reasonable to expect the  qualifying  child
            to leave the United Kingdom.

           Within this discrete regime, the statute proclaims unequivocally
           that where these  three  conditions  are  satisfied  the  public
           interest does not require the removal of  the  parent  from  the
           United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

           21.     Giving effect to the analysis above, in our judgment the
           underlying Parliamentary  intention  is  that  where  the  three
           aforementioned conditions are  satisfied  the  public  interests
           identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply.

           22.      It  would  further  appear  that  the  "little  weight"
           provisions of section 117B(4) - (5) are of  no  application.  If
           Parliament had been desirous of qualifying, or diluting, section
           117B(6) by reference to either section 117B(4) or (5), it  could
           have done so with ease. It has not done so. Fundamentally, there
           is no indication in the structure or language of Part 5A that in
           cases where,  on  the  facts,  section  117B(4)  and/or  (5)  is
           engaged, the unambiguous proclamation in Section 117B(6)  is  in
           some way weakened or demoted. To this may be added the  analysis
           in [18] - [21] above. Clearly, there  is  much  to  favour  this
           construction. However, conscious of the limits of  the  judicial
           function, we decline to provide  a  definitive  answer  to  this
           discrete question,  for  two  reasons.  First,  we  received  no
           argument upon it. Second, it does not clearly  fall  within  the
           grant of permission to appeal."

17. Section 117B (6) must be read in  conjunction  with  section  117A  (3)
    which defines "the public interest question" as being "the question  of
    whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2)."  In  my  view  it  is
    clear that the Presidential  panel  concluded  that,  in  circumstances
    where the requirements of section 117B (6) are met, the  conclusion  on
    this provision is determinative of the  public  interest  question.  No
    submission was made to me  to  interpret  the  decision  in  Treebhawon
    otherwise.

18. I agree with  the  interpretation  of  section  117B  (6)  set  out  in
    Treebhawon for the reasons given in  that  decision.  In  my  view  the
    wording of section 117B (6) is clear. There is only one public interest
    question, as defined in section 117A (3), that is the  question  as  to
    whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
    and family life is justified  under  Article  8(2).  Whilst  the  other
    provisions of section 117B sets out factors to  be  considered  or  the
    weight to be attached to various factors section 117B (6) is phrased in
    definitive terms. Section 117B (6) clearly answers the public  interest
    question, that is whether the interference is justified under Article 8
    (2), in cases where the conditions are met. If the public interest does
    not 'require' removal  in  these  circumstances  then  it  is  not  the
    Tribunal's role to look for other factors which  weigh  in  the  public
    interest. In light of my view of the interpretation of section 117 I do
    not agree with the wider interpretation set out in the case of GES.

19. This means that the correct interpretation is the narrow interpretation
    identified by the Panel in the instant appeal. In  these  circumstances
    the Panel erred in going on to consider other factors in assessing  the
    public interest. The statutory provisions are clear in their  statement
    of the public interest.   In  this  case,  the  conditions  of  section
    117B(6) having been met, no further examination of the public  interest
    was required in the proportionality assessment.




    Remaking

20. I therefore conclude that the panel  erred  in  its  interpretation  of
    section 117B (6) for the reasons set out in the decision of Treebhawon.
    In  light  of  the  clear  concession  and  findings,  which  were  not
    challenged, I set aside the decision of the  Panel  and  remake  it  by
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law.

I set aside the decision and remake  it  by  allowing  it  on  human  rights
grounds.



Signed                                       Date: 12 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 12 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

