
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21297/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 27th  September 2017       |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mr Amanpreet singh
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Proudman, Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India  whose  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7th
    January 2017.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  In terms of ground 1 it  was  said
    that the judge had failed to consider whether the appellant's wife  and
    daughter's Article 8 rights would  be  engaged  if  the  appellant  was
    returned to India.  She did not mention the Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant's wife and the appellant's stepdaughter,  both  of  whom  are
    British nationals.  The judge's  error  in  law  reflected  an  earlier
    observation of Charles George QC sitting as a Deputy High  Court  Judge
    on 27th November 2013  in  a  judicial  review  application  where  the
    effects on her  Article  8  rights  seemed  to  have  been  "completely
    ignored".

 3. This was in the context that the appellant was his wife's  chief  carer
    as found by the judge.  The grounds make reference to  well-known  case
    law.

 4. The second ground was that the judge was irrational in concluding  that
    there were not insurmountable obstacles to the appellant continuing his
    marriage in India because his wife could relocate  and  the  family  in
    India could support the reintegration.   There  was  extensive  medical
    evidence before the judge which  set  out  the  wife's  severe  medical
    health problems.  The judge had concluded  that  the  appellant's  wife
    could receive medical support in India with no evidential  basis.   The
    judge had said that  the  appellant  had  submitted  no  evidence  that
    medical treatment for his wife would be unavailable in India and it was
    clear that the appellant and his  wife  would  be  able  to  rely  upon
    support from the appellant's family, but no evidence was given that the
    appellant's family would be in a position to support the severe  health
    needs of the appellant's wife.  It was said that the judge had  made  a
    sweeping assumption without any evidence.   The  judge  had  failed  to
    consider  whether  the  appellant's  wife  relocating  to  India  would
    constitute an interference with her Article 8 rights, particularly as a
    British citizen.  In the light of these failures it was said  that  the
    decision should be set aside in its entirety.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before me  on
    the above date.

 6. For the Appellant Ms Proudman relied on her grounds.  The judge  needed
    to spell out that in Article 8 terms  she  was  taking  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant's wife into account, and not having  said  that
    was a fatal error to the  findings.   As  such  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 7. In terms of paragraph 42 of the decision the judge had  been  wrong  to
    conclude that physical care would be provided by the NHS.  There was no
    evidence for that.  It was clear the judge accepted that she would lose
    his emotional support which his physical presence provided.   The  loss
    of emotional support to the appellant's wife had not been considered by
    the judge.

 8. In response to observations from Mr Clarke, Ms Proudman  repeated  that
    it was fatal to the decision not to consider the Article  8  rights  of
    the appellant's wife.  She required daily care.  It was unclear whether
    there was medical treatment available for her in India.   There  was  a
    material error of law in the decision and thus  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. For the Secretary of State Mr Clarke said that there were no errors  in
    the decision.  There were no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in India and reference was made to  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 and in particular to paragraph 68 where it was  said  that  the
    entitlement conferred under Section 1(1) of the 1971 Act for a  British
    citizen to live in the United Kingdom did not entitle a British citizen
    to insist that their non-national partner should be  entitled  to  live
    here.  The judge had given reasons why the relationship should continue
    in India.  It was  noted  that  the  appellant's  wife  had  spent  her
    formative life there where she grew up and was educated.  She  had  not
    come to the United Kingdom until  she  was  aged  21.   The  judge  had
    explained why there would not be very significant  obstacles  to  their
    integration in India where he would have the support of his parents and
    wider family.  On all the evidence presented to the judge  that  was  a
    reasonable finding to make.

10. In terms of the family situation the judge had  dealt  very  thoroughly
    with that.  The burden was on the appellant to  show  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to integration in India and that had not  been
    established.  The judge was also entitled to find, as she did, that the
    appellant could make an application for entry clearance to  the  United
    Kingdom.  There were no errors in the decision which should stand.

11. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

12. The judge did not dispute that the appellant and his wife  were  living
    together in a genuine and subsisting relationship (paragraph  35).   It
    was not disputed that the  appellant's  wife  was  a  British  citizen,
    although she was born in India and came to the UK as an adult.

13. The judge set out,  in  considerable  detail,  the  appellant's  wife's
    medical condition.  She noted that there was no evidence as to the long-
    term prognosis for her (paragraph 39)  noting  that  she  had  said  in
    evidence that she was hopeful that once she got her full mobility  back
    she would be able to return to work.  The judge  also  noted  that  the
    appellant's daughter indicated her mother may have been over-optimistic
    and that her mother would need time to recover.  In  paragraph  40  the
    judge noted the medical evidence.  The judge said that the  appellant's
    wife had shown she was someone who had overcome the loss of  her  first
    husband, her illness due to her HIV status and had made a good recovery
    and had been able to work full-time until about Easter this year.   The
    judge went on to make findings about the appellant's  stepdaughter  and
    those findings are not the subject of challenge.

14. The judge went on to say that if the appellant returned  to  India  "no
    doubt additional physical care would be provided  by  the  NHS  to  the
    appellant's wife" (paragraph 42) and this statement was  challenged  by
    Ms Proudman as going too far and a matter on which no evidence had been
    presented to the judge.  In my view it  is  within  judicial  knowledge
    that when physical care is shown to be required the NHS will  do  their
    best to provide it. The judge's statement that additional physical care
    would be provided by the NHS is, in my view,  not  an  issue  which  is
    capable of any genuine challenge.  The judge went on to note  that  the
    appellant was in very regular contact with his own family who  continue
    to live in India.  He had carried out visits there  and  the  appellant
    spoke Punjabi and went on to give reasons why there would  not  be  any
    significant obstacles to their integration in India as  he  would  have
    the support of his parents and wider family.  On the evidence presented
    to the judge this was a reasonable conclusion to make.  The  judge  was
    therefore finding that the appellant did not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Clearly the Rules provide a very stringent  test  for  what  is
    very significant obstacles and the judge was finding  on  the  evidence
    presented to her that those criteria had not  been  met.   In  my  view
    there is nothing difficult or challengeable about those findings and no
    error in law arises.

15. The second ground of appeal really is that, and this was heavily relied
    on by Ms Proudman, the judge had failed to  deal  adequately  with  the
    Article 8 rights of the appellant's  wife.   However,  what  could  not
    really be challenged is what the judge says  in  paragraph  44,  namely
    that the appellant's wife's evidence was that she hoped to make a  full
    recovery and return to work.  She could not presently fly but there was
    no medical evidence to support the claim, and as the judge noted it was
    open to the appellant's wife to remain in the United Kingdom while  her
    recovery continues and join the appellant subsequently.  Given what the
    appellant's wife  said  about  her  own  recovery  and  absent  medical
    evidence that she would not be likely to recover, this  was  a  finding
    that was open to the judge on the evidence presented to her.

16. The judge went on to consider paragraph 117B  of  the  2002  Act.   She
    found that the appellant's presence in the United  Kingdom  had  always
    been precarious and that he had  no  legitimate  expectation  of  being
    allowed to remain and integrate (paragraph 47).  His history  in  terms
    of immigration was poor and he had remained without leave  since  2002,
    having entered illegally.  At the time he and his  wife  commenced  the
    relationship  and  ultimately  married  they  knew  that  they  had  no
    expectation of being allowed to remain and continue their  relationship
    unless they could comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge was  clearly  entitled  to  make  these  observations
    having regard to the appellant's poor immigration history. The  grounds
    take no issue with these findings.

17.  The  main  complaint  by  Ms  Proudman  is  that  the  judge  did  not
    specifically say in terms that she was considering the Article 8 rights
    of the appellant's wife.  The argument for the appellant is  that  this
    is a fatal error and without  such  a  statement  the  decision  cannot
    stand.  I disagree. The issue is one of  substance  not  form.  It  was
    quite clear that the judge was  considering  both  the  rights  of  the
    appellant and the  rights  of  the  appellant's  wife  in  the  lengthy
    decision which runs to some twelve pages.  The judge  spent  much  time
    considering the wife's medical position and whether or  not  she  could
    integrate into life back in India where she had lived for the first  21
    years of her life. The  judge  was  correct  to  say  that  no  medical
    evidence had been presented to  her  that  medical  treatment  for  the
    appellant's wife would be unavailable  in  India  and  it  was  a  fair
    inference to conclude that there would be support from the  appellant's
    family.  The judge went on to make the observation that she could  join
    him either  permanently  or  for  a  brief  period  while  he  made  an
    application for entry clearance to return to the United  Kingdom.   The
    judge went on to repeat that he  was  satisfied  the  appellant's  wife
    could rely upon increased care from the  NHS  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant and rely on  emotional  support  from  her  daughter  if  she
    elected not to join him.

18.  The  judge  was  therefore,  in  my  view,  taking  into  account  the
    appellant's wife's rights under Article 8 and this can be inferred from
    all the findings made by the judge.  In my view her conclusions  cannot
    be said to be perverse or irrational in deciding that under  Article  8
    the appeal should not succeed and that it  was  proportionate  for  the
    appeal to be dismissed.

19. It therefore seems to me that there is no material error of law in  the
    decision and as such the decision must stand.

Notice of Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

21. I do not set aside the decision.

22. No anonymity order is made.


Signed     J Macdonald                           Date 26th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed       J Macdonald                              Date   26th  September
2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
