
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
IA/21897/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 May 2017                         |On 16 June 2017                |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                 Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                TARIQ MEHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr A Salam, Solicitor
For the Appellant:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham  whereby  she  had  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal based on Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  To
    ease following this decision I shall continue to refer to Mr Mehmood as
    the Appellant although it is the Secretary of  State  who  brings  this
    appeal.

2.    The Judge had noted that the parties had accepted that the only  issue
    before her was whether or not the ETS certificate in respect of English
    was genuine or not.

3.    The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal submitted:

   1) The Judge had misapplied the standard of proof because  she  had  said
      the standard of proof was higher than the  balance  of  probabilities;
      and
   2) The Judge said the witness statements of Ms Collins and  M  Millington
      were to be given minimum weight and that that the spreadsheet taken in
      isolation fell short of providing evidence to prove deception.

4.    Mr McVeety said in his submissions that he relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal. He said in addition one needed to look at paragraph 18  of  the
    Judge's decision. It was a misunderstanding by the Judge. It is not the
    Secretary of State who validates it. He referred  to  the  decision  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167
    in respect of the initial burden of proof.

5.    Mr Salam said that there was a misunderstanding about  what  was  said
    by Judge Graham. In respect of the case of Qadir if the Appellant could
    speak English and had no reason to cheat then that is the approach that
    the Judge had followed at paragraph 17. The Judge was entitled to  find
    what she did. The broader picture, namely the  ability  in  respect  of
    English had been conceded.  He asked what his client had done wrong. He
    had applied by way of FLR(M). He submitted that there was no  error  of
    law in the Judge's decision.  The Judge had decided  the  case  on  the
    civil standard. The Judge was entitled to give limited  weight  as  she
    did at paragraph 21 of her decision.

6.    Mr Salam said that even if there was an error of law the question  was
    whether it was material. The result would be the same.

7.    Mr McVeety in  reply  said  that  the  error  cannot  be  said  to  be
    immaterial. It was not a slip of the pen. It was submitted that it  was
    noted what the Judge had said and the  case  could  be  sent  back  for
    reconsideration (within the Home Office).

8.    In my judgment, the Judge did not make a material error of law. The
    case of AA (Nigeria) was concerned with the issue of whether 'false'
    representations means 'dishonest' representations.  The Judge referred
    to this case at paragraph 12 of her decision but it is quite clear that
    the Judge omitted "no" from her sentence. It should have read, "..the
    burden of proof is "no" higher than the balance of probabilities". The
    caselaw did not say anything other than this. It was a clear
    typographical error by the Judge. I note too that the Judge then
    observed the case law at that time and set out it in some detail in
    respect of the English language cases. Ultimately the Judge said at
    paragraph 16 that she had to take into account the particular
    circumstances of the case. Finally, she concluded that she was going to
    give minimal weight to the evidence of Ms Collins and Mr Millington.

9.    As is clear from the Court of Appeal's judgment in Qadir, the Judge
    was right to come to that decision. Indeed, the Secretary of State had
    conceded the case. As was noted by Sales LJ,


      "16.     The evidence relied on by the Secretary of State in the
    cases before us is summarised between [8] and [26] of the UT's
    determination which focuses on the generic evidence. The documentary
    evidence is summarised at [10]. The statements and oral testimony of Ms
    Collings and Mr Millington and written evidence by Mr Green, also a
    Home Office employee, are summarised at [12] to [21] and [24] and [26].
    None of these witnesses had expertise in the science of voice
    recognition. Mr Millington describes several demonstrations by ETS and
    states that he was a member of the Home Office delegation which met ETS
    representatives in the United States in June 2014. None of that
    delegation from this country were voice recognition experts or
    scientists and the process at the meetings did not include the
    provision or consideration of any voice recording (see [21] and [22]).
    Mr Green (see [12]) did not have the expertise to elaborate on the
    spreadsheet computer printouts about which he gave written evidence and
    which were stated to record the outcome of ETS's testing of the voice
    samples which were stated to relate to Messrs Majumder and Qadir."

10.   Therefore, there is nothing of substance to the Secretary of State's
    appeal in this case.

11.   Even if there was, I entirely agree with Mr Salam that the Judge's
    findings at paragraph 17 really do make it abundantly clear that in any
    event the Judge would have to have allowed the appeal. The Judge noted
    there that:
      (1) The Appellant was a credible witness;
      (2) The Appellant had given evidence in English. He was cross
    examined extensively and his use of English was good;
      (3) He has passed various exams including his Masters degree in the
    United Kingdom which had been taught in English
      (4) The Judge concluded, in reality, that there would have been no
    reason for the Appellant to have used a false certificate for his
    English language abilities.


12.   Therefore, even if I was to find that there was a material error of
    law, when using the findings of the Judge from paragraph 17 of her
    decision, it is clear that there would be no decision other than one
    which would allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
The decision allowing Mr Mehmood's appeal therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date: 11 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
