
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/21666 /2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 18 January 2017                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                DIeter kpexor
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

       1. Although the appeal has been brought by the Secretary of State,  I
          continue to refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-
          tier Tribunal.

       2. The appellant is a national of Ghana born on  14  September  1993.
          His appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse him  a
          residence card under the EEA Regulations was allowed by First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Majid by way of a determination promulgated  on  21
          July 2016.

       3. The  respondent  refused  the  application  because  she  was  not
          satisfied that the appellant's marriage was genuine. She relied on
          a report by immigration officers who visited the  alleged  marital
          home only to find a tenant who had resided there for two years and
          who denied all knowledge of the appellant and his spouse.

       4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant although this has  not
          been summarised in his determination so it is not  known  what  is
          said. No record of proceedings is on the Tribunal file. The  judge
          allowed the appeal seemingly on the basis of "compassion" and  his
          "judicial discretion".

       5. The respondent obtained leave on the basis that  the  reasons  for
          the decision were unclear.

       6. The Hearing

       7. The appellant was not in attendance at the hearing before me on 16
          January 2017. A letter dated 5 January 2017 was received from  him
          in which he states: "I wish to inform the court that I will not be
          attending the above appeal hearing. I have decided to withdraw  my
          application  and  voluntarily  exit  the  UK   due   to   personal
          circumstances. I have contacted the Home Office and have commenced
          the voluntary exit process".

       8. I heard submissions from Mr Jarvis who asked  that  I  decline  to
          give permission for the withdrawal given the circumstances of  the
          case and the failings of the determination. He  informed  me  that
          the appellant had not yet left and  the  matter  was  still  under
          process. I formally reserved my determination although  indicating
          that I would set aside the decision.

       9. Conclusions

      10. There can be only one possible outcome in this case and that is to
          set aside the  determination  of  Judge  Majid  for  being  wholly
          inadequate both in logic and in  reasoning.  The  judge  makes  no
          findings at all on  material  matters  such  as  the  marriage  or
          cohabitation and appears  to  allow  the  appeal  because  of  his
          compassion for the appellant who is described as "outraged". There
          is no engagement with the refusal letter and no application of the
          law to the facts of the case. Indeed, there is an utter failure to
          assess the case. The decision is fatally flawed for these  reasons
          and is set aside in its entirety.

      11. Decision

      12. The judge made errors of  law  and  the  decision  is  set  aside.
          However, as the appellant has now withdrawn his appeal against the
          respondent's decision, there is no longer any valid appeal  to  be
          determined.


    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


    Date: 16 January 2017


