
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21945/2013

                                                         IA/21950/2013

                                                         IA/21962/2013

                                                         IA/21964/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd January 2014                            |On 24th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               mr Swaran Singh
                               mrs manit kaur
                             master harpal singh
                           master balwinder singh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Scott (instructed by Middlesex Law Chambers))
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This matter first came before the Upper Tribunal on 3rd  December  2013
    when it came before Mr Justice Mitting and me. Permission to appeal had
    been granted to the Appellants, a Dutch national and his  Afghani  wife
    and children. Their appeals to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue  them  with  Residence
    cards as an EEA national and his dependants had  been  dismissed  by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal. It was dismissed because  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the First  Appellant  was  a
    worker. As noted by us in our Determination promulgated on 13th January
    2014, the single issue was whether or not the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law in concluding that the first Appellant was not a  "worker"
    for the purpose of Regulation 6.

 2.  We  found  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's   conclusions   to   be
    contradictory and unclear and set the  determination  aside.  We  noted
    that nowhere in the determination had the Judge made a finding that the
    P60 and salary slips produced to him were bogus documents or  that  the
    National Insurance number which was the same on both sets of  documents
    was not genuine or that the tax and  national  insurance  contributions
    shown to have been deducted had not in fact been deducted and  paid  to
    HMRC.

 3. As the documents had only been produced at the hearing, UKBA had had no
    opportunity to check their genuineness. If the documents  were  genuine
    we said that the Appellants had proved their  case.  If  not  then  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had been right to dismiss the appeals. Either
    way, we  said,  a  finding  was  necessary  about  the  genuineness  or
    otherwise of the documents.

 4. Accordingly, we found the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made  an  error
    of law for the reasons we stated in that determination. Having  decided
    that the fundamental issue that remained unresolved was whether or  not
    the documents were genuine, we adjourned the matter to permit  UKBA  to
    make checks and it was agreed that the resumed hearing would be  listed
    before me alone.

 5. UKBA had made the checks on the documents and a  signed  statement  was
    produced indicating that it was accepted that they were genuine.

 6. On that basis and in accordance with  the  reasoning  in  our  previous
    determination I remake the decision and allow the Appellants' appeals.


Signed                              Date 23rd January 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

