

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/21517/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 22 April and 6 June 2013                 |On 7  June 2013           |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                               Mr Waleed Ahsan
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  A  R  Babar  and  Mr   A   A   Gondal,   Legal
                       Representatives
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding and Mrs M  Tanner,  Senior  Home  Office
                       Presenting Officers

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      20 February 2013 by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley in  respect  of  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones who  dismissed  the
      appeal following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 23 November 2012 by  way
      of a determination promulgated on 9 January 2013.

   2.       The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 31 December  1985.
      He seeks to remain as a post study work  visa  holder  having  arrived
      here as a student on 26 December 2010 with leave to enter until 24 May
      2012. The application was refused on 24 September 2012  (not  13  July
      2012 as stated in the determination) because  the  appellant  had  not
      shown that he had been awarded a degree within  the  12  month  period
      preceding the application. Alternatively, the judge found that  if  he
      were to look at the facts as at  the  date  of  the  application,  the
      appeal would still fail as although the degree  had  been  awarded  by
      then, the category for which the appellant had sought leave has ceased
      to exist.

   3.       The appeal was dismissed by the judge who found that the  degree
      was awarded on 6 July 2012 and so had not been awarded in the 12 month
      period preceding the application. Article 8 was also relied on but the
      judge found there was no evidence before him as to the nature  of  any
      family or private life the appellant had here.  He found that even  if
      the appellant had made friends and had established a private  life  in
      the two years he had been in  the  UK,  removal  was  a  proportionate
      interference given that the appellant had completed the course he  had
      entered the UK to undertake.

   4.       Permission was granted on the basis that "if the respondent  was
      aware, before taking her decision on 13 July 2012 that  the  appellant
      had been awarded his masters degree, then  the  respondent's  decision
      may disclose an error of law - Khatel  (s.85A:  effect  of  continuing
      application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC)". The  decision  from  the  Upper
      Tribunal made it plain that the court would require clear, unequivocal
      evidence to show that the Secretary of State was put  on  notice  that
      the degree had been awarded before she made her decision.

   5.       On 17 April 2013 the Tribunal received a small bundle of further
      documents from the appellant's representatives. This included evidence
      that notification of the award had been sent to the Secretary of State
      before the date of the decision.

Appeal hearing

   6.       At the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Wilding  sought  an
      adjournment on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  challenge  to
      Khatel in the Court of Appeal was going to be heard in June  and  that
      this appeal should be stayed until that time when  the  law  would  be
      settled. He submitted there was a dispute  between  the  Secretary  of
      State and the Upper Tribunal on the issue  and  that  costs  would  be
      saved by staying appeals on this point  rather  than  the  proceedings
      when the law was unsettled. He also argued that paragraph 34G  of  the
      Immigration Rules had not been considered  in  Khatel  and  that  rule
      clearly established that the date a postal  application,  as  in  this
      case, was made was the date it was posted. He further  submitted  that
      AQ [2011] EWCA Civ 833 had dealt with a case where there was no  fixed
      time line whereas this case had a fixed time line.

   7.       Mr Babar objected to the adjournment.

   8.       Having considered the application for  an  adjournment  and  the
      submissions eloquently  made  by  Mr  Wilding  I  considered  that  an
      adjournment was not justified.  Although I have some sympathy with the
      arguments made on behalf of the respondent, I am required to apply the
      law as it stands and currently Khatel is good law until, and if, it is
      set aside. I appreciate the arguments on costs but the  appellant  has
      also incurred costs in pursuing his appeal which he may not  have  had
      to do had the adjournment application been made prior to  the  hearing
      itself. The Tribunal's  time  would  also  have  been  wasted  had  an
      adjournment been granted. The issue of staying appeal hearings pending
      resolution by a higher court raises many  difficulties.  For  example,
      acquiescence to such requests would  no  doubt  encourage  parties  to
      frequently  seek  adjournments  when  various  issues  were   awaiting
      resolution. It would also mean that  whenever  a  decision  was  under
      challenge nobody would be entitled to rely on it until a higher  court
      had made its decision but of course  that  decision  might  itself  be
      subject to further challenge. For these reasons, therefore, I  refused
      the adjournment application.

   9.       I then proceeded to hear legal arguments on  whether  the  judge
      made an error of law. For the appellant Mr Babar referred  me  to  the
      directions contained within Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley's  decision
      and submitted that documentary evidence had been adduced to  establish
      that the appellant had been  awarded  a  qualification  and  that  the
      Secretary of State had been notified of same prior to the date of  the
      decision.

  10.       In response Mr Wilding argued that there had been  no  error  of
      law and the appellant's representative had not pointed to any  in  his
      submissions. He questioned the necessity  of  the  directions  in  the
      grant of permission given that the  respondent's  appeals  bundle  had
      contained a copy  of  the  award  from  the  University  (at  D1).  He
      submitted that as far as the Secretary of  State  was  concerned,  the
      award had come too late. He submitted that the letter from the  London
      School of Marketing trading as LS Business  School  of  2  April  2012
      which  had  been  submitted  with  the  application  was  insufficient
      evidence of the award as the School was not the awarding body  and  so
      had no entitlement to issue such a letter. The  judge  had  taken  the
      award into account but found it did not assist  the  appellant  as  it
      should have been awarded  within  12  months  of  the  making  of  the
      application.  Mr Wilding submitted that the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
      consider paragraph 34G of the rules when reaching its  conclusions  in
      Khatel; that clarified the argument about  when  the  application  was
      made. The time line was further clarified by  Table  10.  AQ  did  not
      apply to this type of application. Moreover, if the Secretary of State
      was required to consider the  appellant's  fresh  evidence  then  that
      amounted to a variation application which could not succeed because by
      that stage the Post Study Work route had been abolished. Additionally,
      if the date for consideration was  the  date  of  the  decision,  then
      maintenance would have to be assessed as at that date. No evidence  of
      funds at that time had been adduced and so the application would  have
      to  fail.  The  judge  had  considered  the  variation  point  in  his
      determination (at paragraph 22); the Tribunal had not considered it in
      Khatel. The appellant's representative had to identify an error in the
      determination and he had failed to do so.

  11.       Mr Babar replied. He said that the  appellant's  college  was  a
      highly trusted sponsor and so was entitled to issue the letter it did.
      Khatel set out the law as it stands and should be applied. As long  as
      the Secretary of State was notified of the award before  the  date  of
      the decision, the application had to succeed. Although Mr Babar sought
      to argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider the
      guidance, he conceded that this had not been placed before the  judge.
      He also argued that the judge had erred in that he had not followed  a
      consistent approach in  decision  making  by  the  Tribunal  but  then
      conceded that no evidence of other similar  cases  had  been  adduced.
      With regard to Mr Wilding's submissions on maintenance, he argued that
      if the Secretary of State had considered the funds to be insufficient,
      a request for additional information should  have  been  made  to  the
      appellant or the appellant should have been  put  on  notice  of  this
      deficiency in the refusal notice.

  12.       At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved  my  determination.
      However in the process of  writing  up  my  reasons,  it  came  to  my
      attention  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  maintained  that  the
      appellant made his  application  on  9  April  2012.  There  being  no
      evidence on file as to the date the application  had  been  posted,  I
      issued directions on 22 April requiring evidence of postage. This  was
      subsequently received on 10  May  along  with  notification  that  the
      appellant had changed representatives.

  13.       At the resumed hearing on 6 June the appellant  was  represented
      by Mr Gondal. He relied upon the evidence submitted and neither he nor
      Ms Tanner had anything further to add.  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  14.       I have carefully considered all the submissions and the evidence
      before arriving at my conclusions.

  15.       The judge was not helped by the fact that the  only  documentary
      evidence before him,  other  than  the  respondent's  appeals  bundle,
      consisted of a witness statement (paragraph 6). He  was  not  provided
      with a copy of the guidance or with evidence  of  decision  making  in
      identical cases and Mr Babar's criticism of him for  not  taking  that
      evidence into account is baseless  given  that  it  was  never  placed
      before him. I note from the Record  of  Proceedings  that  submissions
      were brief and the thrust of the appellant's case was that the date of
      the decision was the relevant date for consideration of the facts.

  16.       I have considered the argument made by Mr Wilding  that  if  the
      date of the decision is to be taken as the  decisive  date,  then  the
      application would fail as the PSW category no longer existed  at  that
      time. However there is a difference between considering the facts  and
      considering  the  law.  According  to  the  transitional   provisions,
      applications made and undecided by 5 April 2012 would be considered in
      accordance with the rules in force as at  that  date.  This  does  not
      mean, however, that if documentary evidence  submitted  thereafter  or
      facts in existence  after  that  time  are  taken  into  account,  the
      position regarding the rules changes.

  17.       It has been clarified, by evidence served in compliance with  my
      directions, that the appellant posted his application to the Secretary
      of State on 5 April 2012. It follows  that  the  date  of  making  the
      application (as per paragraph 34G of  the  Immigration  Rules)  was  5
      April and that  it  was  subject  to  the  rules  on  PSW  which  only
      subsequently ceased to exist (on 6 April 2012).

  18.       Following Khatel, I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      erred in finding that he could not  consider  the  award  from  Anglia
      Ruskin University even though it was submitted  to  the  Secretary  of
      State before she decided the application. As an application is  to  be
      treated as on going until the date of the decision, the appellant  had
      established that he met the requirements of the rules and had  adduced
      evidence of his degree certificate before the period for consideration
      of the application came to an end.

Decision

  19.       The First-tier Tribunal made an error  of  law.  The  appeal  is
      allowed on immigration grounds.


      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      6 June 2013.
