

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21479/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 February 2014                         |On : 27 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            srinivasa rao pokuri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Mr Pokuri is a citizen of India born on 16 April 1980. Although  this  is
   the Secretary of State's appeal, it is convenient to refer to  Mr  Pokuri
   as the appellant.

2.  The appellant's circumstances reflect those of  the  various  appellants
   in the cases of Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not  to  follow?)  [2013]
   UKUT 00610 ("Nasim 1") and Nasim and others (Article 8)  Pakistan  [2014]
   UKUT 25 ("Nasim 2"), in that he secured a decision in his favour  in  the
   Upper Tribunal in respect of his unsuccessful appeal against the decision
   of the Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave  to  remain
   in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant.  The  Upper
   Tribunal's favourable decision followed the approach of the  Presidential
   Tribunal in Khatel and others (s85A; effect  of  continuing  application)
   [2013] UKUT 00044. As in those cases, following the judgment of the Court
   of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Raju  &  Ors
   [2013] EWCA Civ  754,  directions  were  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
   proposing to set aside the determination of the Upper  Tribunal  pursuant
   to rule 45(1)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
   Further to the appellant's objection to  such  course,  the  appeal  came
   before me to consider that proposal.

3. The appellant's circumstances are that he entered the United  Kingdom  on
   1 July 2010 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student  until  29
   November 2011 and was subsequently granted leave to remain  on  the  same
   basis until 31 July 2012. He applied, on 2 April 2012, for further  leave
   to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant under  the  Points  Based
   System. His application was refused on 28 September  2012  on  the  basis
   that he was unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  A  of  the
   Immigration Rules. He was awarded zero points for the date of  his  award
   as he  had  failed  to  show  that  he  had  been  awarded  his  eligible
   qualification, an MA in  Marketing  and  Innovation  from  Anglia  Ruskin
   University,  no  more  than  twelve  months  before  the  date   of   his
   application. That in turn led to the award of  zero  points  for  English
   language under Appendix B. His application was accordingly refused  under
   paragraphs 245FD(c) and 245FD(d) of HC 395 and a  decision  was  made  to
   remove him by way of directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration
   Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by the  First-
   tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated  on  5  December  2012.  The
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  he  was  unable  to  meet   the
   requirements of the immigration rules  since  he  had  been  awarded  his
   degree in July 2012 and had thus not obtained the relevant  qualification
   at the time he made his application in April 2012 as the rules  required.
   The judge, however, allowed the appeal against  the  section  47  removal
   decision on the limited basis that it was not in accordance with the law.



5. Following a grant of permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal  set  aside
   the First-tier Tribunal's decision in the light of the decision in Khatel
   and others (s85A; effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 and
   substituted a decision allowing the appeal under the immigration rules.

Appeal hearing and submissions

6. At the hearing there was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  appellant
   and no explanation for his absence. I heard from Mr  Jack  who  submitted
   that the appeal had been correctly refused under the  immigration  rules,
   relying on the decisions in Raju and Nasim. He submitted that the judge's
   decision did not contain any errors of law and had correctly been allowed
   with respect to the section 47 removal decision. Article 8 was not raised
   before the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration and findings

7. The appellant's case is identical in all material respects  to  those  of
   the appellants in Nasim 1 and 2 and the reasoning in  Nasim  1  therefore
   applies to him. Following the Court of Appeal judgment in Raju, the Upper
   Tribunal's decision in Khatel is no longer a correct statement of the law
   and accordingly the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chana  of  8
   May 2013 has to be set aside pursuant to rule 45 (1)(b) of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8. I therefore turn to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dove  and
   the appellant's grounds of appeal relating to that decision.  Judge  Dove
   found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration
   rules and set out his reasons in some detail at paragraphs 13  to  15  of
   his determination. There is no error of  law  in  his  decision  in  that
   regard. The evidence is that the appellant was awarded his degree by  the
   Anglia Ruskin University on 6 July 2012, that plainly being the  relevant
   date as was made clear in Nasim 1. His application for  leave  to  remain
   was made on 2  April  2012,  prior  to  the  award  of  his  degree,  and
   accordingly, following the principles in Raju and Nasim 1, he  could  not
   meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

9. The grounds of appeal challenging the judge's decision  raise  the  issue
   of fairness and the evidential flexibility policy,  but  such  challenges
   were effectively rejected in Nasim 1 at paragraphs 38 to 52. The  grounds
   also refer to Article 8 of the ECHR but there was no  indication  in  the
   grounds before the First-tier Tribunal that Article 8  was  relied  upon.
   There was no reference to any established private life in the appellant's
   statement and there was no evidence of such in the  documentation  before
   the judge. Accordingly, even if the judge ought, despite the  absence  of
   any such grounds, to have gone on to consider Article  8,  there  was  no
   evidence before him to indicate that  the  appellant  had  established  a
   private life capable of giving rise to a breach of Article 8 in the event
   of his removal from the United Kingdom. The appellant had, at that  time,
   been in the United  Kingdom  for  two  years  and  four  months  and  had
   completed the studies for which he had applied for permission  to  reside
   in the country. There was no indication of any  family  life  established
   here and there was no evidence of the family  life  referred  to  in  the
   grounds before the Upper Tribunal. In view of the observations in Patel &
   Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  at
   paragraph 57 and in the head-note to Nasim 2, the  appellant  could  not,
   and indeed could not now, succeed on Article 8 grounds.

10. In the circumstances, I find no error of law  in  the  judge's  decision
   and consider that he properly dismissed the appeal against  the  decision
   to refuse to vary leave whilst allowing the appeal  against  the  removal
   decision on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law.

DECISION


11. I set aside the determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chana  and
   substitute a decision on the following basis:

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of  law.  I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
   decision, to dismiss the appeal against the decision to  refuse  to  vary
   leave but to allow the appeal against the section  47  removal  decision,
   stands.










Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
