

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21754/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 August 2017                        |On 25 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                Justina Okaro
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr F. Khan, Counsel, instructed by Edward Marshall
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  born  on  the  22
       February 1953. She is now 64 years  old.  She  appeals  against  the
       determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer promulgated on  21
       November  2016  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the   respondent's
       decision to refuse her application made in the  United  Kingdom  for
       leave to remain.


    2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in March 2004, aged 51 on a
       family visit visa valid from 24 March 2004 until 24 March 2006.  She
       has never left. Instead, she has remained with her son (whom I shall
       refer to as Stanley) in the  United  Kingdom.   Stanley  is  settled
       here.  It might well be inferred this was the true  purpose  of  the
       original entry.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that she was married in  1981
       and that the couple had four children of whom only Stanley lives  in
       the United Kingdom.  Unfortunately, her husband abandoned  her  with
       their children. All are now adults.


    4. Her son, Stanley, went through a traditional marriage in early 2013,
       some three months before the birth of  his  child,  X.  The  child's
       mother, Precious, is now separated from Stanley.  Both Precious  and
       Stanley work and the appellant  plays  a  significant  role  in  her
       grandson's care.


    5. On these basic facts, there  is  simply  no  basis  upon  which  the
       appellant is entitled to remain under the Immigration Rules on human
       rights grounds or on any other basis. It goes  without  saying  that
       her grandson is attached to  her.  It  is  also  accepted  that  she
       participates fully in the childcare arrangements for him. Similarly,
       she maintains a close relationship with her son  who  supports  her.
       That said, she is an overstayer who does not fulfil the requirements
       of the Rules which might enable her to remain either as a  dependent
       relative  or  as  a  carer  for  her  grandson.  There  is   nothing
       exceptional about her position.

    6. When the last of her own parents, her mother,  died  in  Nigeria  in
       2003, a few months before her arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
       appellant felt able to join her son  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
       Judge accepted she became separated from her husband.  Coming to the
       United Kingdom was an understandable  arrangement.  It  became  even
       more so when X was born in 2013.    Unfortunately,  the  arrangement
       was also unlawful.

    7. It was part of the appellant's case that, notwithstanding  that  she
       has a sister in Nigeria and that her father had  many  siblings  and
       the appellant herself has three children  in  Nigeria,  she  claimed
       that her relationship with all of these members of  her  family  had
       failed such that they were unable to provide her  with  any  support
       were she to return to Nigeria. Her principal reason for saying  this
       appears to have been that as a result of her coming  to  the  United
       Kingdom her children had become estranged from her because  she  had
       exercised a preference in favour of her son in the  United  Kingdom.
       On  its  face,  given  her  situation  in  Nigeria  and  her   son's
       willingness to take over the burden of providing for her, there  was
       no apparent reason why her other children would regard the  move  as
       an act of disloyalty. Many families would have regarded  the  choice
       as a sensible one. Her son  was  in  comfortable  circumstances  and
       apparently able to support his mother.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the  appellant's  claim
       to have  become  estranged  from  her  many  relatives  in  Nigeria.
       However, he accepted much of the evidence that had been provided  to
       him about the appellant's circumstances in the  United  Kingdom  and
       what had occurred to her in Nigeria prior to her departure.

    9.  In  paragraph  129  of  his  determination,  the  judge  found  the
       appellant's evidence to be 'essentially credible'.  This  follows  a
       passage in which he had described the appellant's  circumstances  in
       the United Kingdom and the role that she played in looking after her
       grandson. He accepted that the appellant was told by a  friend  that
       her husband had formed a relationship with  another  woman  and  had
       left home. In other words, the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant
       could not return to the support of her husband.

   10. The judge then went on to deal with the relationship  she  presently
       had with her children in Nigeria.  He  noted  that  in  her  witness
       statement she had made no reference to her  children  having  washed
       their hands of her. That was asserted,  somewhat  surprisingly,  for
       the first time in her son's statement. The judge noted that her  son
       had provided no reasons why this rupture had occurred.  He  had  not
       provided evidence as to how he had become aware of  the  information
       which was necessarily information  obtained  from  others.  It  was,
       apparently, a matter of conjecture. Consequently, in  paragraph  133
       of his determination, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  and
       reasonably concluded that he did not accept  she  had  lost  contact
       with her children in Nigeria or that she would have nobody to return
       to.

   11. Importantly, however, in paragraph 137  of  the  determination,  the
       judge went on to consider the position even if  she  were  estranged
       from her children. He  properly  recorded  that  she  had  lived  in
       Nigeria over 50 years. She had been employed prior to coming to  the
       United Kingdom. She had undertaken no research as to whether or  not
       they would  be  employment  opportunities  for  her  in  return.  He
       reasonably  concluded,  therefore,  that  even  if  there  would  be
       difficulties in obtaining  employment,  they  would  not  amount  to
       obstacles sufficient to prevent a return.  He  reasonably  concluded
       that she would have developed relationships, including with friends,
       before she left  Nigeria  and  that  she  had  therefore  failed  to
       establish she was unable to obtain adequate emotional and  financial
       assistance or support on return to Nigeria.

   12. These findings are all entirely sustainable. They make  good  sense.
       They were findings of fact properly open to the judge.

   13. They are, however, the subject of criticism in the grounds of appeal
       addressed to the First-tier Tribunal. There is nothing in the  point
       that the appellant's removal would violate the human rights  of  her
       grandson or that the decision was made without proper regard  to  s.
       55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

   14. The central feature of the grounds is that there  is  a  fundamental
       inconsistency between the judge's finding in paragraph 139  that  he
       found the appellant's evidence to be essentially  credible  and  his
       finding of fact discrediting her evidence that she had lost  contact
       with her relatives in Nigeria. There is  nothing  inconsistent  with
       these findings. The judge makes it perfectly clear what part of  the
       evidence he accepted and what part  of  the  evidence  he  rejected.
       Similarly, it was properly open to the judge to  conclude  that  the
       appellant had not lost all  social,  cultural  and  family  ties  in
       Nigeria which she had acquired in the preceding 50 years. Suffice it
       to say that the criticisms made in the grounds of appeal are no more
       than an attempt to re-argue the judge's findings, all of  which  are
       sustainable.

   15. In the second set of grounds directed to the Upper Tribunal much  of
       the same criticisms are repeated. In a hearing before  me,  Mr  Khan
       focussed on the claimed inconsistency between the  judge's  comments
       in paragraph 129 that  he  found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
       essentially credible and the judge's later rejection  of  the  claim
       that the appellant was estranged from her children in  Nigeria.   No
       discernible inconsistency exists. The findings are clear.

   16. However, as I have earlier  stated,  this  is  something  of  a  red
       herring. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made sustainable  alternative
       findings 'even if' the  appellant  had  become  estranged  from  her
       children. Further, I observe that  even  if  the  appellant  had  no
       children in Nigeria, even if she had no sister in Nigeria,  even  if
       she had no other family members, there is no violation of her  human
       rights were she to be returned to  the  country  in  which  she  has
       lived.  Parents  die,  husbands  may  become  separated  from  their
       spouses, children may move away; there  is  no  absolute  obligation
       under the Human Rights Act requiring a host state to admit a  parent
       in order to join her adult son in the United Kingdom.  The  evidence
       was that her son provided her with support and there  is  no  reason
       why he would not continue to do that, whatever he might  have  said.
       For these reasons this claim was always bound to  fail.  Mothers  in
       the position of this appellant may understandably wish to settle  in
       the United Kingdom to be with  an  adult  child  and  grandchildren.
       However, they have no right to do so unless the Rules permit such  a
       category of entrance and the individual meets  the  requirements  of
       the Rules in that capacity.  This appellant has never established  a
       right to remain  under  the  Rules  and  her  circumstances  are  no
       different from many others in her position and  of  a  similar  age.
       The circumstances do not merit an exception.

DECISION


        The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error on a point of  law  and
        the original determination of the appeal shall stand.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              24 August 2017
