







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21588/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                  |                                             |
|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated             |
|On: 10 June 2015                  |                             On: 20 July 2015|
|                                  |                                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Nilufer Isik
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Ali, Solicitor Advocate (instructed by Stoke
and White LLP

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as  the  secretary  of  state  and  the
      respondent as 'the claimant'.


   2. The claimant is a national of Turkey, born on  1  November  1974.  Her
      appeal against the secretary of state's decision to  refuse  to  grant
      her indefinite leave to remain as a family member of a business person
      settled in the UK under the Turkey  (European  Community  Association)
      Agreement was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash both  under
      the Standstill  Clause  and  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.


   3. The grounds of appeal in the permission  application  related  to  the
      ambit of the application of the Turkey EC Association Agreement and in
      particular the proper construction of Article 41(1) of the  additional
      protocol to the Ankara Agreement.


   4. The claimant entered the UK on 22 June 2013, having been granted entry
      clearance on 31 May 2013 for a period of six months as  the  dependant
      of an ECAA business person.


   5. Prior to the expiry of her visa, there was communication  between  her
      solicitors and an Operation Manager at UKBA. This resulted  in  advice
      to the legal representative as to the making of an  application  using
      the ECAA 3 form. There were further letters and  representations.   In
      due course it was  claimed  that  the  general  advice  given  by  the
      official was incorrect.


   6. The advice from the official had been that in  the  circumstances  the
      claimant should apply under the family immigration rules. However, she
      would not be able to meet the rules under Appendix FM.  There  was  no
      provision under the Appendix covering  her  particular  circumstances.
      The Judge had regard to the ECCA signed on 12 September 1963  and  set
      out the relevant articles.


   7. The Judge relied on authorities from the  European  Court.  She  found
      that the claimant would have met the requirements for indefinite leave
      to remain prior to the change in the rules under Appendix  FM  at  the
      time the eligibility criteria were less stringent.


   8. She found  that  the  principles  of  the  Ankara  Agreement  and  the
      additional protocols apply even after the spouse of a person  such  as
      the claimant has been granted permanent settlement or ILR [35].


   9. On  25  March  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  granted  the
      appellant permission  to  appeal  regarding  the  application  of  the
      standstill provisions imposed by the  Ankara  Agreement,  but  refused
      permission in relation to Article 8.


  10. Judge Levin considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  standstill
      provisions apply only to first admissions  to  the  territory  of  the
      member state. Accordingly, the Judge arguably erred  by  applying  the
      provisions to the claimant, who had not made her application  for  ILR
      at the same time as her husband.


  11. At the commencement of the hearing on 24 June 2015, Mr  Walker  stated
      at the outset that having regard to the grounds of appeal  in  support
      of the secretary of state's application for permission to  appeal,  he
      was not in a position to make any submissions. He had had the  benefit
      of discussions with Mr Ali and that he accepted  that  there  were  no
      restrictions relating to the claimant.


  12. Mr Ali on behalf of the claimant in a helpful note  has  set  out  the
      provisions of Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol.  He  submitted
      that  it  is  clear  that  the  standstill  clause  applies   to   the
      introduction of any new restrictions on the freedom  of  establishment
      and the freedom to provide services.


  13. He referred to two authorities. The first was Tum and  Dari  (External
      Relations) [2007] EUECJ C 16/05 (20 September 2007). He submitted that
      the secretary of state erred in her contention in the grounds that the
      prohibition on restrictions related solely  to  the  first  admission.
      This is inconsistent with the holding paragraph in the decision in Tum
      and Dari.


  14. The ruling by the Court which is to the following effect:


     Article 41(1) of  the  Additional  Protocol  which  was  signed  on  23
November 1970 at  Brussels and concluded, approved and confirmed  on  behalf
of the Community by    Council Regulation (EEC) no. 2760/72 of  19  December
1972, is to be interpreted as   prohibiting the introduction,  as  from  the
entry into  force  of  that  protocol  with  regard  to  the   Member  State
concerned,  of  any  new  restrictions  on  the  exercise  of   freedom   of
establishment,  including  those  relating   to   the   substantive   and/or
procedural conditions  governing the first admission into the  territory  of
that state, of Turkish nationals    intending  to  establish  themselves  in
business there on their own account.


  15. He submitted that the section in the relevant  holding  by  the  Court
      which refers  to  the  first  admission  is  an  illustration  of  the
      application of the principles and a statement of the ratio.


  16. The second case relied on was Naime Dogan v Bundesrepublik Deutschland
      (Case) C-138/13), a judgement of the  second  chamber  dated  10  July
      2014. He submitted that the secretary of state wrongly concluded  that
      the  ratio  is  qualified  or  restricted  to  entry   clearance/first
      admission applications. That decision establishes  the  principles  of
      the Ankara Agreement and the additional protocol  applies  even  after
      the spouse of  persons  such  as  the  respondent  have  been  granted
      permanent settlement or ILR in a member state.


  17. The relevant facts in that case by way of illustration were  that  the
      main applicant, Mrs Dogan, applied to  join  her  husband  who  was  a
      Turkish worker with permanent residence in  Germany.  She  provided  a
      German language certificate but the German authorities  dismissed  her
      appeal finding that she was illiterate. The first question was whether
      Article 41(1) of the additional protocol  was  to  be  interpreted  as
      meaning that the standstill clause set out in the provision  precludes
      a measure of national law, introduced after the entry  into  force  of
      that additional protocol in that Member State, who wished to enter the
      territory of that state for the purpose of family  reunification,  the
      condition that they demonstrate beforehand  that  they  have  acquired
      basic knowledge of the member state.


  18. The Court held that it should be noted that it  is  settled  case  law
      that the standstill clause set out in Article 41(1) of the  additional
      protocol prohibits generally the  introduction  of  any  new  measures
      having the object or effect  of  making  the  exercise  by  a  Turkish
      national of the freedom of establishment or  the  freedom  to  provide
      services on the territory of that Member  State  subject  to  stricter
      requirements than those that applied to  him  at  the  time  when  the
      Additional Protocol entered into force with regard to the Member State
      concerned - judgment in Dereci and others, C-256/11, para 88.


  19. In that case, it was not disputed that the national provision in issue
      which brought about a tightening of conditions of admission concerning
      family reunification which had existed previously, at the date after 1
      January 1973 on which the Additional Protocol was entered into  force.
      In Dogan, the appellant provided a German national certificate but the
      German  authorities  dismissed  her  appeal,  finding  that  she   was
      illiterate.


  20. The Court's ruling with regard to  Article  41(1)  of  the  Additional
      Protocol signed in November 1970 has been interpreted as meaning  that
      the standstill clause set out in the  annex  must  be  interpreted  as
      precluding a measure of national law, introduced after the entry  into
      force of that additional protocol in the member state concerned, which
      imposes on spouses of Turkish nationals residing in that member state,
      who wish to enter the territory of that  state  for  the  purposes  of
      family reunification, the condition that they  demonstrate  beforehand
      that they have acquired basic knowledge of the  official  language  of
      that member state.


  21. I have had regard to the grounds of appeal relied on by the  secretary
      of state where it is contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      failed  to  consider  that  the  restrictions  on   introducing   less
      favourable conditions to ECAA applications and the provisions in force
      in 1973 are clearly stated as relating to the first admission  to  the
      territory of the member state. Accordingly, it is contended  that  the
      claimant's application was a further application that took place after
      the first admission.


  22. However, I find that the Article as set out by the Judge at  paragraph
      20 in any event governed the first admission to the territory of  that
      state of  Turkish  nationals  intending  to  establish  themselves  in
      business there on their own account. This was not the basis upon which
      the claimant sought indefinite leave to remain.


  23. In the circumstances the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the
      claimant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as she entered
      the UK on a six month visa. That requirement, however, post dated  the
      Ankara Agreement. She would have met the requirements for ILR prior to
      the change  in  the  rules  under  Appendix  FM.  At  that  time,  the
      eligibility criteria were less stringent and all  she  would  have  to
      show was that she was legally in the UK at the point  of  application,
      which she was. The decision in Dogan establishes that  the  principles
      of the Ankara Agreement and the additional protocols apply even  after
      the spouse of a person such as the claimant has been granted permanent
      settlement or ILR.


  24. Having regard to the foregoing analysis, the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge was in accordance with the standstill clause.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  any
material error of law and shall accordingly stand.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date:  17/July 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

