
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21076/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April 2014                              |On 30 May 2014               |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SYED MUHAMMAD KASHIF

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):     Mr P Deller, Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs J Desouza, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers (Bethnal Green Road)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker which was promulgated on  7  March  2014
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 20 February 2014.  For  ease  of
    reference I shall refer throughout this determination to the  Secretary
    of State who was the original respondent as "the  Secretary  of  State"
    and to Mr Kashif who was the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant, who was born on 4 June 1980, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.
    He applied to vary his leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant having initially been  here as a student and then as a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study) Migrant.  The application was refused by the Secretary  of
    State on 15 May 2013.

 3. The basis of the Secretary of  State's  decision  as  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter is that the technical requirements  which  are  set  out
    within the Immigration Rules were not satisfied. In particular, he  had
    not signed the third party declaration with which he had been  provided
    and  also  he  had  not  provided  a  separate  letter  from  a   legal
    representative.

 4. The claimant appealed against this decision.  In his witness  statement
    in support of his appeal  he  claimed  to  have  been   called  in  for
    interview  by the Secretary of State and that  at  that  interview,  at
    which he says he was asked about  80 questions, the  representative  of
    the Secretary of State had told him at the  conclusion  that  the  Home
    Office was satisfied that the claimant had complied with the Rules  and
    that no further documents were required.

 5. The claimant then did not hear again from the Secretary of State  until
    he received the refusal letter in which it was claimed (it would appear
    correctly)  that  the  requirements  under  the  Rules  had  not   been
    satisfied.

 6. Before the hearing before Judge Parker directions  had  been  given  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Denson on 14 November 2013 to the effect that
    the Secretary of State must produce a copy of the record  of  interview
    but the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  comply  with  that  direction.
    Moreover the Secretary of State was not represented at the hearing.

 7. Accordingly, following consideration of the evidence which  was  before
    him and in light also of the submissions which were made on  behalf  of
    the claimant at the hearing, Judge Parker found  as  a  fact  that  the
    claimant's account was credible and that his version of  what  occurred
    at the interview was accurate. It is not now suggested on behalf of the
    Secretary of State that in the circumstances of this appeal that was  a
    finding which was not open to Judge Parker.  In my judgement clearly it
    was, because that was the only evidence which was before him.

 8. In Judge Parker's determination he purported to allow the  appeal  even
    though he apparently found that the requirements under  the  Rules  had
    not in fact been complied with.  As the Secretary of State had  claimed
    in the refusal letter, it appears (as the judge  accepts  at  paragraph
    14) that the full details of the third party required under  the  rules
    had not been provided and also a letter from the  legal  representative
    was required but had not been provided.  It has not been argued  before
    me on behalf of  the  claimant  that  in  those  circumstances  it  was
    properly open to the judge to allow this appeal  under  the  Rules  but
    following discussion it certainly  is  the  claimant's  case  that  for
    reasons which I will set out below, the Secretary of  State's  decision
    was nonetheless not in accordance with the law.



Discussion

 9. Before giving this determination I  discussed  with  both  parties  the
    decision which provisionally I proposed to make and it is right to  say
    that both parties considered that this decision was a  fair  one  which
    deals justly with the issues in this appeal in light of the history  of
    this case and the evidence which was before the Tribunal.   Accordingly
    I can summarise my  reasons  for  making  the  decision  I  shall  make
    shortly.

10. I start by  accepting  (on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  effective
    challenge to  the  evidence  of  the  claimant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) that the claimant was indeed called in for  interview  as  he
    says he was and that at the conclusion of the  interview  he  was  told
    that certainly at that stage the Secretary of State  did  not  wish  to
    raise any further matters concerning the application but was  satisfied
    then that no further documents were required.  I also have to  find  on
    the basis of what is set out in Judge Parker's determination that  even
    though at that time the Secretary of State or  those  representing  her
    were satisfied that no further documents were  required,  that  was  in
    fact incorrect because it is clear from what is said  elsewhere  within
    the determination as referred to  above,  that  in  fact  some  of  the
    specified documents had not been provided.  It is for that reason  that
    I have to find that the determination  of the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    to be set aside and the decision remade although I preserve the finding
    as I have already noted, that the claimant's evidence is  credible  and
    is to be accepted.

11. Although the judge appeared  to  consider  at  paragraph  16  that  the
    Secretary of State's "flexibility policy" (presumably  a  reference  to
    her "evidential  flexibility"  policy)  required  her  to  request  the
    claimant to provide further  evidence   if  this  was  missing,  in  my
    judgement this  is  in  fact  not  strictly  correct  because  had  the
    Secretary of State just dealt with the application on the papers  there
    would have been no requirement to  ask  for  any  further  information.
    However, the Secretary of State did not do so but chose to  invite  the
    claimant in for interview and in those circumstances I consider that to
    the extent that there were gaps which  could  have  been   filled,  the
    Secretary of State as a matter of fairness, was obliged  then  to  give
    this claimant an opportunity of dealing with any oversights that  might
    have been  made.

12. As Mr Deller accepted during the  course  of  his  commendably  concise
    submissions, it would seem very odd if having called  the  claimant  in
    for interview, the representative of the Secretary of State did not put
    to the claimant such concerns as he may have  had.   He  also  accepted
    that it was probably correct to state that as a matter of  fairness  if
    the Secretary of  State  subsequently  appreciated  that  some  of  the
    paperwork had not been completed, in those circumstances this  claimant
    should have been given an opportunity of correcting those  deficiencies
    if he could .

13. I have regard when considering  this  aspect  of  this  appeal  to  the
    decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -  common-law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 and it is sufficient  for  these
    purposes if I set out the conclusions of the Tribunal  with  regard  to
    fairness contained at paragraph 2 of the head note as follows:

         "2.  The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote: what
             fairness demands is dependent on the context of  the  decision
             and the particular circumstances of the applicant."

14. In my judgement, in light of the statement by the representative of the
    Secretary of State to the claimant at the end of the interview that his
    application was in order, thereby  creating  an  expectation  that  his
    application would be granted, the principles of fairness  required  him
    to be given at least an opportunity of putting right such  deficiencies
    as the Secretary of State may subsequently have realised there were  in
    his application.

15. Accordingly, although I have found  an  error  of  law  such  that  the
    judge's determination must be set aside, I shall remake the decision by
    allowing the appeal  to  the  extent  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in accordance with  the  law.  I  shall  also  make  a
    direction that the Secretary of  State  must  when  reconsidering  this
    application take account of such  evidence  as  the  claimant  provides
    within the next 21 days.  This gives the claimant an opportunity to the
    extent that he is able of complying with the requirements of the Rules.
     If he does so, then there is no reason why this application should not
    be granted.  The only detriment to the Secretary of State is  that  the
    claimant would not be obliged to pay another fee. On the other hand, if
    it turns out that the claimant is unable to  comply  with  any  of  the
    requirements under the rules, then in those circumstances there  is  no
    proper reason why ultimately his appeal should succeed.



Decision

I set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  J  Parker  as
containing a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the decision  of
the Secretary of State is not in accordance with the law.

I direct that when considering the claimant's application the  Secretary  of
State must take account of such further  evidence  as  may  be  provided  on
behalf of the claimant within 21 days of today's date.


Signed:                                 Date: 27 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

