

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/21503/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |            Decision & Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 4 February 2016                 |            On 22 February 2016    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               Mr SHAHIN MIAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Lam (counsel) instructed by       David Tang & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 3rd June 2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.




Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  18  November  1992  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.

4. On  29  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for an EEA residence card.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Abebrese ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  16  October  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Reeds gave permission to appeal stating

      "1. It is arguable that when considering whether this was  a  marriage
      of convenience, the First-tier Tribunal made a factual error referring
      to the parties having lived together for three years  (at  [15])  when
      the evidence referred to a date in October 2012.
      "2. Furthermore, when considering the issue, it is arguable  that  the
      First-Tier Tribunal failed to take into account in  the  decision  and
      weighing in the balance material evidence, including the pregnancy  of
      the EEA sponsor and the  documentation  provided  to  demonstrate  the
      relationship."

The Hearing

7 (a) Mr Lam, for the appellant, relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  told
me that the Judge had treated one single factor  as  determinative  of  this
appeal without considering each strand of evidence. He told me that  despite
the fact that the Judge accepts at [17] that the  EEA  sponsor  is  pregnant
with the appellant's child, and that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  had
lived together since October 2012, at [15] the Judge relies entirely  on  an
ambiguous answer given by the appellant to a question posed to  him  in  two
parts by an immigration officer.


(b) Mr Lam told me that the appellant  was  interviewed  on  23  July  2014.
During that interview he was asked "your current leave in the  UK  has  just
expired. Are you entering into this  marriage  because  your  Visa  has  now
ended?" The appellant answered  "yes".  Mr  Lam  told  me  that  the  answer
related to the first sentence of the question  only.  It  was  an  ambiguous
answer and not an admission. He told me that the Judge  viewed  that  answer
as being entirely determinative of the appellant's credibility and that  the
Judge gave inadequate consideration to the positive findings of  fact  which
support the appellant's position that he is in a durable  relationship  with
an EEA national.


(c) Mr Lam urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.


8. For the respondent, Mr Tarlow adopted the terms of the rule  24  response
dated 3 November 2015. He told me that the focus in this  case  is  [15]  of
the decision. He told me that the Judge was correct to  take  account  of  a
simple answer given to what he described as a simple question.  He  told  me
that the Judge had made findings in relation to  cohabitation  &  pregnancy,
so that having considered each aspect of this case the Judge  was  empowered
to find one factor to be determinative of the appeal. He told  me  that  the
decision does not contain errors of law, material or  otherwise,  and  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand

Analysis

9. This application was made on the basis of the establishment of a  durable
relationship. In the reasons for refusal letter the  respondent  bemoans  an
apparent lack of evidence  of  the  durable  relationship.  A  supplementary
reasons for refusal letter narrates the fact  that  the  appellant  and  EEA
national have made two frustrated attempts to marry.

10. At [14] the Judge sets out his findings that on both 18  July  2014  and
17 November 2014 the appellant and sponsor were intercepted  at  a  registry
office and prevented from marrying.

11. In the first sentence of [15]  the  Judge  narrates  "the  tribunal  has
found on the evidence that the marriage of the appellant and the sponsor  is
not one which satisfies the requirements of the  regulations..............."
that is a finding which was not open to the Judge to make  because  at  [14]
the Judge records that marriage did not take place. It is  a  finding  which
indicates that the Judge  approached  this  case  as  an  enquiry  into  the
genuineness of the marriage, rather than consideration  of  whether  or  not
the evidence was sufficient to establish a durable relationship.

12. The Judge's findings of fact are contained between  [14]  and  [17].  At
[17] the Judge finds that the  sponsor  is  pregnant  with  the  appellant's
child. At [15] the Judge finds that  a  tenancy  agreement  shows  that  the
appellant and sponsor have been living together. The Judge gives no  reasons
for finding  that  neither  of  those  facts  form  evidence  of  a  durable
relationship.

13. In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT
00038(IAC) the Tribunal held that "Although neither the  Directive  nor  the
Regulations define it, as  a  matter  of  ordinary  parlance  and  the  past
experience of the UK's  Immigration  Rules  and  case  law,  a  marriage  of
convenience in this context  is  a  marriage  contracted  for  the  sole  or
decisive purpose of gaining admission to the host state. A durable  marriage
with  children  and  co-habitation  is  quite  inconsistent  with   such   a
definition".

14. The failure of the Judge to take  account  of  the  sponsor's  pregnancy
(and the undisputed evidence that the appellant (now) is the father  of  the
child), together with the Judge's failure to properly consider the  accepted
evidence of cohabitation is an error of law. The Judge's focus on  marriages
of convenience, when the sponsor and appellant are not even married,  is  an
error of law. I view those errors to be material errors of law, because  had
the errors  not  been  made,  the  outcome  of  the  case  could  have  been
different. Because I find material errors of law I set aside the decision.

15. Although I set the decision aside, there is sufficient  evidence  before
me to enable me to substitute my own decision.


Findings of Facts


16. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national. He arrived  in  the  UK  on  15
June 2011 with leave to  remain  as  a  student  until  31st  May  2014.  In
September 2011, whilst working at a car wash (in the UK), the appellant  met
Ms Dace Puke.

17. Ms Dace Puke is an EEA national exercising treaty rights of movement  in
the UK. Romance blossomed between the appellant and the  EEA  national  and,
12 October 2012, they started to live together. They  live  together  still.
On 16 June 2012 the appellant's leave to remain was  curtailed  because  the
appellant's college had its sponsor licence revoked.

18. On 17 July 2014 the appellant and the EEA national  attempted  to  marry
at a registry office. They were intercepted by six immigration officers  who
interviewed them separately. They were not allowed to marry. On 17  November
2014 the appellant and the EEA sponsor returned to the registry office  once
more  intending  to  marry.  For  the  second  time  they  were  stopped  by
immigration officers. The appellant and EEA national have not married.

19. The appellant and EEA national now have a 10-month-old  baby  who  lives
with them. Their relationship endures; they are committed to each other  and
intend to continue to live together.


Conclusions


20. Article 3.2 of the Directive provides that a host  Member  State  shall,
in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate entry and  residence
of, amongst others, the partner with whom the Union citizen  has  a  durable
relationship,  duly  attested.   Regulation  8(5)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
correspondingly states that a person will be an extended  family  member  of
an EEA national if the person is the partner of an EEA national (other  than
a civil partner) and can prove to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a
durable relationship with the EEA national.

21. A "durable relationship" is not defined by the  Regulations.   "Durable"
has a number of potential  meanings.   The  dictionary  definition  suggests
that if something is durable it has the ability to  withstand  pressure  and
the wear of time and that it is long lasting.  In essence this  mirrors  the
general requirements to be found in  Immigration  Rules  that  relationships
should be subsisting, that they should in a sense have acquired a  sense  of
permanency either through  marriage,  civil  partnership  or  by  virtue  of
length of time and that the parties  should  intend  that  the  relationship
will continue on a permanent basis.

22. The appellant and his EEA national partner have been in  a  relationship
since September 2011. They have lived together since October 2012. They  now
have a child. The weight of  reliable  evidence  indicates  that  there  are
committed to each other; they would, by now, be married to each  other  were
it not for the respondent's intervention. I therefore  draw  the  conclusion
that they intend to live  together  permanently  and  that  they  are  in  a
durable relationship.

23. I therefore find that the appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law. I therefore set that decision aside

25. I substitute the following decision.

26. The appellant's appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  is
allowed.



Signed                                                              Date 15
February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


