
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21844/2012
                                                               ia/21852/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 March 2013                              |On 18 March 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                            VADIVARASI RAJENDRAN
                               ARUN VEERASAMY

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms N Manyarara, instructed by Jein, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued  on  7  December  2012  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the respondent's decision made on 26  September  2012  refusing
    their application for further leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant and dependant.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of India.  On 16  October  2010  the  first
    appellant was granted leave to enter as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    until 7 February 2012 and the second appellant was granted leave  as  a
    dependent partner.  On 4 April 2012 the  first  appellant  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant,  again
    with the second appellant as her dependant.

3.   Her application was refused as she was unable to show  that  the  award
    she relied on had been awarded at the date of her application.  At  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    first appellant had been studying at the London School of Business  and
    Finance for an MBA to be awarded  by  the  University  of  Wales.   She
    submitted in support of her application a letter dated  29  March  2012
    saying that she had successfully completed Part 1 of her  qualification
    and was awaiting for the dissertation result.  On 16 May 2012  she  was
    notified by the University of Wales that she had been successful and on
    9 June 2012 she forwarded her MBA award to the respondent.

4.   However, the  judge  found  following  NO  (Post-Study  Work  -  award)
    Nigeria [2009] UKAIT  00054  that  the  qualification  must  have  been
    awarded by the date of application and not thereafter.  On  this  basis
    the appeal was dismissed.

5.    Subsequently,  in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 00044 the Tribunal held  that  an  application
    for further  leave  to  remain  was  to  be  treated  as  a  continuing
    application starting with the date when  it  was  first  submitted  and
    ending on the date when it was decided  and  therefore  an  award  made
    after the initial application but before the date of  the  respondent's
    decision could be taken into account.

6.   Mr Nath conceded that if Khatel, which is the subject of an  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal, was correctly decided then the judge had erred  in
    law and the appeal should be allowed.  He asked for the hearing  to  be
    adjourned until the appeal had been heard by the Court of Appeal but  I
    was not satisfied that this was the proper course to take  particularly
    when the date of hearing was not known.  The respondent's  position  is
    protected by her appeal rights.

The Error of Law and Re-making the Decision

7.   I am satisfied in the light of Khatel that the judge erred  in  law  by
    finding that an award made subsequent to the application but before the
    respondent's decision could not be taken into account.  I set aside the
    decision and in the light of the judge's findings of fact substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal against the refusal of  further  leave  to
    remain.
Decision

8.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside.   I
    re-make the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  against  the  decision
    refusing further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.






Signed                                  Dated: 15 March 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
