

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/21829/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 August 2017                          |On 15 August 2017                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


|           |DAVID NDAGIJIMANA                              |               |
|           |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)                 |               |
|                                                                            |
|Appellant                                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|  |SEC                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   |    |
|  |Respondent                                                          |    |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, of Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
                    Partnership.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Rwanda born on  10  July  1972,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hosie who (following a  hearing  on
    26 September  2016)  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 20 May 2015 to refuse his application of 24 September  2014
    for indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of ten year's continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.
    The respondent also refused the application on  human  rights  grounds,
    having considered para 276ADE(1) of the Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)   (hereafter   referred   to
    individually as a "Rule" and collectively the "Rules") and Article 8 of
    the 1950 European Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) outside the Rules.

Immigration history and relevant background

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  1  October  2004  with
    entry clearance as a student. His leave was  subsequently  extended  as
    follows: He had leave as a student until 31 January 2010 and as a  Tier
    1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 24 February 2012. He then submitted an in-
    time application for leave to remain on the basis of his  human  rights
    which was refused on 17  April  2013.   He  appealed.  His  appeal  was
    dismissed and he exhausted his appeal rights on 24 April 2014.

 3. The relevant immigration history after he exhausted his  appeal  rights
    is as follows:

             16  May  2014       The  appellant   lodged   judicial   review
proceedings

            16 Sep 2014      The judicial review claim was dismissed

            24 Sep 2014      The appellant  made  the  application  for  ILR
                            which is the subject of this appeal.
                       As at the date  of  the  application  and  as  stated
                            above, the appellant had lived  in  the  United
                            Kingdom for  a  total  period  of  9  years  11
                            months.

            20 May 2015      The  decision  that  is  the  subject  of  this
                            appeal was made. At this  date,  the  Appellant
                            had lived in the United  Kingdom  for  a  total
                            period of 10 years 8 months.

            25 Sep 2016      Date of hearing before  Judge  Hosie.  As  this
                            date, the appellant had lived in the UK  for  a
                            total period of 12 years 5 months.

 4. In his witness statement dated 13 September 2016,  the  appellant  said
    that he was born in Uganda and lived with his  family  there  from  his
    birth until 1994 when he went to Rwanda, aged 22 years.  He  stayed  in
    Rwanda for a period of 9 years, from 1994 until 2003 when  he  went  to
    Holland for studies. He stayed in Holland for one year and then applied
    to study in the United Kingdom, arriving in the  United  Kingdom  on  1
    October 2004. He also said that he was not aware that his leave was not
    extended under s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971 (the "1971 Act") during
    the course of the judicial review proceedings  and  genuinely  believed
    that he had s.3C leave.

The judge's decision

 5. One issue before the judge under para 276B was whether the  appellant's
    leave was extended under s.3C whilst his  judicial  review  proceedings
    were pending. Mr Nasim, who  appeared  for  the  appellant  before  the
    judge, contended that it did. The respondent's representative contended
    it did not. Having considered s.3C of the 1971 Act,  the  judge  agreed
    with the respondent that the appellant's leave was not  extended  under
    s.3C of the 1971  Act  whilst  his  judicial  review  proceedings  were
    pending. The judge therefore concluded that the appellant had 9 years 7
    months' of lawful residence as at the date of  his  application  of  24
    September 2014 and therefore that he could not satisfy para 276B of the
    Rules which required 10 years' of lawful residence.

 6. It was also argued before the judge that the respondent had  failed  to
    consider the exercise of her discretion in relation to the gap  in  the
    appellant's leave since he exhausted his appeal  rights.  The  relevant
    section of the decision letter reads:


            "Discretion for breaks in lawful residence

            ... You must be satisfied that the applicant has acted  lawfully
        throughout the whole 10 year period and has made  every  effort  to
        obey the Immigration Rules.

            ...

            Gap(s) in lawful residence

            ...

            You can use your judgment and  use  discretion  in  cases  where
        there may be exceptional reasons why a single application was  made
        m ore than 28 days out of time. For  example,  exceptional  reasons
        can be used for cases where there is:

                 a postal strike,
                 hospitalisation, or
                 an administrative error by the Home Office

            Your current application of 24 September 2014 was submitted  153
        days out-of time, after your appeal rights exhausted  on  24  April
        2014.

            It is noted that prior to submitting this application you  filed
        for Judicial Review in May 2014. Your Judicial Review was dismissed
        at a Substantive Hearing on 16 September 2014.

            It must be pointed out that filing for Judicial Review does  not
        extend your leave by the provision of Section 3C of the Immigration
        Rules. Further, you did not have  any  leave  when  you  filed  for
        Judicial Review and the decisions in relation to  your  immigration
        history where [sic] maintained.

            No exceptional reasons have been  provided  for  submitting  the
        currently application in excess of 28 days out-of-time.  With  this
        in mind, it is considered not appropriate to exercise discretion in
        your circumstances."

 7. Mr Nasim confirmed at the  hearing  before  me  that  he  advanced  the
    submission before the judge  that  she  should  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under s.86(3) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the "2002 Act") on the ground that  the  respondent's  discretion
    should have been exercised differently. It was argued before the  judge
    that the appellant had provided exceptional reasons. In  this  respect,
    his witness statement dated 13 September 2016 stated that  he  believed
    that his leave was extended  under  s.3C  whilst  his  judicial  review
    proceedings were pending, that he  genuinely  believed  he  had  lawful
    leave during this period, that he had  developed  strong  private  life
    ties in the United Kingdom and was integrated into the  United  Kingdom
    whereas he had no ties or limited ties in Rwanda.

 8. The judge dealt with the submission in  relation  to  the  respondent's
    discretion at para 27 where she stated:

            "27. ... In relation to the  alleged  failure  to  appropriately
             exercise discretion by the Respondent or the fettering  of  its
             discretion applies to gaps in lawful  residence.  As  indicated
             the period of judicial review, albeit he was entitled  to  make
             this  application,  was  not  part  of  lawful  residence.  The
             argument that the Respondent has  somehow  failed  to  properly
             exercise discretion cannot be sustained."

 9. In relation to  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  under  the  Rules,
    specifically para 276ADE(1), the judge said, at para 28, as follows:


            "28. I accept that in fact the Appellant has been in the  UK  at
             the time of the hearing for a period of 9 years and  7  months.
             Given that not all of this was lawful leave I am unable to find
             that he meets the terms of paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) in relation
             to his private life. He does not claim to  have  a  partner  or
             family in the UK. His appeal under the Immigration Rules cannot
             be sustained."

10. Having decided that the appellant could not succeed  under  the  Rules,
    the judge considered the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the  Rules
    at paras 29-37,  making  it  clear  that  she  followed  the  five-step
    approach explained in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.  The  judge
    acknowledged at para 29 that the fact that a case is a 'near miss'  may
    be a relevant  consideration.  She  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    established private life in the United Kingdom and that  removal  would
    interfere with his private life. In relation to  the  third  step,  she
    found that any interference would be in accordance with the law because
    she considered that the appellant was not entitled  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under the Rules. In relation to  the  fourth  and  fifth
    steps, she considered proportionality at paras 36 and 37, which read:

      "36.  Under  the  fifth  test  in  Razgar  the  Respondent's  wish  to
             maintain effective immigration control  is  declared  to  be  a
             public interest consideration in terms of section 117B  (1)  of
             the 2002 Act, as amended by the 2014 Act. In  assessing  public
             interest under Article 8(2) I am required to be mindful of  the
             provisions of Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, as amended. I note that these provisions are a
             starting point and are not exhaustive. The  Appellant  has  not
             committed  any  criminal  offences  and  is   not   liable   to
             deportation. The Appellant can speak English and  has  attained
             qualifications whilst in the UK. Little weight is to  be  given
             to a private life which is established when the  person  is  in
             the UK  unlawfully  and  also  at  a  time  when  the  person's
             immigration status is precarious. Precariousness occurs when  a
             person's continued presence in the UK will  be  dependent  upon
             their obtaining a further  grant  of  leave.  This  Appellant's
             immigration status has always been  dependent  upon  a  further
             grant of leave. He came to study in the  UK  and  there  is  an
             expectation that once his studies have been completed he should
             return to his country of origin. He became  unlawful  when  his
             section 3C leave expired.

      37.   The Respondent's position is that the Appellant  has  a  mother,
             brother and sisters  in  Rwanda  and  that  he  has  spent  his
             developmental and  formative  years  in  Rwanda.  This  is  not
             disputed by the Appellant. The Appellant's position is that  he
             lived apart from his family in Uganda and elsewhere for a large
             part of his life and that as an adult he would  have  to  start
             again and would not be able to live with any of his family. The
             fact that the Appellant may have lived apart  from  his  family
             and would need to set up in his own house if returned to Rwanda
             does not detract from the fact that he  has  family  there  who
             could assist this process and lend support. He  maintains  some
             contact with his family and knows where they are. The Appellant
             would be in a position to maintain contact with his friends and
             acquaintances from the UK by modern means of  communication  if
             living elsewhere. The Appellant is familiar with  the  language
             and culture in Rwanda. These factors tend to indicate  that  he
             ought to be able  to  reintegrate.  The  Appellant  has  gained
             qualifications and experience in the UK. He therefore ought  to
             be able to seek employment and provide for the means to support
             himself in Rwanda.  I  accept  that  this  would  involve  some
             disruption to his  private  life  and  this  must  be  balanced
             against the legitimate aim  of  the  effective  maintenance  of
             immigration control. Taking all of the evidence in the round it
             would not be unduly harsh to refuse the Appellant's appeal."





The issues

11. The grounds of appeal advanced three grounds. Ground  1  concerned  the
    judge's treatment of the submissions before her concerning the exercise
    of the respondent's discretion. It relied upon the versions  of  ss.82,
    84 and 86(3) of the 2002 Act that were in force immediately before they
    were amended by s.15 of the Immigration Act 2014 with  effect  from  20
    October 2014. In essence, it was suggested that the respondent had  not
    properly exercised her discretion to overlook the fact that the gap  in
    the appellant's leave exceeded 28 days and therefore the appeal  should
    be allowed on the ground that the discretion should have been exercised
    differently.

12. The amendment of s.86 with effect from  20  October  2014  removed  the
    Tribunal's power to allow an appeal "in so far as it thinks  that  ....
    (a) a decision .... was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (including
    immigration rules") or (b) a discretion exercised in making a  decision
    ..... should have been exercised differently. At the same time, s.84 of
    the 2002 Act was amended so as to remove the ground of appeal, that the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

13. Accordingly, at the commencement of the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Nasim
    accepted that ground 1 was misconceived.

14. Mr Nasim then advanced ground 1 in the context of Article 8, i.e.  that
    the respondent had erred in the exercise of  her  discretion  and  this
    rendered the decision not "in accordance with the law" for the purposes
    of Article 8(2). He confirmed that this had not been argued before  the
    judge.

15. I shall now summarise the issues before me, as advanced at the  hearing
    before me. They may be summarised as follows:

    i)      Ground (a): The  judge  erred  in  her  consideration  of  para
       276ADE(1), in that, she erroneously considered  para  276ADE(1)(iv),
       instead  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  which  required  consideration  of
       whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
       reintegration in Rwanda.

    ii)     Ground (b): The judge erred in her assessment of the Article  8
       claim outside the Rules, in that:

      x)     (hereafter  the  "discretion  ground")  She  erred  in  law  in
           concluding that the decision was in  accordance  with  the  law.
           Although  this  issue  was  not  argued  before  her,  Mr  Nasim
           submitted that it was a Robinson obvious point, a  reference  to
           the principle in R. v. SSHD, IAT ex parte Anthonypillai  Francis
           Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089).


            y)   (hereafter the "proportionality ground") She erred in  law
           in reaching her decision on proportionality.

Assessment

16. In relation to ground (a), Mr Nasim submitted that the judge had made a
    significant error in her assessment of para  276ADE.  She  should  have
    considered  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles the appellant's reintegration in Rwanda. However, at para  28
    of her decision, she incorrectly referred to para  276ADE(1)(iv)  which
    did not apply. He submitted that this was not a typographical error. He
    submitted that she may have had in mind  para  276B  of  the  Rules  or
    276ADE(1)(iii) but it is clear that she did not consider 276ADE(1)(vi).



17. I asked Mr Nasim whether the error was material in view of the  judge's
    assessment of proportionality outside the Rules at paras 36 and 37.  Mr
    Nasim submitted that the error was material for the following reasons:

    i)      As at the date of the hearing, the appellant had  been  in  the
        United Kingdom for 12 years, and not 9 years 7 months as stated  by
        the judge at para 28 of her decision.

    ii)     In an assessment of whether there  would  be  very  significant
        obstacles to reintegrate, the guidance given by the Court of Appeal
        as to meaning of integration at para 14 of  SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]
        EWCA Civ 813 applies. Para 37 of  the  judge's  decision  does  not
        engage with the issues that should  have  been  considered  and  as
        explained at para 14 of Kamara.

    iii)    An assessment of proportionality outside the Rules cannot  take
        the place of an assessment under para 276ADE(1)(vi). It is possible
        for a judge to find that there were no very  significant  obstacles
        to  an  individual's  reintegration  for  the  purposes   of   para
        276ADE(1)(vi) and yet find that the decision is disproportionate.

    iv)     The appellant had given details in his witness statement as  to
        the reasons why there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
        reintegration in Rwanda. The judge had  failed  to  deal  with  his
        evidence.

    v)      The judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  proportionality,  as
        contended under the proportionality ground in ground  (b),  and  as
        further explained below.

18. I shall deal with the proportionality ground in ground  (b)  below.  As
    will be seen, I have concluded that the judge did not materially err in
    law in her assessment of proportionality. At  this  juncture,  I  shall
    deal with the remainder of the submissions summarised  at  my  para  17
    above.

19. The following is a slightly more detailed summary  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement: The appellant was born in  Uganda  and  lived  there
    until 1994, when at the age of 22 years he went to Rwanda in  order  to
    pursue his studies. He went to study  at  the  National  University  of
    Rwanda and graduated in 1997. He then secured employment in  Rwanda  as
    an Assistant Engineer at the American  Refugee  Committee,  working  in
    Nyagatare. He then secured work with the Catholic  Relief  Services  in
    Butare.  As stated above, he lived in Rwanda for 9 years until 2003. In
    2003, he went to Holland to study. Whilst it is correct to say that the
    judge made a mistake when she  said,  at  para  37,  that  his  mother,
    brother and sisters are in Rwanda, the fact is that, according  to  his
    witness statement, he does have relatives in Rwanda,  i.e.  his  mother
    and three sisters. His sisters are married and  have  lived  in  Rwanda
    since settling there in the early 1990s.

20. With this background, it is useful to recall that the Court  of  Appeal
    said at para 14 of its judgment in Kamara as follows:

             "14.  In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
             "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that  he
             be deported, as set out in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to
             find a job or  to  sustain  life  while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory  language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient  for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as  to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider   in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country  is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a
             reasonable opportunity to be accepted  there,  to  be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to  build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of  human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

            (my emphasis)

21. I accept that para 28 of the judge's decision does not make sense.  She
    referred incorrectly to 276ADE(1)(iv) which did  not  apply.  She  said
    that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for 9 years 7 months
    whereas it is clear from elsewhere in her decision that she found  that
    this was the total period of his lawful leave. She was  aware  that  he
    had continued to live in the United  Kingdom  after  he  exhausted  his
    appeal rights in April 2014. There is  nothing  to  indicate  that  she
    considered  the  question  of  whether  there  were  very   significant
    obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in Rwanda at para 28.

22. However, the judge did consider the question of reintegration in Rwanda
    at para 37, as part of her assessment of  proportionality  outside  the
    Rules.  At  para  37,  she  said  that  the  appellant  had  spent  his
    developmental and formative years in Rwanda. This  observation  is  not
    out of place, given the summary above of his life in Rwanda  from  1994
    to 2003. She said that, whilst he would need to set up his own house if
    returned to Rwanda, this does not detract from the  fact  that  he  has
    family there who could assist with the  process  and  lend  support.  I
    acknowledge that, at para 37, she incorrectly said that  the  appellant
    has a brother in Rwanda. However, this is a minor slip, given  that  it
    is a fact that she correctly  said  that  the  appellant's  mother  and
    sisters live in Rwanda. She said he was familiar with the language  and
    culture in Rwanda, that he has gained qualifications and experience  in
    the United Kingdom and ought to be able to seek employment in Rwanda.

23. In essence, at para 37, the judge did consider the salient matters that
    need to be considered in relation to  the  question  of  whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to reintegration in  an  assessment
    under  para  276ADE(1)(vi).  She  was  plainly  aware  when   assessing
    proportionality that the appellant had  been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom since October 2004.

24. Accordingly, whilst I  accept  that  it  appears  that  the  judge  did
    overlook considering whether there would be very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's reintegration in  Rwanda  in  the  context  of  para
    276ADE(1)(vi), this is not material given her assessment at para 37  in
    the context of proportionality outside the Rules.

25. It is correct to say that it is possible for a judge to find that there
    were no very significant obstacles to an individual's reintegration for
    the purposes of para 276ADE(1)(vi) and yet find that  the  decision  is
    disproportionate. I cannot see how this submission helps the  appellant
    in connection with para 276ADE(1)(vi) since it is his case  that  there
    are very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  in  Rwanda  under
    para 276ADE(1)(vi). Mr Nasim did not suggest that it  would  have  been
    open to the judge, if she had considered para  276ADE(1)(vi),  to  find
    that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    reintegration  in  Rwanda  notwithstanding  her  conclusion  that   the
    decision was  disproportionate  when  assessing  the  Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules. In any event, such  a  suggestion  would  have  been
    untenable because a positive finding under  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  should
    lead to the conclusion that the decision is  disproportionate  even  if
    Article 8 is also considered outside the Rules.

26. Finally, in my  view,  on  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement (summarised at  para  19  above),  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant lacks ties in Rwanda is simply untenable. Given that  he  was
    able, as a young man aged 22 years with less experience of life than he
    had as a 44-year old man at the  date  of  the  hearing,  not  only  to
    complete his university studies in Rwanda but go on to find employment,
    the suggestion that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Rwanda is untenable. Indeed,  his  own  experience  in
    Rwanda over a period of 9 years, during which  time  he  undertook  and
    completed university  studies  from  1994  until  1997  and  found  two
    different jobs over a period of 5  years  from  1997/1998  until  2003,
    shows that, although he had had no prior experience of living in Rwanda
    at  that  time,  he  was  able  to  integrate  in  that  society.   His
    circumstances had improved by the date of the hearing before the  judge
    when compared with his circumstances when he first went  to  Rwanda  in
    1994. As at the date of the  hearing  before  the  judge,  he  had  the
    benefit of having had his previous experience of having lived,  studied
    and worked in Rwanda, whereas in 1994 he went  to  Rwanda  without  any
    prior experience of living there. In addition, he has had  the  benefit
    and experience of living in two other countries that were  new  to  him
    when he first arrived, i.e. Holland and  the  United  Kingdom.  He  has
    received further education in both of those countries. In addition, and
    as the judge said, his mother and three sisters who live in Rwanda  can
    help him to settle down.

27. On this evidence, no Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  can  reasonably
    conclude that there are very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
    reintegration in Rwanda.

28. For all of these  reasons,  the  judge's  error  in  relation  to  para
    276ADE(1)(vi) is not material. I therefore reject ground (a).

29. I turn to the discretion ground in ground (b). As explained at para  11
    above, the argument advanced before the judge was that she should allow
    the appeal under s.86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law. I accept  that  the  judge
    did not deal with this argument at para 27 of her  decision.  I  accept
    that she instead merely stated, at para 27, that s.3C  does  not  cover
    judicial review proceedings.

30. However, the judge's failure to deal with s.86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act is
    wholly immaterial, given that it was accepted by  Mr  Nasim  before  me
    that the submissions were made in reliance upon the  versions  of  s.84
    and s.86 that were obsolete because they were deleted with effect  from
    20 October 2014.

31. I do not  accept  that  it  was  a  Robinson  obvious  point  that  the
    respondent's exercise of discretion was unlawful and  so  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law for the purposes of Article 8(2)  in
    the assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules. It
    must be remembered that the discretion in question is the discretion to
    disregard a period of overstay that is  in  excess  of  28  days.  This
    argument did not strike me as a Robinson obvious point  when  Mr  Nasim
    advanced his submission. It follows that the judge cannot  be  said  to
    have erred in law for failing to deal with an  argument  that  was  not
    advanced before her.

32. In any event, I reject the submission that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law for the  purposes  of  Article  8(2),  for  the
    reasons given at paras 35 and 36 below. Before  giving  my  reasons,  I
    shall summarise Mr Nasim's submissions in this regard.

33. Mr Nasim submitted that the judge failed to consider the reasons  given
    for requesting the exercise of discretion in the appellant's favour  in
    a letter which accompanied the application for ILR. This letter  stated
    that the appellant did not have ties in Rwanda; he had lawful residence
    for 9 years 7 months; and he did not know that his leave  had  expired.
    The decision letter states, under the heading: "Discretion  for  breaks
    in lawful residence" that: "You must be satisfied  that  the  applicant
    has acted lawfully throughout the whole 10 year  period  and  has  made
    every effort to obey the Immigration Rules." Mr  Nasim  submitted  that
    the respondent had failed to consider that the  appellant  was  someone
    who had made every effort to obey  the  Immigration  Rules.  Whilst  he
    accepted that the respondent had considered the exercise of discretion,
    he submitted that she had not done so adequately and that therefore the
    decision was not in accordance with the law for the purposes of Article
    8(2).

34. My reasons for rejecting the submission that the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(2)  for  the
    following reasons:

35. A decision is "in accordance with the law" for the purposes of  Article
    8(2) if the decision is empowered by a provision of the  law  which  is
    accessible, i.e. if there is in place a legislative framework  for  the
    decision which gives rise to the interference with the rights protected
    under Article 8(1) and such legislative framework  is  published  in  a
    form which is accessible to those likely to be  affected.   I  did  not
    hear full argument in this issue and I acknowledge that there has  been
    development in the law on this issue. However, any such development  is
    not relevant in this particular case, given  that  the  nature  of  the
    argument advanced in this case is that the respondent did not  properly
    consider the exercise of her discretion. It is not suggested  that  she
    did not consider the exercise of her discretion  at  all.  To  put  the
    submission another way, it is said that the respondent's  consideration
    of the exercise of her discretion  was  inadequate.  In  my  judgement,
    inadequacy of reasoning cannot render a  decision  not  "in  accordance
    with the law" for the purposes of Article 8(2).

36. Even if the discretion ground was a Robinson obvious point (which I  do
    not accept) in relation to the second step of the five-step approach in
    Razgar  so  that  the  judge  was  obliged  to  consider  whether   the
    respondent's exercise of her discretion rendered the  decision  not  in
    accordance with the law  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(2),  it  is
    inevitable, on any reasonable view, that she would have been  bound  to
    conclude that the decision was in  accordance  with  the  law  for  the
    following reasons:

    i)      The existence or otherwise of any ties in Rwanda is  irrelevant
        to the exercise of discretion  in  this  particular  case  for  the
        simple reason that the discretion in question  concerns  whether  a
        period of overstay in excess of 28 days before an  application  was
        made should be disregarded. Likewise, the fact that  the  appellant
        had had leave for a period of 9 years  7  months  and  was  only  5
        months short of qualifying for ILR under the long residence Rule is
        irrelevant  to  the  question  whether  the  discretion  should  be
        exercised to disregard a period of overstay in excess  of  28  days
        before an application was made. These matters may  be  relevant  to
        the proportionality exercise but they are wholly irrelevant, on any
        reasonable view, to  the  question  whether  the  decision  was  in
        accordance with the law for the purposes of Article 8(2).

    ii)     This is because the discretion in  question  concerned  whether
        the fact that the appellant's application for ILR was made 153 days
        out of time should be a bar to  being  granted  ILR.  The  decision
        letter set out examples of the circumstances in  which  exceptional
        reasons may exist. It will be seen from  those  examples  that  the
        focus is on the reasons why an application was not lodged within 28
        days of an individual's leave expiring. The existence of  any  ties
        in Rwanda and the fact that the appellant was only 5  months  short
        of having 10 years' lawful residence are plainly irrelevant.

      iii)  As for the fact that it is said that the appellant did  not  to
        know that his leave expired when he exhausted his appeal rights  in
        April 2014 and that he genuinely believed his  leave  was  extended
        whilst his judicial review proceedings were pending,  ignorance  of
        the law is not an exceptional reason. It is  reasonable  to  expect
        individuals to comply with the law, if necessary  by  taking  legal
        advice. It cannot therefore be said that  the  appellant  had  made
        every effort to follow the law. In any event, it is plain that  the
        phrase "made every effort to obey the  Immigration  Rules"  in  the
        decision  letter  did  not  set  the  test  for  the  exercise   of
        discretion.

    iv)     There was therefore nothing exceptional  in  the  reasons  that
        were advanced on the appellant's behalf in support of  his  request
        for the exercise of discretion  in  his  favour.  The  respondent's
        decision, that there were  no  exceptional  reasons,  was  entirely
        lawful, on any reasonable view.

37. I therefore reject the discretion ground in ground (b).

38. I turn to the proportionality ground  in  ground  (b).  I  shall  first
    summarise the reasons advanced in the grounds and  at  the  hearing  in
    support of the submission that the judge had erred in her assessment of
    proportionality:

      i)    At para 37, the judge said that the appellant  had  his  mother,
        brother and sisters in Rwanda. This was incorrect. His  mother  and
        three sisters are in Rwanda. His brother is not.

      ii)   The judge incorrectly stated that his family  could  assist  him
        because most of his family members do not live in Rwanda:  he  only
        had three sisters who are married and live in Rwanda. The appellant
        gave evidence that he rarely talked to his sisters and  they  would
        be unable to help him as his sisters were married and  living  with
        their husbands.

      iii)  The judge was incorrect to say that the appellant had spent  his
        "developmental and formative years in Rwanda" because he  had  only
        lived in Rwanda for 9 years from 1994.

      iv)   She failed to consider the fact that the appellant had lived  in
        the United Kingdom for 12 years as at the date of the  hearing.  Of
        this period, he had lawful residence for a  period  of  9  years  7
        months.

      v)    She failed to take into account the reasons  why  the  appellant
        did not meet the requirements for indefinite leave to remain  under
        para 276B of the Immigration Rules.

      vi)   She applied the "unduly harsh" test when  deciding  whether  the
        decision was disproportionate.

      vii)  She failed to consider the appellant's evidence of his  lack  of
        ties to Rwanda as set out in his witness statement. She  failed  to
        grapple with his evidence about his circumstances  in  Rwanda  upon
        his return. Although Rwanda was the country of his nationality,  it
        was the place to which he had the least ties. He spent the majority
        of his life in Uganda (22 years). As at the date of the hearing, he
        had lived in the United Kingdom for 12 years, whereas he  had  only
        lived in Uganda for 9 years.

39. Although I accept that the judge made a mistake  in  stating  that  the
    appellant has a brother in Rwanda, she was correct in stating that  his
    mother and sisters live in Rwanda. The essential point she  was  making
    is that he has family in Rwanda. Thus, the mistake in referring to  the
    brother being in Rwanda is wholly immaterial.

40. The appellant gave oral evidence to the judge (para 11 of  the  judge's
    decision) that he does not  have  much  contact  with  his  mother  and
    sisters in Rwanda and that he would be unable to seek the help  of  his
    family if returned to Rwanda because his sisters are  married  and  are
    living with their husbands. The judge dealt with that evidence at  para
    37 where she said that he had some contact with his  family  in  Rwanda
    and knows where they are. That was consistent with his  oral  evidence.
    Plainly, she did not accept his evidence that his  mother  and  sisters
    would not be able to assist him to  set  up  his  own  house  and  lend
    support. I agree with Mr Nath that the appellant is simply  disagreeing
    with the judge's decision.

41. The same applies in relation to the submission at para 38  iii)  above.
    As I said (at para 22 above), the judge's finding  that  the  appellant
    had spent his developmental and formative years in Rwanda is not out of
    place given the summary above of his life in Rwanda from 1994 to 2003.

42. In relation to para 38 iv) and v) above, the judge  was  plainly  aware
    that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004  and  that  he
    had had leave for 9 years 7 months. She was plainly aware that  he  did
    not satisfy para 276B because the period of his lawful residence was  5
    months short of the minimum period of 10 years. She specifically  said,
    at para 29, that the fact that a case is a 'near miss'  is  a  relevant
    consideration in the proportionality exercise.  She  did  not  need  to
    repeat this at paras 36 or 37 of her decision.

43. In relation to para 38 vi) above, the mere fact that the judge used the
    phrase "unduly harsh" does not mean that she applied the wrong test. It
    is clear from para 29 onwards that she was aware that the  question  in
    relation to  the  balancing  exercise  was  whether  the  decision  was
    proportionate.    She    used    the    words    "proportionate"    and
    "disproportionate"  and  "proportionality"  several  times.  When   her
    decision is read as a whole, it is simply untenable to suggest that the
    use of the phrase "unduly harsh" on one single occasion at para  37  is
    sufficient to displace her use of the correct  word  on  several  other
    occasions elsewhere in the decision so as to  lead  to  the  conclusion
    that she applied the wrong test.

44. There is no express reference in the judge's decision to the fact that,
    as at the date of the hearing, the appellant had lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 12 years whereas he had only lived in Rwanda for  9  years.
    It does not follow that she did not have it in  mind.  Judges  are  not
    obliged to refer to every piece of the evidence.

45. I therefore reject the proportionality ground in ground (b).

46. I have therefore concluded that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision.


Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hosie did not  involve  the
making of any material errors of law.




[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 14 August 2017
