
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP/DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21368/2014
                                                               IA/21375/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2015                |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                              LIDIJA DESPOTOVIC
                             ANDJELA DESPOTOVIC
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Hawkin of Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Davidson of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 25th June 2015.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Serbia born 26th September 1969 and 22nd
    November 1997 respectively.  The first Appellant is the mother  of  the
    second Appellant.

 3. The Appellants entered the UK on 19th  August  2008  with  visit  visas
    valid until 19th February 2009.  Following the expiry  of  their  visas
    the Appellants overstayed without leave.

 4. On 23rd November 2011 the Appellants submitted applications  for  leave
    to remain based upon Articles 3 and 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).  The applications  were  refused
    without a right of appeal on 14th January 2013.   Further  applications
    for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  were  submitted  in
    February 2014 and refused on 30th April 2014.

 5. The Appellants appealed to  the  FtT,  and  their  appeals  were  heard
    together on 21st May 2015.  The FtT, having heard  evidence  from  both
    Appellants, dismissed the appeals with reference to Articles 3 and 8 of
    the 1950 Convention.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Cox  on  18th  September
    2015 in the following terms;

         "1.  The Appellants (A1 and A2) are  citizens  of  Serbia  and  are
             mother and 17 year old  daughter.   They  seek  permission  to
             appeal, in time, against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Davidson whereby he dismissed their appeal  against  the
             Respondent's decision to refuse LTR outside the  Rules  having
             regard to Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

         2.   I have carefully considered the decision in  relation  to  the
             grounds, settled by Counsel who appeared below.   The  grounds
             in essence contend that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
             reasons for his adverse credibility finding and in  particular
             why  the  corroborative  evidence  of  A2  was  rejected;  and
             secondly erred in his approach to A2's private life claim  and
             associated section 55 best interests.

         3.   On consideration, I am just persuaded that both grounds may be
             arguable in the terms in which they are couched.

         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable material error of law in  the
             decision and permission is granted."

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FtT had  directed  itself  appropriately.   In
    summary it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  gave  adequate  reasons  at
    paragraph 38 for not accepting the first Appellant's account  that  she
    was the  victim  of  domestic  violence.   It  was  contended  that  in
    paragraph 38 the FtT referred to both Appellants who claimed to  be  in
    fear of the first Appellant's ex-husband.  It was  contended  that  the
    FtT clearly had regard to the evidence of both Appellants.

 8. It was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  properly  considered  the  best
    interests of the second  Appellant,  as  a  child,  and  balanced  this
    against the public interest.  The FtT noted at paragraph  60  that  the
    first Appellant stated that she was in a relationship, but  not  living
    with her partner, and it was unclear what the nature  of  the  evidence
    was before the FtT regarding this relationship, and what difference  it
    would have made to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

10. Mr Hawkin relied and expanded upon the four Grounds of Appeal which are
    summarised as follows:

    Ground 1

    The FtT erred at  paragraph  38  in  rejecting  the  first  Appellant's
    account of domestic abuse by failing to take into  account  the  second
    Appellant's corroborative evidence.  If the  FtT  rejected  the  second
    Appellant's evidence on this point, reasons should have been given  and
    no reasons were given.

    Ground 2

    The FtT erred in paragraph 32 by proceeding on the basis  that  it  was
    "clearly in her interest" for the second Appellant to return  with  her
    mother to Serbia.  The description of the  second  Appellant's  private
    life, and the evidence in support, in fact  provided  strong  arguments
    that it was in her interest to remain in the UK.

    Ground 3

    The FtT erred at paragraph 46 by concluding that the second Appellant's
    best interests in remaining with her mother outweigh  her  interest  in
    remaining and being educated  at  public  expense.   The  FtT  had  not
    explained how the  second  Appellant's  best  interest  outweighed  her
    interest in remaining.  The FtT erred by appearing to consider that the
    second Appellant's claim concerned the wish to be "educated  at  public
    expense".  This was not the case, as her claim concerned  the  totality
    of her personal, social and private life accumulated during her  nearly
    seven years of living  in  the  UK.   In  focusing  on  the  simplistic
    assumption that the case is just about "education",  the  FtT  had  not
    considered these other relevant points  or  the  evidence  provided  in
    support.

    Ground 4

    In considering at paragraph 50 the proportionality of removal  the  FtT
    erred by leaving out of account the first Appellant's relationship with
    Igor Filipboc, who has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK,  and
    supports both Appellants.

The Respondent's Submissions

11. Mrs Sreeraman relied upon the rule 24  response.   In  summary  it  was
    contended that the FtT had given adequate reasons for the  findings  in
    paragraphs 37 and 38.  There was specific reference in paragraph 37  to
    an ashtray being thrown, and that was  evidence  given  by  the  second
    Appellant, which indicated that her evidence had  in  fact  been  taken
    into account by the FtT.  The  FtT  in  these  paragraphs  gave  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the claim that the Appellants would  be  at  risk
    from the first Appellant's former husband if they  returned  to  Serbia
    and there was no error disclosed in the dismissal of the  appeals  with
    reference to Article 3.

12. It was contended that there was no error disclosed by the consideration
    of the FtT in relation to Article 8.  The FtT correctly referred to the
    guidelines in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

The Appellants' Response

13. Mr Hawkin disagreed that paragraphs 37  and  38  of  the  FtT  decision
    disclosed a consideration of the second Appellant's evidence.   It  was
    submitted that these paragraphs related only to the evidence  given  by
    the first Appellant.

14. Mr Hawkin reiterated that the FtT had neglected to  consider  that  the
    second Appellant was almost an adult, and did not consider  the  second
    Appellant's case fairly, because the FtT consideration related  to  her
    education, and not other aspects of her private life.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I do not find a material error of law disclosed by the first Ground  of
    Appeal.  The FtT was entitled to find in paragraph 37  that  there  was
    little evidence of domestic violence, except the account of the ashtray
    which was thrown, and my reading of this paragraph is that this  aspect
    of the account was accepted.  It was this aspect that was  corroborated
    by the second Appellant's evidence, which is referred to  in  paragraph
    21 of the FtT decision.

17. The FtT was entitled to note that the first Appellant  had  not  sought
    any help from the Serbian authorities in relation to domestic violence,
    and to take into account that her explanation for that, as explained in
    paragraph  37  was  that  she  claimed  that  her  former  husband  was
    politically influential and above the law.  The  FtT  was  entitled  to
    reject this aspect of the first Appellant's account  noting  that  when
    her former husband  received  a  letter  from  the  second  Appellant's
    primary school teacher, threatening to report him to  the  authorities,
    he was frightened into relinquishing control of the  second  Appellant.
    The FtT was entitled to find that this did not  indicate  that  he  was
    above the law.

18. In addition the FtT was entitled to note  in  paragraph  38,  that  the
    Appellants, having left Serbia in 2007 claiming to be in  fear  of  the
    first Appellant's former husband, in fact returned to Serbia in 2008 to
    visit family members, which indicated that they were not  genuinely  in
    fear of the first Appellant's former husband.

19. The FtT adequately assessed the evidence in  relation  to  the  claimed
    risk on return, and did not fail to  take  into  account  any  material
    evidence, and the finding in paragraph 48 that the Appellants  had  not
    proved that they would be at risk on return from the first  Appellant's
    former husband, was a finding open to the FtT.  The evidence  submitted
    to the FtT did not prove the Appellants would be at risk from the first
    Appellant's former husband of treatment that would breach Article 3  of
    the 1950 Convention.

20. In my view grounds 2 and 3 of the application for permission to  appeal
    are linked and I will deal with them together.   The  second  Appellant
    was a minor at the date of the FtT hearing and therefore the FtT had to
    consider her best interests as a primary consideration and  would  have
    committed an error of law had it not done so.

21. Despite incorrect references in paragraphs 32, 43 and 46  to  the  best
    interests of a minor being  paramount  as  opposed  to  primary,  I  am
    satisfied that the FtT realised that the best interests of a child  are
    a primary consideration, and a finding must  be  made  in  relation  to
    those best interests, and then an assessment made  whether  those  best
    interests are outweighed by the strength of any other considerations.

22. The FtT stated in paragraph 32;

         "I therefore accept that Andjela, who is still a  minor,  has  over
         six years of private life which deserved to be taken  into  account
         in this case.  It is clearly in her interest  to  remain  with  her
         mother, and that her social, cultural, and educational life is  not
         disrupted unless there are compelling reasons to the contrary.   In
         view of the fact that she has over six years of meaningful life  in
         the UK, and is currently aged 17, and  will  be  an  adult  in  six
         months' time, she is at the  stage  where  she  would  normally  be
         preparing to take her A levels and preparing to go to university."

23. I find no error of law  in  the  statement  set  out  above.   The  FtT
    recognised that the second Appellant's social, cultural and educational
    life needed to be considered, and  recognised  that  although  still  a
    minor, she would be an adult in six months' time.

24. The second Appellant's witness statement dated 21st May 2015, which was
    presented to the FtT,  does  not  give  comprehensive  details  of  her
    private life but confirms  in  paragraph  3  that  she  is  permanently
    resident with her mother in the UK, and that they last entered  the  UK
    in August 2008 together, and have lived together ever since.  Paragraph
    5 describes the second Appellant  and  her  mother  having  significant
    social and community ties, and explains that they both  considered  the
    UK to be their home, and paragraph 7 describes the  Appellant  and  her
    mother feeling more settled and happier and that they both wished to be
    given the opportunity  to  continue  their  life  in  the  UK.   It  is
    therefore apparent that the second Appellant has always lived with  the
    first Appellant since coming to the UK, and that there is a close  bond
    between them, and it is not apparent that it was suggested to  the  FtT
    that the best interest for the second Appellant would  be  to  separate
    from her mother.

25. In paragraph 47 the FtT concluded that the Appellants had established a
    family life in the UK as  mother  and  daughter,  and  that  conclusion
    discloses no error of law.  It was open to the FtT,  having  considered
    the evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellants to conclude that the
    best interests of the Appellant, as a minor, would be  to  remain  with
    her mother, and to return to Serbia, the  country  of  which  both  are
    citizens, and where they have spent the greater part of their lives.

26. The FtT took into account the wishes of both Appellants  to  remain  in
    the UK, and the length of time that they had resided here, and the fact
    that their residence had been unlawful since February 2009.

27. I do not accept that the FtT has  adopted  the  "simplistic  assumption
    that the case is just about education".  I do not accept  the  FtT  has
    not considered other relevant points.  I do find that there was a  lack
    of comprehensive evidence in relation to the second Appellant's private
    life, and that her evidence, and that of the first Appellant, did focus
    upon her education.  The second Appellant referred to her education  in
    paragraph 8 of  her  witness  statement  confirming  her  enjoyment  in
    attending school. Paragraph 7 of the Grounds of Appeal contained within
    the first  Appellant's  witness  statement  confirms  that  the  second
    Appellant is currently attending school and is at an important stage of
    her education, and that removing her from the UK would severely disrupt
    her ability to focus on her education.

28. The FtT acknowledges and considers in paragraphs 32 and  43,  that  the
    second Appellant has social and cultural private life  in  the  UK,  in
    addition to the educational aspect of her private life.  In my view the
    FtT has  considered  all  the  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants in relation to their private and family life, and not  taken
    into  account  irrelevant  factors,  and  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the second  Appellant's  best  interests  would  be  to
    remain with her mother and to return to Serbia, even if  that  was  not
    the wishes of the Appellants.

29. I find no merit in the fourth Ground of Appeal which contends that  the
    FtT left out of account when  considering  proportionality,  the  first
    Appellant's relationship with Igor Filipboc.  The FtT referred to  this
    relationship in paragraphs 16 and  35  of  the  decision  but  did  not
    specifically refer to it in considering proportionality and that is  an
    error, but it is not material.  It is apparent that the FtT  placed  no
    significant weight upon that relationship and that is not an error.  It
    is noteworthy that although Mr Hawkin advised me that Mr  Filipboc  had
    attended the FtT hearing, he was not called to give any  oral  evidence
    in  relation  to  the  relationship  between  himself  and  the   first
    Appellant, and he did not submit any witness statement to  confirm  the
    details of that relationship.

30. In fact, the Grounds  of  Appeal  submitted  to  the  FtT,  which  were
    contained within the  first  Appellant's  witness  statement,  rely  at
    paragraph 6  upon  the  first  Appellant's  relationship  with  another
    individual, Stanko Raonic, contending that the couple have  been  in  a
    relationship for a considerable period of time, and that Mr Raonic is a
    father  figure  to  the  second  Appellant,  and  has  maintained   and
    accommodated the Appellants in the UK without recourse to public funds.

31. There was no reference to Mr Filipboc in the witness  statements  filed
    by either of the Appellants.  The first Appellant's case had altered by
    the time the FtT heard the appeal, as her relationship with  Mr  Raonic
    had ended and she had commenced a new relationship  with  Mr  Filipboc,
    but they did not live together.  It appears that it was  not  contended
    that the Appellants had a family life with Mr  Filipboc  but  that  the
    relationship should have featured as a consideration in  their  private
    life.  The lack of a finding on this relationship  is  not  a  material
    error, given the absence of any evidence from Mr Filipboc, and the lack
    of any reference to him in the  second  Appellant's  witness  statement
    dated 21st May 2015, and the acceptance that  the  Appellants  did  not
    live with him,  and  the  fact  that  the  first  Appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with another individual who was providing maintenance  and
    accommodation for them, when the appeal was lodged in May  2014,  which
    contradicted the assertion made by the first Appellant and referred  to
    in paragraph 16 of the FtT decision, that she had been with Mr Filipboc
    for thirteen months.

32. The grounds contained within the application for permission  to  appeal
    display a disagreement with the findings made by the FtT,  but  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need
to make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date: 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date: 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
