
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21110/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th April 2015                            |On 30th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                       mr Sanjaykumar Mahijibhai patel
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chotu
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 27th August 1980 is  a  citizen  of  India.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Chotu.  The Respondent was  represented
    by Mr Harrison a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a  long
    resident or as the partner of a person settled in the UK or as a father
    of children  settled  in  the  UK.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application on 17th April 2014.  The Appellant had appealed
    that decision and the appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foudy sitting at Manchester  on  20th  October  2014.   The  judge  had
    allowed the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Respondent had  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by Designated Judge Woodcraft on  15th  December
    2014 on the basis that it  was  arguable  the  judge  had  inadequately
    reasoned her proportionality findings.  Directions were issued for  the
    Upper Tribunal firstly to consider whether an error  of  law  had  been
    made in this case or not and the matter comes before me  in  accordance
    with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Harrison adopted the Grounds of Appeal outlined  in  this  case  and
    said that there had been an insufficiency of adequate  reasoning  given
    by the judge.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. It was submitted that the judge had fairly dealt with this case and had
    dealt with the matters and proportionality adequately.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and  submissions  made.   I  now  provide  my  decision  with
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge at paragraph 5 of her decision had outlined in  summary  form
    the history of this case as it related both to the Appellant and to the
    Appellant's wife.  The judge had found correctly for  reasons  provided
    at paragraphs 6 to 11 that the Appellant could not succeed in remaining
    in the UK under the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  any  of  the
    potential bases that had been raised in his application.  It  is  clear
    from those paragraphs that the judge had dealt fairly and robustly with
    the matters presented and was entitled to reach  the  conclusions  that
    she did.

 8. The judge thereafter had identified the potential need to look at  this
    case outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 and at  paragraph
    12  had  set  out  the  correct  approach  to  be  considered  in  such
    circumstances referring  as  she  did  to  case  law  on  this  matter.
    Thereafter at paragraphs 13 to 19 she had set out reasons why she found
    it was pertinent to look at this case outside of the Immigration  Rules
    under the terms of Article 8 ECHR  and  why  in  the  somewhat  unusual
    circumstances of this case she found that it would be  disproportionate
    to require the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  Her reasoning is
    concise.   She  clearly  had  in  mind  the  case   law   relating   to
    consideration of cases outside of the Immigration Rules and she clearly
    had in mind in reaching her conclusion Section 117 of the 2002  Act  as
    she noted at paragraph 21 of her decision.  The conciseness and clarity
    in her conclusions may in part reflect her experience in this field and
    in  family  law.   The  evidence  and  reasoning  discloses  that   the
    conclusion reached by the judge was reasonably open to her in this case
    and while she was not assisted by the absence of a  Presenting  Officer
    the approach that she adopted to the law discloses no material error.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law was made by the judge in this  case  and  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


