
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/21945/2015
                                                               IA/21951/2015
                                                               IA/21955/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2017                  |On 3rd February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                   MS MARGARET AKINWANDE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                MASTER OLUWATOBI AKINWANDE (SECOND APPELLANT)
               MISS OLUWATUMININU AKINWANDE (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Scott, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitworth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. All three Appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The first Appellant who I
    shall refer to as the Appellant was born on 6th of October 1981 and she
    is the mother of the 2nd and 3rd Appellants. The 2nd  Appellant  who  I
    shall refer to as Tobi (as he was known at first instance) was born  on
    3 January 2009 and is now 8 years old. His sister the 3rd Appellant who
    I shall refer to as Tumi (as she was similarly known) was born  on  1st
    of April 2011 and is now 5 years old. On 22nd of January 2015 the three
    Appellants applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds but this
    was refused on 28th of May 2015. The Appellants appealed  against  that
    decision and their appeals were allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Burns  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  14th  of  June  2015.  The
    Respondent appeals with leave against that decision.  For  the  reasons
    which I set out below at paragraphs 18 to 21 inclusive I have set aside
    the decision of the First-tier and have re-heard the  appeal.  Although
    this matter came before me initially as an appeal by the  Respondent  I
    shall nevertheless for the sake of convenience continue to refer to the
    parties as they were known at first instance.

 2. Following the death of her father in 2005 the  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2006 as a visitor and was living with her husband  Mr
    Akinwande. She and her husband separated in 2010 when her husband  went
    to live with another woman. The couple had 2 children Tobi who was born
    a year or so before the separation and Tumi who was born shortly  after
    it. At the time of her statement dated 25th of February  2015  made  in
    support  of  the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  the
    Appellant said that her husband was not having  any  contact  with  the
    couple's children. I was told that that situation had recently  changed
    (see below).

 3. The Appellant made an application for herself and her children in  2013
    for leave to remain but this was refused by the Respondent  on  1st  of
    May 2013. The Appellant has had no leave  to  remain  in  this  country
    since the expiry of her visitor's Visa. The Appellant  complained  that
    that application may have been refused by the  Respondent  because  not
    all relevant information was put to the Respondent at the time such  as
    the abuse the Appellant had suffered at the hands of  her  husband.  In
    her application the Appellant added that she was not  in  contact  with
    her mother or brother in  Nigeria  and  if  returned  they  would  have
    nowhere to live. Tobi  had  medical  problems  including  asthma.  Both
    children were born in  the  United  Kingdom  and  would  find  it  very
    difficult to live in Nigeria.

The Explanation for Refusal

 4. The Respondent noted that the children were Nigerian nationals and  all
    three Appellants were in the United Kingdom unlawfully. As at the  date
    of applications on 25th of February 2015 neither of  the  children  had
    been in the United Kingdom for 7 years and therefore failed to  qualify
    for leave under  section  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules.  The
    eligibility requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  mandatory  and
    applied to all applicants regardless of whether the EX1  criteria  were
    met. At the date of application, the Appellant had lived in the  United
    Kingdom for 8 years and therefore could not succeed under paragraph 276
    ADE as she had not lived in United Kingdom for at least 20  years.  The
    Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Nigeria because  she  had
    resided there for 25 years before coming to  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    claim was refused  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which might warrant a grant of leave  outside
    the Rules.

 5. According to the Respondent the best interests  of  the  children  were
    served by remaining with their parent as  the  children's  relationship
    with  their  parent  determined  their   well-being.   The   Respondent
    considered her duty under section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and decided it was both reasonable  and  compliant
    with the section for the children to be returned to  Nigeria  with  the
    Appellant. The refusal letter  listed  the  various  factors  that  the
    Respondent  considered  were  relevant  such  as  the  availability  of
    education in Nigeria, that  they  were  not  yet  old  enough  to  have
    developed any skills which were not transferable, there was no  special
    educational medical or medical need for  the  children,  the  Appellant
    would be able to secure employment on return and as no  one  had  leave
    there could have been no realistic expectations that the  family  would
    be able to remain in this country permanently and as such  it  was  the
    Appellant's decision not  to  educate  the  children  with  a  view  to
    returning to Nigeria.

The Decision at First Instance

 6. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  came  before
    Judge Burns sitting at Birmingham on 14th of June 2015. The Judge noted
    that by the time the matter came before her the oldest child  Tobi  was
    now 7 years of age and had lived  continuously  in  this  country  from
    birth. The Judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant  who  adopted  her
    witness statements and from a friend  of  the  Appellant's  who  ran  a
    mother and toddler group at the local  church  the  Appellant  attended
    with the children.

 7. The Judge set out the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 16  to  20  of
    her determination. Tobi loved school  and  had  made  lots  of  friends
    there.  The  family  were  regular  attendees  at  their  church.  Tobi
    considered himself  to  be  British  but  considered  his  mother,  the
    Appellant,  to  be  African.  He  was  troubled  by  asthma  which  was
    controlled by regular use of his inhalers. He had not required hospital
    admission since he was 5 years of age. He also had eczema and a seafood
    allergy. The Appellant's husband had not seen the children  since  2013
    and there were no court orders in place in  relation  to  contact.  The
    father was in a new relationship and the Appellant did not  know  where
    he was living. She did not even know at the  time  of  the  hearing  at
    first instance whether her husband was in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
    Nigeria. She spoke both English and Yoruba but the children just  spoke
    English. She was concerned about the possibility Tobi might not receive
    medical care upon return and that her daughter Tumi might be unable  to
    obtain an education as her husband's family might discourage that.  The
    Appellant's witness described the Appellant as  a  devoted  mother  who
    worked hard to  look  after  her  children  despite  obvious  financial
    struggles and difficulties as a single carer.

 8. The Judge accepted that the Appellant had been  a  victim  of  domestic
    abuse at the hands of her husband and was vulnerable  as  a  result  of
    that abuse. The Appellant had been receiving counselling since  January
    2015. The Judge noted the excellent school reports for  Tobi  and  that
    the children had transferred to another  the  primary  school  and  had
    settled well. The Judge adopted the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    the case of PD [2016] UKUT 00108, considering the claims both initially
    and separately under the Rules and if unsuccessful the  joint  position
    as a family  outside  the  Rules  under  Article  8.  The  only  viable
    proposition in this case was that the Appellants should tay together as
    a family unit.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to prevent the Appellant from reintegrating  back
    into Nigeria although she had suffered domestic violence. She would  be
    in no worse position in Nigeria where she had  lost  contact  with  her
    family than she was in the United Kingdom where she did  not  have  any
    family. She could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

 9. The Judge then proceeded to consider Tobi's position within the  Rules.
    Tobi could not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  if  the
    position was assessed at the date of either the application  or  indeed
    the Respondent's decision but this was not the complete picture. In the
    Judge's view the Tribunal was obliged to  consider  paragraph  276  AO.
    This provides that the requirement to make a valid application will not
    apply when an Article 8 claim is raised in an appeal. The  Judge  found
    that the requirement to have 7 years continuous  residence  as  at  the
    date of application could be applied to Tobi by following paragraph 276
    AO since Tobi did not have to make a  valid  application  when  raising
    Article 8. This led the  Judge  at  paragraph  42  to  write:  "I  have
    considered [Tobi's] length of residence at the date of the hearing  and
    find that he would meet the requirement of paragraph  276  ADE  1  (iv)
    provided that he can show me that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    him to leave the United Kingdom". The Judge was fortified in this  view
    as she held that it provided a consistent approach with  the  statutory
    regime under section 117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002. The Judge's conclusion at paragraph 44 was  that  Tobi  would
    meet the requirements of the Rules if he could show that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom. No issue  arose
    in relation to Tumi since the Judge acknowledged  that  she  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

10.  The Judge evaluated Tobi's best interests noting his  connection  with
    Nigeria was minimal and that he had never visited the country.  He  did
    not speak a local language and considered himself  to  be  British.  He
    attended church and his  integration  in  United  Kingdom  Society  and
    culture was complete. The Appellants were a stable and  settled  family
    and it would be in Tobi's best interest to  continue  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom with his mother and sister. At Paragraph  56  the  Judge
    found that Tobi's appeal succeeded because it would not  be  reasonable
    or proportionate to expect him to leave the United Kingdom. It followed
    that the other two Appellants' appeals  should  also  succeed  as  Tobi
    should not be left here on his own.

11.  The  issue  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rule  was  one   of   the
    proportionality of the interference with  family  life  caused  by  the
    pursuit of the legitimate aim of immigration control. The Appellant was
    not financially independent as she had been unable to work. She had the
    capacity to work and if she remained in the United Kingdom she and  her
    children would have the capacity to access publicly funded services and
    benefits including education for  the  children.  As  at  the  date  of
    hearing Tobi was 7 years of age and was therefore a  qualifying  child.
    The Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    him and it was not reasonable  to  expect  Tobi  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. When the child was a qualifying child and the parent  was  not
    liable to  deportation  but  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the child the public interest  did  not  require  the
    removal of the parent. The Judge repeated this comment at paragraph 53.

12. There was no evidence  that  the  level  of  medical  care  for  Tobi's
    ailments was unavailable in Nigeria but his integration into the United
    Kingdom was complete. He had a very minimal  connection  with  Nigeria.
    Weight had to be attached to the fact that the Appellant had  no  legal
    right to remain in United Kingdom but the Judge wrote at paragraph  55:
    "Tobi's best interests cannot be compromised solely on account of  this
    factor". Tobi's appeal succeeded and the other  2  Appellants'  appeals
    were allowed accordingly.

The Onward Appeal

13. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing that  the  First-
    tier had made its assessment on too narrow a basis.  A  wider  approach
    should have  been  adopted  for  example  taking  into  account  Tobi's
    nationality, his young age, the cultural awareness resulting  from  his
    family and heritage and his mother's status as an unlawful  overstayer.
    The  Tribunal  had  not  considered  those   points   adequately.   The
    application for permission to appeal came on the papers  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth  on  10  November  2016.  In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that the Judge  had  not  treated  Tobi's
    best interests as  a  primary  consideration  but  effectively  as  the
    primary consideration given the wording employed at paragraph 55.  This
    was that the Judge would  attach  weight  to  the  Appellant  being  an
    unlawful overstayer but Tobi's best interests would not be  compromised
    solely on account of that factor.

14. It was arguable Judge Hollingworth continued that the Judge should have
    set out a  full  analysis  of  all  the  factors  appertaining  to  the
    proportionality exercise including the conclusion as to the application
    of section 55 without either diluting  or  striking  out  any  relevant
    factor that was in the public interest,  by  solely  referring  to  the
    conclusion in relation to section 55.  It  was  arguable  that  further
    factors in the context of reasonableness in  relation  to  Tobi  should
    have  been  taken  into  consideration  by  the  Judge  when  she   was
    considering the application of the Immigration Rules. It  was  arguable
    that she had confined the issue of reasonableness at paragraphs  46  to
    48 inclusive to the application of section 55 without  considering  the
    broader factors appertaining to proportionality. It was  arguable  that
    the Judge's conclusion at paragraph 48 of the decision in  relation  to
    the application of the Immigration Rules had affected the carrying  out
    of the proportionality exercise under the sub-heading used of  "Article
    8 outside of the Rules".

15. Following the grant of permission, the Tribunal  issued  directions  to
    the effect that there was a  presumption  that  in  the  event  of  the
    Tribunal deciding that the decision of the First-tier  was  to  be  set
    aside on grounds of error of law the remaking  of  the  decision  would
    take place at the same hearing. The fresh decision  would  normally  be
    based on the evidence before the First-tier and  any  further  evidence
    admitted together with the parties'  arguments.  The  parties  must  be
    prepared accordingly in every case.

The Error Of Law Stage Before Me

16. As a result of the grant the matter came before me in the  first  place
    to decide whether there was an error of law. If there was not, then the
    decision at first instance would stand. If there was then the  decision
    would be set aside  and  the  matter  reheard.  For  the  Respondent  a
    preliminary issue was raised that the grounds of onward  appeal  should
    be amended to include an argument that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was inconsistent with the authority of the Court of Appeal  in
    the case of MA Pakistan. The Judge  had  focused  solely  on  the  best
    interests of the children without taking into  account  other  relevant
    matters such as the Appellant's poor immigration history. I  considered
    whether to permit this application. I noted that at paragraph 2 of  the
    Respondent's onward grounds of appeal reference was made  to  the  fact
    that the Judge did not take into account the Appellant's status  as  an
    unlawful overstayer. I did not consider that the Respondent was seeking
    to raise a fundamentally new  ground  that  would  otherwise  take  the
    Appellant by surprise but was amplifying a point taken in the  existing
    grounds. I indicated that the Respondent could argue the point.

17. The Respondent made two main points. The first was to  argue  that  the
    Judge had not considered  the  meaning  of  the  word  "reasonable"  in
    section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  correctly  as  it  imported  wider
    considerations than a focus solely on the child. Secondly the Judge was
    wrong to allow the appeal under the  Rules.  The  case  could  only  be
    considered outside the Rules. For the  Appellant  it  was  argued  that
    Paragraph 276AO was designed to cover cases where an applicant  claimed
    asylum or was in detention. The relevant date for  Article  8  purposes
    was the date of hearing and  there  were  compelling  circumstances  to
    justify a grant of leave in this case such as Tobi's health issues. The
    Judge had taken the public  interest  into  account  in  the  balancing
    exercise. Trebhowan [2015] UKUT 674 was still  good  law.  MA  Pakistan
    found that significant weight should be given to the fact that a  child
    was a qualifying one.

18.  The first issue the Judge had to decide was whether any  of  the  three
    Appellants could succeed under the Immigration Rules without  the  need
    for recourse to Article 8 outside the Rules. The  Judge  accepted  that
    neither the Appellant nor Tumi could succeed under the  Rules  for  the
    reasons given in the determination. Those parts of  the  decision  have
    not been cross appealed and I find there was no error in that  part  of
    the Judge's decision. The issue was whether Tobi could meet the  Rules.
    The Judge held that Tobi could meet the Rules because  the  requirement
    in paragraph 276 ADE that Tobi  had  to  have  been  resident  in  this
    country for at least 7 years at the date of application  could  not  be
    enforced against him because of the wording of paragraph 276 AO. In  my
    view this was a material error of law.

19.  276 AO applies where a problem arises at the time  that  an  Article  8
    claim is raised for example the fee is not paid or there is some  other
    reason why the application for leave is not valid. The purpose of  that
    subsection  is  to  ensure  that  Article  8  claims  are   not   ruled
    inadmissible  because  of  a  technicality.  The  subparagraph  is  not
    intended to undermine  the  clear  wording  of  the  remainder  of  the
    paragraph. If paragraph 276 AO had the meaning which the Judge at first
    instance ascribed to it, paragraph 276 ADE would lose all  meaning.  As
    the Judge acknowledged a valid human rights claim had in fact been made
    in this case. It was not open to the First-tier to extend  the  meaning
    of invalidity of application to mean "unable to meet the Rules  because
    a requirement in the paragraph could not be met".

20.  The determination thereafter proceeded on the basis that Tobi  met  the
    Immigration Rules when clearly he did not. He was not 7 years of age at
    the date of application. This meant that when the Judge did  go  on  to
    consider the case in the alternative outside the Immigration Rules  she
    was not looking at the appeal through the prism of the  Rules  as  case
    law requires because she was not giving weight to the  fact  that  Tobi
    could not meet the Rules. It was argued on the Appellant's behalf  that
    even if the Judge was wrong to find that Tobi could meet the Rules  the
    Judge nevertheless conducted a correct proportionality exercise outside
    the Rules directing herself in accordance with the 2002 Act  such  that
    any error regarding the interpretation of the Rules was not material.

21.  The issue outside the Rules was what were  the  relevant  factors  that
    needed to be taken into account and weighed in the balancing  exercise?
    The Judge was correct to note that outside the Rules the difference  in
    wording in section 117 B (6) of  the  2002  Act  meant  that  what  was
    relevant was whether Tobi was at least 7 years of age by  the  time  of
    the hearing. Where the Judge went wrong in law was  when  she  said  at
    paragraph 15 that the Appellant was an unlawful over stayer  and  while
    weight had to be accorded to this Tobi's best interests  could  not  be
    compromised solely on account of this factor. Were it not for the ratio
    of the Court of Appeal in the case of MA Pakistan  that  comment  might
    not have disclosed an error of law but following the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision it is clear that the Tribunal can and should take into account
    other factors such as the parent's poor immigration record. The  debate
    until MA Pakistan was  decided  had  been  whether  the  reasonableness
    exercise required by section 117 B (6)  was  purely  child  focused  or
    whether it should take into account  other  factors  in  assessing  the
    reasonableness of requiring a qualifying  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. The Court of Appeal decided on the latter course basing  their
    decision on earlier  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  relation  to  the
    deportation requirements at section 117C. Recently the  Upper  Tribunal
    has reaffirmed the position see  the  case  of  Kaur  (children's  best
    interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014  (IAC).  While
    the child's best interests must be  established  by  reference  to  the
    child alone, the test of reasonableness in requiring the child to leave
    potentially imports other matters concerned with  the  public  interest
    (such as the parents' immigration history). I agree with  the  comments
    of Judge Hollingworth that the impression  given  by  the  First-tier's
    determination was that Tobi's best interests were the paramount concern
    of the Tribunal rather than a primary consideration. It meant that  the
    Judge had not considered the question of  reasonableness  of  expecting
    Tobi to leave because not all material considerations  had  been  taken
    into account. This was a material error of law as a result of which the
    determination fell to be set aside and the case re-heard.

The Substantive Rehearing

22.  As the Judge at first instance had  heard  a  substantial  quantity  of
    evidence which was recorded in the determination and  as  most  of  the
    factual evidence was not in dispute when rehearing the appeal and/or re-
    determining  the  proportionality  exercise,  I  did  not  consider  it
    necessary to remit the appeal back to the First-tier for the appeal  to
    be heard all over again. Since  I  had  decided  that  Tobi  could  not
    succeed under the Rules (and it was already established the  other  two
    Appellants could not either) what was necessary was a  reassessment  of
    the proportionality exercise outside the Rules. This  would  take  into
    account the evidence put forward by the Appellant. I indicated  to  the
    parties that the matter would proceed there and then with a  rehearing.
    I directed myself in terms  of  the  directions  issued  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the parties were expected to be in a position to  proceed
    if an error of law was found (as it had been). The Appellant, the  only
    witness  to  give  evidence,  did  not  require  the  services  of   an
    interpreter.

23.  I enquired of the Appellant's solicitor whether there was  any  further
    evidence including oral evidence from the Appellant that he  wished  to
    tender for the rehearing. He indicated that the position with regard to
    contact between the  Appellant's  husband  and  the  two  children  had
    recently changed.  There  were  still  no  court  proceedings  underway
    (according to what the Appellant told me in oral  evidence)  but  there
    was now a letter from social services indicating that  the  Appellant's
    husband wished to have contact  with  the  children.  This  letter  was
    produced.  It was submitted on the Appellant's behalf that this  was  a
    further reason why the children should not be removed from  the  United
    Kingdom since their removal  would  destroy  any  possibility  of  them
    enjoying a  family  relationship  with  their  father.  In  brief  oral
    evidence the Appellant told me that Tobi continued to regard himself as
    British. The church the three Appellants went to  had  a  mostly  white
    congregation. Tobi continued to have health problems.

24.  For the Respondent it was  submitted  in  closing  that  the  Appellant
    could not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances  such  that  the  appeals  should  be  allowed
    outside of the Rules. For the Appellants it was  submitted  that  there
    were powerful circumstances in this case  why  the  appeals  should  be
    allowed outside the Rules. The Respondent's  own  guidelines  on  cases
    involving children who had been in the United Kingdom for more  than  7
    years were that it would be a very unusual case for such an application
    to be turned down. Tobi regarded himself as British  not  Nigerian,  he
    had been here now for the whole eight years of his  life.  The  appeals
    should be allowed.

Findings

25.  As I indicated when considering the error of law  stage,  none  of  the
    three Appellants in this case can meet the Immigration Rules. For their
    applications to succeed they  have  to  be  able  to  show  that  their
    applications fall to be allowed under Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules. They undoubtedly have a family life  together  and  that  family
    life would be interfered with by requiring all of  them  to  return  to
    Nigeria. There was no issue in this case of the family being separated,
    if returned they would be returned as a unit. The interference would be
    in accordance with the legitimate aim of  immigration  control  because
    the Appellant had overstayed her visit  visa  and  had  made  extensive
    recourse to public funds for the education of her children but also for
    Tobi's healthcare. The Appellant had no leave to be in this country but
    was here as an over stayer. She had no means of  support  and  was  not
    financially independent. It appeared that she survived on charity  from
    her local church. The issue therefore was the  proportionality  of  the
    interference with the Appellants' right to a family life together.

26.  When analysing  an  Article  8  appeal  outside  the  Rules  but  which
    concerns a child or children the first matter to be established is what
    are in the best interests of  the  relevant  child  or  children  as  a
    primary consideration but not the primary one. Having established those
    best interests, they must  be  put  into  the  balancing  exercise  and
    weighed along with the  other  relevant  matters.   What  needs  to  be
    balanced in this case is the fact that Tobi has now lived  continuously
    in this country for 8 years and has put down roots  here.  That  factor
    has to be given weight both because the jurisprudence says so but  also
    because the Respondent's own guidelines predicate  that.   Tobi's  best
    interests are to remain in the care of his mother  and  live  with  his
    sister. I deal with the issue of contact with his father below.

27.  As against that the Appellant has a poor  immigration  record  and  has
    incurred a significant cost of public funds in bringing up her children
    in this country without any form of leave. While as I indicate Tobi has
    access to the education system in this country there  was  no  evidence
    either before me or before the First-tier that he would  be  unable  to
    receive an education in Nigeria. He does not speak a local language but
    English is widely spoken in Nigeria. He is by  all  accounts  a  bright
    child and I see no reason why he  could  not  adapt  to  the  education
    system in Nigeria. At Paragraph 54 of the First-tier determination  the
    Judge noted that Tobi was only at an early stage in his  education  and
    this reinforces my view that Tobi could adapt to the  education  system
    in Nigeria. The Judge at first instance rejected the  health  claim  in
    relation to Tobi in the same  paragraph  (54).  Tobi  had  some  health
    issues such as asthma and eczema which are relatively minor  and  there
    was no evidence of a lack of medical care for such ailments in Nigeria.

28.   The  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  from  the  Appellant  that   Tobi
    identified himself  as  British  and  had  a  minimal  connection  with
    Nigeria. One could perhaps query the  extent  to  which  an  8-year-old
    child is  aware  of  their  nationality  as  opposed  to  their  social
    surroundings but it does not follow even if I accept  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant on this point that Tobi considers himself  British,  that
    Tobi would have a minimal connection with Nigeria. Firstly, he has  his
    mother and sister, secondly the Appellant herself has a support network
    which has enabled her to survive and which is not devoid of association
    with Nigeria. Tobi is not at a crucial stage in his education and I see
    no reason why he should not be assisted by his  mother  to  reintegrate
    back into the country of which he remains a citizen.  He  is  adaptable
    and whilst he may well feel he is British; I see no reason why he would
    not adapt to identifying himself as a citizen of his country of origin.

29.  An argument that has only  arisen  recently  was  put  forward  in  the
    hearing before me but was not put at first instance. This was that  the
    family's removal would prevent  the  development  of  any  relationship
    between the children and their father. This development is  at  a  very
    early stage indeed. It is not clear what is the immigration  status  of
    the Appellant's husband. He has evidently not taken any interest in the
    children for many years and the Appellant herself appears not  to  have
    known his whereabouts until very recently when he apparently sought  to
    come back into the children's lives. There does appear to be a tactical
    element in this and there  are  a  number  of  problems  about  contact
    happening in any event. The Judge at  first  instance  noted  that  the
    Appellant was a vulnerable person  because  she  had  been  subject  to
    violence from her husband. In those circumstances it  is  difficult  to
    see to what extent she is making a voluntary  decision  to  permit  the
    children to  see  their  violent  father  or  to  what  extent  she  is
    intimidated by him and the past history of their interaction. The  fact
    that social services are involved is not surprising given  the  violent
    history of the relationship and they too are evidently approaching this
    matter with some caution. I do not consider that it is any good  reason
    to delay the removal of the Appellants from this country where they are
    here unlawfully on the  off  chance  that  someone  who  has  taken  no
    interest in their lives for the last few years might or  might  not  be
    prepared to maintain a consistent relationship with them in the future.
    Again it is a question of balancing the best interests of the  children
    against the public interest in enforcing immigration control.  It  will
    usually be in the best interests of a child to have a relationship with
    both parents. The evidence in this case  does  not  indicate  that  any
    relationship between the children and their  father  would  be  at  all
    meaningful. I do not  consider  that  this  late  intervention  of  the
    Appellant's husband weighs significantly in the balance  on  the  three
    Appellants' side.

30.   I  must  decide  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  whether  there  are
    compelling circumstances such that the Appellants' desire to remain  in
    this country outweigh the  public  interest  in  enforcing  immigration
    control. I have noted the children's best interests which are to remain
    with their mother but have come to a different conclusion to the  Judge
    at first instance on the weight to be ascribed to those best  interests
    in the balancing exercise. The fact that Tobi considers himself  to  be
    British and has a limited connection to Nigeria, are not I find factors
    of such weight that they outweigh the public interest in this case.  On
    the other side of the equation when  assessing  the  reasonableness  of
    requiring Tobi, a qualifying child, to leave the United  Kingdom  there
    is that the family have been living  here  unlawfully  for  many  years
    incurring substantial costs to the public purse, have  not  lost  their
    connections to Nigeria, could reintegrate as a family into Nigeria  and
    could do so without adverse effects on the  children.  Tumi  is  not  a
    qualifying child and due to her young age the arguments that she  could
    adapt to life in  Nigeria  are  if  anything  even  stronger  than  the
    arguments I have put forward in  relation  to  her  brother  Tobi.  The
    children's private life has been focussed on  their  mother  and  while
    disrupted by removal  could  be  restarted  in  Nigeria.  None  of  the
    Appellants have leave to be  here  and  the  private  lives  they  have
    established her can only be afforded little weight. That is  outweighed
    by the public interest I have already set out.

31.  I do not consider that there would  be  any  breach  of  Article  8  by
    returning the family as a unit to Nigeria where they could resume their
    family and private lives. There are no very compelling circumstances in
    this case such that the appeal should be allowed outside the Rules  and
    I therefore dismiss the appeal in this case.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I have set it aside. I have re-made the  decisions  in  this
    case by dismissing the appeals of all three Appellants both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and outside them under Article 8.

    I dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

    I make no anonymity orders as there is no public policy reason  for  so
    doing.


Signed this 3rd February 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 3rd February 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

