
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21609/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th February 2014                         |On 08th April 2014           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R I O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: In person but assisted by his wife S.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge L Murray promulgated on  12th  November  2013  in  which  she
        dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations but allowed it under
        Article 8 ECHR.



Background


     2. RIO was born in 1969 and is a national of Nigeria. The Secretary of
        State refused to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of
        a right of residence in United Kingdom as a family member of an EEA
        national exercising Treaty rights on the basis  he  had  failed  to
        provide sufficient evidence that his wife S was  exercising  Treaty
        rights in the UK.


     3. Judge Murray heard oral evidence from both RIO and his wife. It was
        not disputed that RIO married his wife in July 2012 [28].  Although
        S was found to be a credible witness she was not  employed  in  the
        United Kingdom and she is the carer for her daughter C. S has  been
        awarded carer's allowance as a result.  C has been  awarded  higher
        rate DLA for both the care and mobility component as  a  result  of
        her difficulties which includes  a  diagnosis  of  Autism  Spectrum
        Disorder (ASD) for which she needs  to  be  educated  in  a  highly
        specialised environment.  S's evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal
        was that she is simply  not  in  a  position  to  undertake  either
        effective employment or self-employment and not in  a  position  to
        look for  work  as  a  result  of  her  daughter's  full-time  care
        requirements and due to her own health issues.


     4. It is accepted S is an EEA national as she is a citizen of Ireland.
         Her daughters are British  and  EEA  nationals  and  she,  as  the
        primary carer for C, derives a right of  residence  under  European
        law.


     5. Judge Murray's finding that S is not  an  EEA  national  exercising
        Treaty rights is legally correct and so RIO  cannot  succeed  under
        this avenue. This finding is not challenged  by  way  of  a  cross-
        appeal and  is  a  preserved  finding.   In  paragraph  35  of  her
        determination Judge Murray states:


              35. It is also  clear  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
   requirements of                  Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. He
   arrived as an illegal                  entrant  and  does  not  fall  for
   consideration under any of the                     paragraphs there.


     6. At paragraph 36 Judge Murray stated she  therefore  considered  the
        Appellants case under Article 8  ECHR  and  refers  to  MF  Nigeria
        [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.


     7. From paragraph 37 onwards Judge Murray examines the Article 8 claim
        by reference to the  Razgar  criteria  only  before  concluding  in
        paragraphs 45 and 46:




              45. I find that there  are  no  legitimate  and  proportionate
   reasons to                       exclude the Appellant  from  the  UK  in
   this case.  I have considered                 the fact that he arrived in
   the  UK  as  an  illegal  entrant  and  that  there                   are
   inconsistencies  in  his  account  in   relation   to   his   immigration
     history.  However, I do not consider that it would  be  reasonable  for
          the  family  to  relocate  to  Nigeria.   The  sponsor  has  three
   daughters in                 the UK. One is now an adult.  The second  is
   dependent on her for her                  full-time care due to  ADS  and
   the third is in full time education. In                 ZH  (Tanzania)  v
   SSHD [2011]  UKSC  the  Supreme  Court  considered                    the
   question of the weight to be given to  the  best  interests  of  children
          who were affected by the decision to remove one  or  both  parents
          from the UK and the question  of  in  what  circumstances  it  was
          permissible to remove a non-citizen where the effect would be that
   a                   child who was a citizen of the UK would also have  to
   leave.  The                   Supreme  Court  concluded  that  the  'best
   interests of the child' meant                 the well-being of the Child
   which involved asking whether it was               reasonable  to  expect
   the child to live in another country.  Relevant to                   that
   assessment  would  be  the  level  of  the  child's  integration  in  the
     UK, where and with whom he  was  supposed  to  live  and  the  strength
     or relationships that  would  be  severed  if  he  had  to  move  away.
     Although nationality  was  not  a  trump  card  it  was  of  particular
          importance in assessing the best  interests  of  the  child.   The
   intrinsic               importance of citizenship should  not  be  played
   down. In reaching                decisions which will affect a  child,  a
   primacy of importance must be                 accorded to his or her best
   interests.  It is not a factor of limitless                 importance in
   the    sense    that    it    will     prevail     over     all     other
   considerations one must rank higher than any other.


              46. The sponsor is HIV positive and is dependent on medication
   here to                 which she is entitled. The Appellant is  not  the
   father of the sponsor's                   children but for family life to
   continue they would have to move to                Nigeria as a unit.  In
   view of her daughter's entitlement to education                  and  the
   nature  of  the  care   required   for   [C],   relocation   to   Nigeria
   could not be considered reasonable and in their best  interests.  In  the
          circumstances the Respondent's decision  is  not  a  proportionate
   one.


     8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it  is  arguable  the
        Judge failed to give any  express weight to the public interest  or
        explain  why  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  would   result   in
        unjustifiably harsh consequences to the  Appellant  or  his  family
        such that his  removal  would  not  be  proportionate  rather  than
        "unreasonable".



     9. It was submitted by Mr Richards that there are a  number  of  legal
        errors in the  determination.   He  referred  specifically  to  the
        finding in paragraph 45 that there  was  no  legitimate  reason  to
        exclude the Appellant from the United Kingdom which  indicates  the
        Judge failed to understand that the legitimate reason is  the  need
        for valid and workable immigration control. The Judge  specifically
        refers to legitimate and  proportionate  reasons  as  two  separate
        entities yet her failure to properly consider the former  indicates
        that she has failed to undertake the proper and necessary balancing
        exercise.  It was submitted that it had not been proved that  there
        are any exceptional circumstances  such  as  to  warrant  leave  to
        remain outside the Rules being granted and that the needs of S  and
        C had not been weighed  against  the  wider  needs  of  immigration
        control.   The  Judge  had  failed  to  engage  properly  with  the
        Appellant's circumstances and that  the  public  interest  deserved
        being given greater weight than it was.



Discussion



    10. I find there is no error in the finding that it is  not  reasonable
        in all the circumstances to expect S, C, or her other daughters  to
        leave the United Kingdom and relocate to Nigeria in  light  of  the
        fact they are EEA nationals and such a decision would require  them
        to leave the boundaries of the European 'state', and because of the
        specific needs identified by Judge Murray.


    11. I do however find Judge Murray has erred in  law.  Mr  Richards  is
        correct to state that a  reading  of  the  determination  does  not
        disclose whether the competing interests were  properly  considered
        and if so what the outcome of that exercise was. The  Judge  refers
        to the need to strike a fair balance and the guidance  provided  in
        the case of Huang [40 - 41] but then fails to do so. In any  event,
        Judge Murray was obliged to do  more  than  she  did.   Although  I
        accept in paragraph 36 there is a reference to MF (Nigeria)  it  is
        not clear that the approach advocated by the Court in that case was
        probably followed and there  is  no  specific  reference  to  other
        authorities which have provided definitive guidance on how a  court
        should assess  such  cases  in  light  of  the  provisions  of  the
        Immigration Rules which came into force after 9th July 2012.


    12. Having concluded, quite properly, that RIO was  unable  to  succeed
        under the Immigration Rules it was necessary for  Judge  Murray  to
        consider the merits of the case  in accordance  with  the  approach
        set out by the Court of Appeal in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by  Shahzad
        (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).   These  judgments
        have made it clear that the question  of  proportionality  must  be
        looked at in the context of the Immigration Rules with no  need  to
        go on to a specific assessment under Article 8 if it is clear  from
        the facts that there are no particular  compelling  or  exceptional
        circumstances requiring that course to be taken. That  approach  is
        consistent with what the Court of Appeal said in MF  (Nigeria)  and
        with the approach of the House of Lords, particularly in cases such
        as Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In  Shahzad  it
        was found that where an area of the Rules does  not  have  such  an
        express mechanism such as that found in the deportation provisions,
        the approach in Nagre ([29]-[31] in particular) and Gulshan  should
        be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements  of  the  Rules,
        only if there may be arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
        remain outside them, is it necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  go
        on to consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
        sufficiently recognised under them.


    13. The starting position for the Judge was to look at  the  Rules  and
        see whether RIO was able to meet their requirements, which she  did
        [35].  He could not, and so the next question to arise  is  whether
        the decision would lead to a breach of Article 8 but in the context
        of whether there are factors not covered by the  Rules  which  give
        rise to the need to consider Article 8 further.  The  Secretary  of
        State is of the view that having considered the merits of the  case
        outside the Rules it should have been found  there  was  no  reason
        established to warrant a grant of leave on this basis. In light  of
        the material the Judge was  asked  to  consider  it  has  not  been
        arguably made out that  the  decision  will  result  in  compelling
        circumstances giving rise to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
        RIO or any family member, such as to establish an arguable case  at
        this time.


    14. Appendix FM contains provisions enabling those who wish  to  remain
        in the United Kingdom as  partners  for  parents  or  other  family
        members to have their cases considered.  The  Rules  and  case  law
        referred to above set out how the  legitimate  interest  is  to  be
        assessed. The fact RIO was unable to succeed under the Rules  means
        that it cannot meet the criteria set out by the Secretary of  State
        for an individual to remain in the UK.


    15. The fact RIO entered the UK illegally and has not had lawful  leave
        would mean the Secretary of State is entitled to place very  little
        weight upon relationships created at a time he had no right  to  be
        in the UK which is why he could not succeed under Appendix  FM.  In
        discussing  whether  the  decision  will   result   in   compelling
        circumstances giving rise to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
        RIO or any family member, such as to establish an arguable case  at
        this time, S claimed that for the first time in two and half  years
        C had come into their bedroom laughing and talking to RIO and  that
        if he was to be removed any progress that had been  made  would  be
        set back.  RIO and S met in mid-2011 but any  face-to-face  contact
        with the children only occurred in December as a result of concerns
        regarding the children's needs.


    16. S confirmed she had assumed that RIO had leave to remain and it was
        only  when  she  asked  him  in  January/February  2012  about  his
        immigration status that he told her he did not. That was when  they
        became engaged. She was therefore aware of the precarious nature of
        RIO's status very early in the relationship both in relation to her
        and the children


    17. S submitted that  a  lot  of  things  could  happen  regarding  her
        daughter if RIO was to be removed although it was clear that she is
        a very capable and competent mother who tries to deal with problems
        and issues herself rather than seeking outside  assistance  in  the
        first instance.  When asked what she would do if  RIO  was  removed
        she stated she would try and put in place  a  regime  to  meet  the
        needs of the children although if C did not want to  go  to  school
        she may not be able to get her there.  S thought she will  be  able
        to succeed with meeting most of C's needs but not all and  that  if
        not all needs are met her daughter could  regress  and  her  speech
        become affected. She stated that if C becomes upset  she  hits  the
        wall which she uses to comfort/protect herself.  S  then  tries  to
        speak to her and to talk  to  her  although  she  does  not  always
        respond. S is fully aware of her daughters needs.


    18. I find the best interests of C are to remain with  her  mother,  S,
        who has been her primary carer, who is aware of her needs,  who  is
        capable of meeting such needs alone or with assistance  if  needed,
        of both a physical and emotional nature.  I  find  on  the  current
        evidence it has not been established that RIO needs  to  remain  in
        the UK for those needs to be met.


    19. S stated all she wants is a normal life.


    20. When asked about the intervention of Social  Services  S  confirmed
        there is no assigned social worker for C or the family,  indicating
        there is no need for assistance/intervention, although she accepted
        professional services are  available  including  parenting  support
        groups and educational assistance. Notwithstanding this S maintains
        it will cause harm to C if RIO is removed.


    21. Whilst I accept that S is the person best placed to know the  needs
        of her daughter it is clear she also wants RIO to remain in the  UK
        to enable them to continue with the family unit they  have  created
        here.  It is accepted this is  a  family  splitting  case  but  the
        requirements of the Rules place an obligation upon an individual to
        show that the effects of removal will be such that the Secretary of
        State's view regarding the correct interpretation of Article  8  to
        be  found  in  the  Immigration  Rules  can  be  overridden.    The
        difficulty in this case is the lack of evidence to support what  is
        said regarding the impact upon C if RIO  is  removed.   This  is  a
        relatively new relationship and the evidence  appears  to  be  that
        prior to it being formed S met all the needs of her children  to  a
        standard that did not  require  professional  intervention.   Where
        required, assessments have been undertaken and needs identified and
        the statutory services  provided  appropriate  resources,  such  as
        specialised schooling, which would continue in RIO's absence.


    22. The finding of this Tribunal is that RIO  has  not  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon him to the required standard to show that  the
        Secretary  of  State's   decision   will   result   in   compelling
        circumstances giving rise to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
        RIO or any family member. It is important to remember in such cases
        that there is a  threshold  to  be  crossed.  In  this  appeal  the
        problems experienced by C have been there from the outset, prior to
        the formation of the relationship. There is no  independent  expert
        evidence to support what is being claimed will be  the  consequence
        of RIO's removal for C.


    23. At the end of the hearing it  was  indicated  to  S  that  if  such
        evidence was to be obtained there is always the  possibility  of  a
        fresh application being made to the Secretary of State  which  will
        need to be considered on its merits.

Decision

    24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make that  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect  the  identity  of
        the child C.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th April 2014












