









Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21929/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House            |                              Decision and   |
|On 22 December 2015              |Reasons Promulgated                          |
|                                 |On 18 January 2016                           |
|                                 |                                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mrs Rupasree Das
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chuckooa, solicitor (Suman Kumar Das)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 12 April 1995.  She
      appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her
      appeal against the respondent's decision pursuant to paragraph 319V of
      the Immigration Rules refusing her application for leave to remain  in
      the UK as the parent of her son.


   2. The Judge found that she had not  been  able  to  show  that  ".....on
      return she meets  the  very  high  threshold  in  order  to  meet  the
      requirements  of  'living  in  the  most   exceptional   compassionate
      circumstances'". [11]


   3. In his "Notice of Decision" the  Judge  stated  that  "the  appeal  is
      dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds".


   4. It is not evident, however, that the Judge considered the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8.


   5. Her grounds of appeal before the Tribunal asserted  that  the  refusal
      was unlawful because it is incompatible  with  her  rights  under  the
      Human Rights Convention.


   6. In her grounds of appeal seeking permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, it is contended that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  have
      regard  to  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  despite  a   lengthy
      submission which was advanced at the hearing. A written statement from
      Mr S. Alam who represented the appellant at the hearing was  produced.
      He stated without contradiction that  he  did  refer  to  and  advance
      submissions to the Tribunal pursuant  to  the  appellant's  Article  8
      rights which focused on the appellant, her sponsor and other siblings,
      including her grandchild.


   7. In granting permission to the appellant to appeal, First-tier Tribunal
      Judge McDade considered the grounds relating to Article  8  and  noted
      that the Judge's reasoning is contained in one short paragraph and  it
      is arguable that anxious scrutiny had not been given to  the  relevant
      issues. He found that there was an arguable error of law.


   8. Mr Kotas submitted that although the Judge's  reasons  may  have  been
      brief, they were succinct and he was entitled to be satisfied that  on
      the basis of the evidence before him, the appellant was not living  in
      the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.


   9. Mr Chukooa submitted  that  there  had  been  a  complete  failure  to
      consider the appeal under Article 8.


     Assessment


  10. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the rules  and  on  human  rights
      grounds. However, there was no consideration given to the  appellant's
      claim under Article 8. The appellant had relied on human rights in her
      grounds of appeal before the Tribunal.


  11. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal was originally scheduled  for  20
      October 2015. It  was  adjourned  for  the  production  of  a  witness
      statement from Mr Alam confirming the contention that the  appellant's
      Article 8 claim  had  been  fully  ventilated  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. I accept his assertion that has not been disputed, that  the
      appellant's article 8 claim was fully ventilated before the First-tier
      Tribunal.


  12. In the circumstances, I find that there has been an error on  a  point
      of law as the Judge has not engaged at all with the  submissions  made
      under Article 8, notwithstanding his dismissal of the appeal on  human
      rights grounds. I cannot find that the same  result  would  inevitably
      have been reached even if the human rights  claim  had  been  properly
      considered.


  13. Mr Chukooa submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-
      tier Tribunal.


  14. I have had regard to the Senior President's Practice Statement and the
      approach to be considered when remitting an appeal to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision. In giving effect to such approach, I am
      satisfied that the effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  as  her
      human rights appeal has not been properly considered.


  15. The appeal is accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
      Hatton Cross for a fresh decision to be made under Article 8.


  16. The date of such hearing is still to be allocated.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.


      The decision is set aside and the case is remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date 15 January 2016










      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





