
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/21867/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                     |On 06 February 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

            Anuradha Bhathiya Ruwan Kumara Mankotta Kankanamalage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossain, a solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In this decision, the parties will continue to be referred to by  their
    designations before the First-tier Tribunal (FTT). The  present  appeal
    is by the Respondent against First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Aujla's  ("the
    Immigration Judge's") decision promulgated on 1  August  2016.  In  his
    decision, the Immigration Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant  a  residence  card  under
    regulation 17 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 11  November  1979  who
    entered the UK as a student.  He began a relationship with Ms  Zsusanna
    Kosan  ("the  Sponsor"),  a  Hungarian  citizen,  in  about  2013.  The
    appellant had been married previously, but that marriage was subject to
    a grant of a decree absolute in May 2016. It is  not  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant had settled into a  durable  relationship
    with the Sponsor. The sponsor claims to  have  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK under the 2006 Regulations. The appellant  claimed  to
    be an "extended family member" of the Sponsor  within  the  meaning  of
    regulation 8(5)  of  those  regulations.  The  Respondent  advised  the
    Appellant of his right to appeal her decision under  regulation  26  of
    the 2006 regulations. The Immigration  Judge  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

3.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal (the UT) is on  two  grounds,  one  of
    which is not raised in the grounds of appeal.   The  first  ground  was
    raised orally by Mr Jarvis. He relies on the case of Sala (EFMs:  Right
    of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) (Sala), a decision of Vice-President
    Mr Ockleton. I allowed him to do so because the hearing in the case  of
    Sala only concluded on 7 June 2016, whereas the appeal in this case was
    lodged on 9th August. I thought it right to  given  the  Respondent  an
    opportunity  to  raise  that  ground  as  it  went  to  the  issue   of
    jurisdiction. If the argument was correct, it would therefore have  the
    effect of rendering the appeal to the FTT, effectively, a  nullity.  Mr
    Hossain did not object to the UT hearing that argument. It was  decided
    in Sala that  there  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse a residence card to a  person  claiming
    to be an extended family member.

4.   Mr Jarvis's second ground was that in there was no power  for  the  FTT
    to "allow" the appeal. The extent of  the  Immigration  Judge's  powers
    were limited to requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise  her
    discretion,  possibly  with  a  recommendation  that  she  grants   the
    Appellant the  residence  card  he  seeks  having  considered  all  the
    relevant facts.  This submission follows from a leading case of Ihemedu
    (OFMs meaning) [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) which involved  an  analysis  of
    the Citizens Directive 2004 and the  2006  Regulations.  The  Directive
    regulates the status of family members from  countries  to  which  that
    directive applies.  In the context of an application  by  an  "extended
    family  member"  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  point  that  if  an
    application is made, it gives the Secretary of State  a  discretion  to
    issue a residence card under Regulation 17 of  those  Regulations.   If
    the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion, the  most
    an Immigration Judge can do is to allow the appeal to the  extent  that
    he remits the matter back to the Secretary of State for her to  make  a
    fresh decision.

5.   I also heard submissions from Mr Hossain, who submitted  that  a  large
    amount of evidence was supplied to the FTT.  He pointed  out  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had lived together for three years  and  that
    they would face significant inconvenience because  of  the  delay  that
    would follow, if the  Respondent's  appeal  were  to  succeed  and  the
    decision of the FTT was set aside. Their relationship had  advanced  to
    the point where they were ready to get married. I  was  invited  by  Mr
    Hossain to direct the Secretary of State  to  make  a  fresh  decision.
    However, I understood Mr Hossain to accept that Sala was, at  least,  a
    persuasive authority on this Tribunal. It seemed to  follow  from  that
    concession  that,  at  least  to  the  extent  that  the   FTT   lacked
    jurisdiction, I had to allow the respondent's appeal.


Conclusions

6.    Having  carefully  considered  the  submissions   made,   it   appears
    appropriate to afford the case of Sala some weight, whether or  not  it
    is binding on the Tribunal. It is at least  persuasive  authority  that
    the Immigration Judge lacked any jurisdiction to determine  the  appeal
    before him. I am aware that Sala is being  appealed  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal and it may be that further guidance  will  be  provided  in  due
    course. In the meantime, I have concluded that, based on the  reasoning
    in that case, there  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State  relating  to  an  extended  family
    member.  That is an absolute bar to the appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Therefore, although it was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, I am prepared to accept Mr Jarvis's submission  that  I  should
    follow the case of Sala unless and until the  Upper  Tribunal  is  told
    that that decision is wrong.

7.   The other ground of the appeal may become relevant if Sala is found  to
    have been wrongly decided. Accordingly, I now  turn  to  consider  this
    ground. Based on the case of Ihemedu it is not open to  an  Immigration
    Judge for the First-tier Tribunal simply to "allow the appeal under the
    EEA Regulations". It is clear  that  this  was  an  application  by  an
    extended family member.  The  correct  course  was  to  find  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and to direct the Secretary
    of State to make a fresh decision having regard  to  the  evidence.   I
    understand that as a result of this hearing this is now what is  likely
    to occur as none of the Immigration Judge's fact findings are  impugned
    before the UT.  There was an  additional  ground  of  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds. In so far as Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights ((Article 8 of the ECHR) was raised, the Immigration Judge
    went on to consider this  argument  at  pargraphs  17  et  seq  of  her
    decision. It has been held that the  EEA  Regulations  incorporate  all
    considerations including those that would  otherwise  arise  under  the
    ECHR and  therefore  there  is  no  need  to  separately  consider  the
    Appellant's protected human rights.

8.   I am persuaded by Mr Jarvis,  having  considered  this  further  point,
    that it is not open to me to allow  his  appeal  but  then  direct  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh  decision.   If  I  allow  the
    Respondent's appeal, the principal basis of that appeal is  that  there
    is no jurisdiction before the First-tier Tribunal for  the  Immigration
    Judge to hear the appeal in  the  first  place,  and  it  is  therefore
    necessary to set aside that decision in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

9.   My decision therefore is that I allow the respondent's  appeal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I find a  material  error  of
    law in the sense that the First -tier Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.   I
    also find that there was an error of law in the direction made  by  the
    FTT in that it should have been limited to a direction to the Secretary
    of State to exercise her discretion and not simply to allow the appeal.
    Accordingly, my decision  is  that  I  allow  the  respondent's  appeal
    against the FTT's decision which is set aside.


10.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the decision of the FTT it follows that  the  fee  award
should also be set aside and there will be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


