

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/22272/2015
                                                               IA/20627/2015
                                                               IA/22298/2015
                                                               IA/22287/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Employment Tribunal    |Decision Promulgated                  |
|Birmingham                          |                                      |
|On 10 May 2017                      |On 18 May 2017                        |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                        OLUWATOSIN OLOLADE ARANNILEWA
                           ADEAYO DAVID ARANNILEWA
                                    [O A]
                                    [A A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Dixon instructed by Raffles Haig Solicitors
For the Respondent; Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On the 20 May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  first
        appellants application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds
        made on the basis (i) the first appellant lives  with  her  husband
        and two children in the UK, (ii) the first appellant and her family
        have no ties to Nigeria, (iii) that the  fourth  appellant  suffers
        from Pulmonary Stenosis and receives continuous treatment and  also
        suffers from eczema, (iv) that the third appellant  is  part  of  a
        dance troupe known as Sylvia Bird School of Dance and that  removal
        would breach the respondent's obligations under Article  8  of  the
        ECHR and (v) that the children have never left the UK  since  birth
        and are accustomed to British life.
     2. The appellants appealed the refusal which was heard  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Juss ('the Judge') who in a decision promulgated  on
        25 April 2016 dismiss  the  appeals.  The  Judge  noted  the  first
        appellant is the principal appellant with the remaining  appellants
        being her dependants.



Background


     3. The Judge sets out  relevant  findings  at  [10]  to  [15]  of  the
        decision in the following terms:

        "10.      I have given careful consideration to all  the  documents
             before me and to the evidence and submissions, which  are  set
             out in the Record of Proceedings.


        11.  I find that the Appellants do  not  discharge  the  burden  of
             proof. My reasons are as follows. This is  a  case  where  the
             first and  second  Appellant  have  arrived  in  this  country
             illegally  and  on  a  false  passport.  They  have  done   so
             deliberately. They have established a family in  circumstances
             where they knew that their  presence  here  was  "precarious".
             They have fallen off the radar. They have  emerged  only  when
             they have felt it was safe for them to do so, with the  eldest
             child's age being over 7 years, so as to avail  themselves  of
             the human rights arguments and the well established  principle
             in immigration law that presence in the UK for seven years  is
             a relevant matter for consideration.


        12.  It is not, however, decisive. One knows that to  be  the  case
             because the public interest considerations in Section 117B  of
             the 2002 Act are now such that they have to  be  always  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise with any  human  rights
             that are put forward by the Appellant. I  am  aware  that  the
             case of Azimi-Moayed suggests that the ages from 4 to 7  years
             is going to be more significant than 1 to  4  years,  but  the
             matter is still not conclusive, and everything has to be taken
             into account. As against this, the children are to be returned
             with their parents as a single-family unit.  In  the  case  of
             Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  the  children  were  much  older,  and
             although these children have all been born  in  the  UK,  this
             does not mean to say that it follows that their  removal  with
             their parents can never be legitimately demonstrated.


        13.  The Section 55 consideration in the BCIA 2009, which  requires
             attention to be given to "best interest" of the child does not
             mean that, with the availability of educational facilities and
             medical help in Nigeria, that their best interests will not be
             served,  especially  given  that  they   are   going   to   be
             accompanying their parents, who have a long  association  with
             Nigeria.


        14.  In coming to  these  conclusions,  I  have  been  particularly
             guided by the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874. As
             was made clear in that  case,  "the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world..."  This means that,


             "if neither parent has the right to remain,  then  it  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.  Thus,
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?" (See paragraph 58).


             For the reasons I have given, especially in the context of the
             children's educational and health needs, I can see  no  reason
             why it is considered unreasonable to  expect  them  to  follow
             their parents who have no right to remain in this country.  As
             that case also made clear,


             "in our case none of the family is a British citizen. None has
             the right to remain in this country. If the mother is removed,
             the father has no independent right to remain. If the  parents
             are removed, then it is  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to go with them" (see paragraph 60).


             Indeed, that case also stands as authority for the proposition
             that, "it would have been appropriate to consider the cost  to
             the public purse in providing  education  to  these  children"
             (see paragraph 61), in circumstances where they had  no  right
             to remain in this country.


        15.  On the totality of the evidence before me,  I  find  that  the
             Appellants have not discharge the  burden  of  proof  for  the
             reasons given  by  the  Respondent  to  justify  the  refusal.
             Therefore, the Respondent's decision is in accordance with the
             law and the applicable Immigration Rules."


     4. The Judge therefore dismissed the appeal.
     5. On behalf of the appellants Mr Dickson applied  for  permission  to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was refused by a  judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal on the 2 September 2016 in the following terms:


        "1.  The applicant seeks permission to appeal a  decision  of  FtTJ
             Juss dismissing their  appeals  for  leave  to  remain  on  A8
             grounds.


        2.   The grounds seek to argue that the FtTJ's finding that parents
             had arrived illegally and hid in the UK until the eldest child
             was 7 years old before  emerging  and  seeking  to  regularise
             status wrongly  attached  the  parents  poor  conduct  to  the
             children. There is no merit in this ground. The findings  made
             by the FtTJ were properly open to him on the  evidence  before
             him and he then went  on  to  consider  the  Section  55  best
             interests of the children  properly  applying  EV(Philippines)
             and concluded their best interests were to return  with  their
             parents as an intact family unit.


        3.   Contrary to the submission on paragraph 117B, the FtTJ has not
             approached his findings in a "skewed manner" but has  properly
             found that it is reasonable  for  the  children  to  accompany
             their parents to Nigeria  (paragraph  14)  a  finding  he  was
             entitled to reach on the evidence before the Tribunal.


        4.    Overall the  grounds  amounts  to  a  disagreement  with  the
             findings of the FtTJ and an attempt to  re-argue  the  appeal.
             They disclosed no arguable errors of law."


     6. The application for permission was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        directly where it was considered  and  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Kekic on 24 October 2016 in the following terms:


             "The appellant (with  her  husband  and  their  two  children)
             challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss  who
             dismissed this article 8 appeal.


             The grounds argue that in finding that  the  appellant  evaded
             immigration  control  until  she   made   her   human   rights
             application in 2014, the judge failed to take account  of  the
             earlier application  made  in  2009.  It  is  maintained  this
             influenced his decision and also that he unfairly did not  put
             the matter to the appellant at the hearing. The  grounds  also
             take issue with the judge's assessment of s. 117B, maintaining
             that he did not properly apply it. Finally it is  argued  that
             he misapplied EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.


             The grounds fail to make out any arguable error of law in  the
             determination. The appellant  and  her  husband  both  entered
             illegally and even if they  made  an  earlier  application  to
             remain, the fact is that they did not  leave  as  they  should
             have done after it was refused and their appeal failed. In any
             event, the judge specifically pointed out  (at  paragraph  12)
             that this was not a decisive matter and he took various  other
             considerations into account. The reliance upon EV is explained
             at paragraph 14 and shows no misapplication. Section 117B  was
             also considered and the judge took full account  of  the  best
             interests of the children. Given current case law, and in  the
             absence of any compelling or exceptional circumstances in this
             case which would differentiate it from any  other  case  of  a
             family who establish their  lives  here  during  a  precarious
             period, it is difficult to see how  any  other  outcome  would
             have been possible. The judge found that  despite  the  eldest
             child's period of residence, it would be reasonable to  expect
             him to return with the rest of the  family  to  Nigeria  where
             their family life could continue. There is no  arguable  error
             in that finding. That and the other  conclusions  reached  are
             wholly sustainable."


     7. The appellant then challenge the decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Kekic by way of judicial review to the  High  Court.  In  an  order
        sealed on the 12 January 2017 permission to bring  judicial  review
        was granted by the  Honourable  Mr  Justice  Andrew  Baker  in  the
        following terms:


        "Permission is hereby granted


        Observations:


        There is no merit in the attempt to challenge the view of the facts
        adopted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Juss at paragraph  11  of  the
        Decision. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic rightly analyse the failure to
        leave after the unsuccessful application  in  2009  as  making  the
        Appellant's position on the merits worse, not better. The burden of
        proof is immaterial: it is clear from paragraph 11, and explicit in
        paragraph 15, that Judge Juss was affirmatively  persuaded  by  the
        Respondent that the decision to  refuse  the  Applicants  leave  to
        remain in the UK was justified. Likewise,  Judge  Kekic's  slip  in
        saying that there had been an appeal against the 2009  decision  is
        immaterial.


        However, Judge Juss' decision raised an arguable point of important
        principle, namely whether the approach  adopted  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  is  rightly  to  be
        applied without question to a case in which both children were born
        in  the  UK  and  one  is  now  a  'qualifying  child'  within   s.
        117D(1)(b)."


     8. In an order sealed on 3 February 2017 the High Court, having  noted
        that there had been no request for a substantive  hearing,  quashed
        the refusal of permission to appeal.
     9. On 15 February 2017 Mr CMG Ockelton, Vice President  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal, granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  for
        the following reasons:


             "Permission is granted in light of the decision  of  the  High
             Court in this case. The parties are reminded  that  the  Upper
             Tribunal's task is that set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act."


    10. The Secretary States Rule 24 reply dated 1 March 2017  opposes  the
        application in the following terms:


        "1.  The respondent in this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department. Documents relating to this appeal  should
             be sent to the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  at
             the above address.


        2.   The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. In summary, the
             respondent will submit inter-alia that the judge of the First-
             tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.


        3.   It is recorded in the determination that the  first  appellant
             accepted, in her witness statement, that she  and  the  second
             appellant entered  the  UK  illegally  in  2005.  The  judge's
             observations in paragraph 11 - that they entered illegally  on
             a false passport and established a family in the knowledge  of
             their "precarious" immigration status -  are  not  challenged.
             The judge gave weight to the matter of the  first  and  second
             appellants poor immigration  history  and  dishonesty,  rather
             than to the specific  tactic  of  waiting  until  their  child
             reached the age of seven before making themselves known to the
             immigration authorities. In light of  this,  it  seems  likely
             that the judge, in conducting the  balancing  exercise,  would
             not view the matter  of  the  second  appellant's  application
             favourably, given that the appellants  now  appear  to  accept
             that the second appellant entered the UK in 2005, rather  than
             the much earlier date claimed in his 2009 ILR application.  In
             either scenario, the conduct  of  the  appellant(s)  has  been
             dishonourable, and it is clear that it is in respect  of  this
             fact that the judge drew adverse inference. On that basis, the
             outcome of the appeal could not have been different.


        4.   The judge had in mind the provisions of Section 117B. It is  a
             matter for the judge to  decide  whether  or  not  the  public
             interest considerations weigh in favour of the appellants.  In
             referring to the case of EV (Philippines),  the  judge  quoted
             that "it would have been appropriate to consider the  cost  to
             the public purse in providing education to these children". He
             was clearly mindful of the burden on taxpayers - an  important
             element of Section 117B. It is difficult to  see  how  Section
             117B could have led the judge to a different  decision,  given
             that the appellants have never resided lawfully in the  United
             Kingdom.


        5.   The fact of the third appellant being a "qualifying child" for
             the purposes of Section 117B does not secure  the  appellants'
             success,  since  the  judge  reached  an  adequately  reasoned
             decision that it would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their parents to Nigeria.


        6.   The best interests of the child  are  a  primary,  but  not  a
             paramount consideration. In  all  the  circumstances  of  this
             appeal, the judge was clearly of the view that the family  can
             reasonably be expected to leave  the  UK  as  a  family  unit.
             Furthermore, the case of Azimi-Moayed notes that  seven  years
             from the age of four is likely to be  more  significant  to  a
             child that the first seven years of life -  a  threshold  that
             neither child in this case is reached.


        7.    The  difference  in  circumstances  in   the   case   of   EV
             (Philippines) does not negate its applicability in this  case.
             The key consideration, quoted by the judge  in  paragraph  14,
             remains the same - is it reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
             follow the parent with no right to remain in  the  country  of
             origin? In both  cases,  none  of  the  family  is  a  British
             citizen, and none has the right to remain in the UK.


        8.   The respondent will submit that the determination  exposes  no
        material error of law."




Error of law


    11. Although the refusal of permission by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
        has been quashed those  parts  refusing  permission  to  appeal  in
        relation to the challenge to [11] of the  First-tier  decision,  as
        explained in the first paragraph of the order of Mr Justice  Andrew
        Baker, are similarly adopted by this Tribunal meaning the only area
        upon which detailed submissions are required relates to whether the
        Judge erred in law in relation to the approach adopted by the First-
        tier Tribunal when considering EV (Philippines).
    12. Mr Dixon, in his opening address, acknowledged  the  basis  of  the
        grant is a focus on how the Judge applied to  the  decision  in  EV
        (Philippines) but claimed  it  is  not  possible  to  divorce  such
        consideration from the way the best interests of the children  have
        been considered. It was submitted that the  Judge  failed  to  have
        regard to the factual matrix set out in EV (Philippines), and  that
        that case was decided  when  neither  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  nor
        section 117B(vi) and the concept of a 'qualifying child'  featured.
        It is also submitted that the child in EV (Philippines) fell  short
        of the relevant seven-year period leading to the merits of the case
        being considered outside the Immigration Rules.
    13. Mr Dixon submitted that the Judge did not address himself  properly
        in relation  to  the  approach  and  nor  did  he  have  regard  to
        Presidential guidance, including the need for strong reasons why  a
        person who has remained in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years
        should be removed.
    14. It was submitted that the Judge fails  to  undertake  the  required
        balancing exercise and to assess the merits  by  reference  to  the
        reasonableness test.
    15. It was submitted a  Social  Workers  report  gives  reasons  beyond
        purely educational matters as to why the child should remain in the
        United Kingdom and that the best interest factors go beyond  simply
        schooling and should include the child's social life. It is  argued
        these are elements of the best interest's assessment at  the  Judge
        did not factor in. The Judge only refers it [14] to  education  and
        health needs.
    16. It was also submitted that  it  was  necessary  for  the  Judge  to
        consider the degree to which it can be expected the child will make
        a positive contribution to the United Kingdom as the  child  was  a
        bright child described as being "gifted and talented" which  was  a
        separate consideration beyond just disruption, requiring the  Judge
        to assess what weight it should be given. It was submitted this  is
        a significant countervailing factor.
    17. Mr Dixon accepted, following an observation from the Tribunal, that
        any future contribution would be speculative  but  maintained  that
        the Judge had not dealt with the same at all which had been  missed
        by the Judge.
    18. It was accepted by Mr Dixon that the issue  is  the  weight  to  be
        given to the various factors but maintained that in a case such  as
        this when the evidence related to  more  than  mere  disruption  it
        could not be said that the Judge had properly considered the issues
        and consider the factual matrix,  or  that  if  he  had  done,  his
        decision would have been the same.
    19. It was also argued the Judge failed to consider  section  117(B)(6)
        which is a key omission as it is not a case where it  is  said  the
        family lacked the required  English  language  skills  or  will  be
        dependent financially upon the public purse.
    20. There have been numerous changes in relation to the  way  in  which
        human rights appeals are to be considered by virtue of  changes  to
        both the  Immigration  Rules  and  statutory  provisions  and  more
        recently by the Supreme Court, which confirmed that the  Tribunal's
        jurisdiction  in  such  matters  is  a  Human  Rights  jurisdiction
        requiring an assessment of the  merits  of  the  parties  competing
        arguments before any conclusion  is  reached  in  relation  to  the
        proportionality, or otherwise, of a decision.
    21. It is important to bear in mind in relation to this matter that the
        Judge did not slavishly follow EV (Philippines) on its facts or  as
        if it were a  country  guidance  case.  The  Judge  refers  in  the
        decision under challenge to several submissions having been made by
        the advocates containing specific reference  to  EV  (Philippines).
        Specific reference to this can be found in [7], [9] and the  Judges
        conclusions at [14] set out above.
    22. There have been a number of decisions of the Court  of  Appeal  and
        Upper Tribunal one of which is the case  of  EV  (Philippines)  and
        Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in which it  was  held  that  the
        best interests of the child were to be determined by  reference  to
        the child alone without reference to  the  immigration  history  or
        status of either parent (paras 32  and  33).  In  then  determining
        whether or not the need for immigration control outweighed the best
        interests of the  children,  it  was  necessary  to  determine  the
        relative strength of the  factors  which  made  it  in  their  best
        interests to remain in the UK; and also  to  take  account  of  any
        factors that pointed the other way. At [35] it was stated that  the
        best interests of children will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors
        including their age, the length of time that they have been in  the
        United Kingdom, how long they have been  in  education,  the  stage
        that their education has reached, to what  extent  they  have  been
        distanced from the country to which they are to  be  returned,  how
        renewable their connection with it may be,  the  extent  that  they
        will have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting  to
        life there and  the  extent  to  which  the  course  proposed  will
        interfere with their family life or other rights in  this  country.
        The longer the child had been in  the  UK,  the  more  advanced  or
        critical the stage of his education, the looser his ties  with  the
        country in question, and the more deleterious the  consequences  of
        his return, the greater the weight that fell into one side  of  the
        scales. If it was overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that
        he should not return, the need to maintain immigration control  may
        well not tip the balance. By contrast if it was in the child's best
        interests to remain, but only on balance with some factors pointing
        the other way, the result may be the opposite. In  the  balance  on
        the other side there fell to  be  taken  into  account  the  strong
        weight to be given to the need to maintain immigration  control  in
        pursuit of the economic well-being of  the  country  and  the  fact
        that, ex hypothesi, the claimants had no entitlement to remain. The
        immigration history of the parents might also  be  relevant  [34  -
        37].
    23. It must also be remembered there have been a number of  changes  to
        the way in which human rights matters are  assessed  found  in  the
        current version of  the  Immigration  Rules,  section  117  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  the  respondents
        Immigration Directorate Instructions on Family Migration.
    24. EV (Philippines) is not a binding authority  on  the  facts  or  to
        suggest that a child who has been in the UK  for  more  than  seven
        years must be permitted  to  remain,  as  the  appeal  against  the
        decision in that case was in fact dismissed by the Court of  Appeal
        notwithstanding it being found that the judge in  that  matter  had
        adopted an approach "too favourable to  the  appellant"  [61].  The
        importance of that case is the guidance it provides in relation  to
        the approach to be adopted when considering the best  interests  of
        the children when the issue before the Tribunal is  whether  it  is
        reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.
    25. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a  person  who
        is under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British  citizen,  or  (b)
        has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  seven
        years or more.  If a child is a qualifying child for  the  purposes
        of section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  as  amended,  the  issue  will
        generally be whether it is not reasonable for that child to return.
    26. The decision in R (on the application of Osanwemwenze) v  Secretary
        of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  1563  whilst  not
        specifically concerned with section 117B but has some relevance  in
        terms of the reasonableness of a child  leaving  the  UK.  In  this
        case, the claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had  been  in
        the United Kingdom for more than 7 years and had leave to remain in
        his own right. It was held that this was an important  but  not  an
        overriding consideration  and  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
        claimant's family including the stepson to relocate to Nigeria. The
        parents had experienced life there into adulthood and would be able
        to provide for the children and help them to reintegrate.
    27. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that
        when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question  posed  in
        relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must  be  posed
        and answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to
        expect the child to follow its parents to their country of  origin;
        EV (Philippines). It is not however a question  that  needs  to  be
        posed and answered in relation to each child more than once.
    28. It is also important to note that in R (on the  application  of  MA
        (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705  it  was  held  that  when
        considering whether it was reasonable to remove a child from the UK
        under rule 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  section
        117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a
        court or tribunal should not simply focus on the child  but  should
        have regard to the wider public interest considerations,  including
        the conduct and immigration history of the  parents.  It  was  also
        confirmed however that if section 117B(6) applies then  "there  can
        be no doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained
        provision in the sense that Parliament has  stipulated  that  where
        the conditions specified in  the  sub-section  are  satisfied,  the
        public interest will not  justify  removal."  It  was  additionally
        held, however, that the fact that a child had been in  the  UK  for
        seven  years  should   be   given   significant   weight   in   the
        proportionality exercise because of its relevant to determining the
        nature and strength  of  the  child's  best  interests  and  as  it
        established as a starting point that leave should be granted unless
        there were powerful reasons to the contrary.
    29. The principles established  by  the  case  law  have  informed  the
        respondents policy to be found in the  IDIs  on  Family  Migration,
        Paragraph 11.2.4. which deals with non-British children. The August
        2015 version states that the requirement that a non-British Citizen
        child has lived in the UK for a continuous period of at least the 7
        years immediately preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises
        that over time children start to put down roots and integrate  into
        life in the UK, to the extent that being required to leave  the  UK
        may be unreasonable. The longer the child has resided  in  the  UK,
        the more the balance will begin to  swing  in  terms  of  it  being
        unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  UK,  and  strong
        reasons will be required in order to refuse a case with  continuous
        UK residence of more than 7 years.


        Relevant considerations are likely to include:  (i)  Whether  there
        would be a significant risk to the child's health: For example,  if
        there is  evidence  that  the  child  is  undergoing  a  course  of
        treatment for a life threatening or serious illness  and  treatment
        will not be available in the country of return;  (ii)  Whether  the
        child would be leaving the UK with their parent(s): It is generally
        the case that it is in a child's  best  interests  to  remain  with
        their parent(s). Unless special factors apply, it will generally be
        reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),
        particularly if the parent(s) have no right to remain  in  the  UK;
        (iii) The extent of wider family ties in the UK: The decision maker
        must consider the extent to which the  child  is  dependent  on  or
        requires support from wider family members in the UK  in  important
        areas of his or her life. (iv) Whether the child is  likely  to  be
        able  to  (re)integrate  readily  into  life  in  another  country.
        Relevant factors include: (a) whether the  parent(s)  and/or  child
        are a citizen of the country and so able to enjoy the  full  rights
        of being a citizen in  that  country;  (b)  whether  the  parent(s)
        and/or child have lived  in  or  visited  the  country  before  for
        periods of more than a few weeks. The  question  here  is  whether,
        having visited or lived in the country before, the child  would  be
        better able to adapt, and/or the parent(s) would be able to support
        the child in adapting, to life in  the  country;  (c)  whether  the
        parent(s) and/or child have existing family or social ties with the
        country. A person who has extended family or a network  of  friends
        in the country should be able to rely on them for support  to  help
        (re)integrate there; (d) whether the parent(s)  and/or  child  have
        relevant cultural  ties  with  the  country.  The  caseworker  must
        consider  any  evidence  of  exposure  to,   and   the   level   of
        understanding of, the cultural norms of the country. For example, a
        period of time spent living mainly  amongst  a  diaspora  from  the
        country may give a  child  an  awareness  of  the  culture  of  the
        country; (e) whether the parents and/or child can speak,  read  and
        write in a language of that country, or are likely to achieve  this
        within a reasonable time period.  Fluency  is  not  required  -  an
        ability to communicate competently with  sympathetic  interlocutors
        would normally suffice; (f) whether the child has  attended  school
        in that country; (v) Any country specific information, including as
        contained  in  relevant  country  guidance;  (vi)   Other  specific
        factors raised by or on behalf of the child:  Parents  or  children
        may highlight the differences in the quality of  education,  health
        and wider public services or in economic  or  social  opportunities
        between the UK and the country of return and argue that these would
        work against the best interests of the child if they had  to  leave
        the UK  and  live  in  that  country.  Other  than  in  exceptional
        circumstances, this will not normally be a relevant  consideration,
        particularly if the parent(s) or wider family  have  the  means  or
        resources to support the child on return or the  skills,  education
        or training to provide for their family on return, or  if  Assisted
        Voluntary Return support is available.
    30. The IDIs also state that where the  applicant  does  not  meet  the
        requirements of the family and private life Rules, refusal  of  the
        application will normally be appropriate, but in every case falling
        for refusal under  the  Rules  the  decision  maker  must  consider
        whether there are exceptional circumstances warranting a  grant  of
        leave to remain outside the Rules. Occasionally  these  exceptional
        circumstances  will  be  obvious,  but  generally  it  is  for  the
        applicant to raise them.
    31. The core message from EV (Philippines) of whether,  in  the  proper
        context, it was reasonable to expect a child to follow its  parents
        to the country of origin is still good law.
    32. Mr Dixon also referred to  the  ability  of  the  family  to  speak
        English and to be self-sufficient but these  are  not  points  that
        stand in the appellant's favour  but  matters  that  do  not  count
        against them. They are therefore neutral. Had  the  appellants  not
        been able to speak English or to demonstrate an available income to
        meet their day-to-day needs, this would have been  counted  against
        the appellants in relation to the section 117B  assessment.  It  is
        important to note  that  Section  117B  is  a  statutory  provision
        introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 which  therefore  supersedes
        any previous rules, guidance, or case law.
    33. Although the Supreme Court has reminded us that the jurisdiction is
        that of a Human Rights jurisdiction, the Secretary of State has set
        out her case in relation to how the balancing  interest  should  be
        conducted in both the Immigration Rules and Section 117, which must
        always form part  of  the  balancing  exercise  undertaken  by  the
        decision maker, and to be properly weighed against any points  that
        may arise in favour of the appellant(s), before making  a  decision
        in relation to the proportionality of the proposal to remove.
    34. It is also important not to lose sight of the fact that  Article  8
        does not give a person a right to choose where they wish  to  live.
        Article 8 is about preventing unwarranted interference by  a  State
        in protected family and/or private life recognised by Article 8.
    35. In this matter, the Judge clearly took  account  all  the  evidence
        provided in the appellant's bundle as noted in [3] of the  decision
        under challenge.
    36. The Judge took account of the  immigration  history  together  with
        what was being said in relation to  the  children  of  the  family,
        including the daughter who was at that time 8 � years  of  age  and
        the fourth appellant son who was three years of  age  [5]  and  the
        difficulties it was submitted the older  child  may  experience  in
        mixing with children in Nigeria if returned,  and  her  involvement
        with the dance group at school. It is not found the Judge failed to
        take account of, ignored, or did not apply the  appropriate  weight
        to any aspect of the factual matrix of this case that the Judge was
        asked to consider.
    37. The Judge also carefully noted the submissions made by Mr Dixon  on
        behalf of the appellants and Mr Singh on behalf of the Secretary of
        State.
    38. The Judge's findings from [10] to [15] are set out above. The Judge
        made no arguable legal error material to the decision  in  relation
        to the immigration history of the adults who, even if they  made  a
        2009 application, still failed to leave  the  United  Kingdom  when
        they knew they had no right to remain here. Their presence  in  the
        United Kingdom has always been unlawful and therefore precarious.
    39. The Judge was aware of the need to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise
        incorporating  both  the  Section  117  factors   and   any   human
        rights/personal elements put forward by the appellant [12].
    40. The Judge considered several authorities all of which are pertinent
        in relation to considering the best interests of the  children  and
        specifically refers to Section 55 of  the  2009  Act  and  at  [13]
        reminding himself of the need for attention  to  be  given  to  the
        "best interests" of the child.  In  this  context,  the  Judge  was
        considering the availability of services required by  the  children
        in Nigeria by specific  reference  to  educational  facilities  and
        medical help, as these were  matters  that  were  advanced  on  the
        appellant's behalf during the appeal hearing.
    41. This is not a case in which the Judge has limited consideration  to
        those matters as submitted by Mr Dixon. The Judge did what  he  was
        required to do namely to consider the competing  arguments  in  the
        round, in what is described as the "real  world"  which  is,  after
        all, the world in which the  children  will  find  themselves,  and
        consider whether it was reasonable to expect the children to follow
        their parents to Nigeria when no member of this family are  British
        citizens will have a right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
        Judge clearly found that the two parents, who  have  experience  of
        living in  Nigeria,  are  capable  of  meeting  the  needs  of  the
        children, including assisting the children in  adapting  to  a  new
        lifestyle in Nigeria. It has not been made out that, however bright
        the children are,  there  is  a  real  possibility  of  a  positive
        contribution being made to  the  United  Kingdom  that  could  have
        sufficient weight attached to it that will tip the  proportionality
        assessment in the appellant's favour at this time. If  one  of  the
        children qualifies as a doctor is always open to  her  to  make  an
        application for leave under the skilled migrant category at a later
        stage, if appropriate.
    42. The conclusion by the Judge that it was reasonable  to  expect  all
        appellants to return to  Nigeria  where  they  can  continue  their
        family life together has not been made out to be a finding  outside
        the range of  those  reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence made available. It has not been made out before the  Judge
        that the appellants will not be able to re-establish a private life
        in the United Kingdom or that any element of private life  that  is
        lost is sufficient to make  the  decision  disproportionate.  There
        are, for example, dance schools  in  Nigeria  and  important  dance
        scene involving performing arts.
    43. There is no obligation upon the Judge to set out in specific detail
        each and every element of the case advanced  to  him  and  to  make
        findings on every point providing a reader of the decision is  able
        to understand why the judge arrived at the decision he did. In this
        case, it is clear why the Judge concluded as he did which  is  that
        having considered all the relevant factors as part of  the  Article
        8(2) balancing exercise the Secretary of State had  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to  the  required  standard  to  show  the
        decision was proportionate. As the Judge  found  in  [15]  "on  the
        totality of the evidence before me, I find that the Appellants have
        not discharged the burden of proof and the  reasons  given  by  the
        Respondent do justify  the  refusal.  Therefore,  the  Respondent's
        decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the   applicable
        Immigration Rules". This is a finding that there  was  insufficient
        material advanced on the appellant's behalf to show that  this  was
        one of those cases where, despite the adverse immigration  history,
        lack of nationality, ties formed in the United Kingdom  by  way  of
        private life, the fact family life that  exists  will  continue  in
        Nigeria if the family are removed as the whole, and that the family
        have relevant experience of living in Nigeria, it  was  shown  that
        the circumstances relied upon by the appellants were sufficient  to
        outweigh the strong public interest arguments relied  upon  by  the
        Secretary of State, notwithstanding the fact that the eldest  child
        has been in the United Kingdom for the period of time  accepted  by
        the Judge. Such  period  is  not  determinative  of  an  appeal  is
        otherwise the statutory provisions and Immigration Rules would  say
        so but they do not. Nor  is  the  fact  the  eldest  child  may  be
        approaching a period of 10 years in United Kingdom, after which she
        may be able  to  apply  for  British  Citizenship  a  determinative
        factor. There is no near miss principle in immigration law.  It  is
        the nature of the ties that a person has established, that they are
        able to prove to a decision maker,  and  whether  any  interference
        with such ties will result in sufficient consequences  to  outweigh
        the Secretary's States case that is the salient issue. Finding this
        was not the  case  the  Judge  adopted  a  structured  approach  is
        required by the authorities.
    44. The statement in the grounds that the  Judge  should  have  made  a
        different decision is a challenge to the weight the Judge  gave  to
        the evidence and conclusions arising. There is no arguable merit in
        such a claim as the judge considered the  evidence  made  available
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate
        reasons for findings made. As such the weight to be  given  to  the
        evidence is a matter for the Judge. It has not been made  out  that
        those conclusions were not available to the Judge or are in any way
        irrational or perverse.






Decision

    45. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    46. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I do not make such order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th of May 2017













