
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22493/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 23 December 2015                    |                   On 20 January 2016 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                       Miss Yetunde Oluwatosin Gbadebo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRATARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought in  relation  to  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas which  was  promulgated  on  13  July  2015.   The
    appellant applied to the Secretary of State for a derivative  residence
    card in accordance with regulation 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The application was made  on  15  May
    2013. It was refused on the basis that there was insufficient  evidence
    that the appellant was the primary carer  of  the  child  in  question.
    That is apparent from the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter,  dated  15  May
    2014.

2.   When the matter  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  evidence  was
    received from the appellant stating that she  had  sole  responsibility
    for the child, who is a United Kingdom citizen, and  various  items  of
    documentation were placed before the Tribunal.   The  appellant's  case
    was that she was not financially supported at all  by  the  father  and
    even if there had been some degree  of  contact  at  the  time  of  the
    child's birth that had soon vanished and, in effect, she was  a  single
    parent and solely responsible for bringing up that child.

3.    The  relevant  provision  (regulation  15A)  which  should  have  been
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge required the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that she was the primary carer of a UK national.

4.   The difficulty, which is acknowledged as such today on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, is paragraph 25 of the First-tier Tribunal decision
    which reads as follows:

         "There is simply no evidence in this case that forms any basis  for
         the proposition that the appellant has any derivative  rights  from
         an EEA national because there is simply no evidence  or  basis  for
         the assertion that she had a relationship in the first place.   The
         fact that she has a child with an individual named  (on  the  birth
         certificate) as the  father,  does  not  prove  that  there  was  a
         relationship as required or understood by the EEA Regulations."


5.   The focus in the passage cited and elsewhere in the decision is on  the
    relationship between the appellant and the father of the  child.   What
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have concentrated on - but did not
    - was the relationship between the appellant and the child concerned.

6.   In those circumstances, I am satisfied that there was an error  of  law
    in that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  turn  his  mind  to  the
    question which had to be decided.  That is so central to the  issue  in
    dispute that it is a clear error of law and not  one  which  cannot  be
    categorised as being immaterial.

7.   There is insufficient material before this Upper Tribunal to  determine
    the matter today and therefore the only  way  I  can  dispose  of  this
    matter is by remitting it to a First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh. It would be inappropriate to comment upon any  of  the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal as none can be preserved.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a
judge other than Judge Lucas.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         18 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         18 January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC





