
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22676/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th June 2013                               |On 4th July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                omer dirilmis
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Turkey born on 1st January 1981.  He
    entered the UK illegally on 5th November 1999 and applied  for  asylum.
    That application was refused, and  the  Appellant's  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed on 17th December 2004.  He did not leave the UK, and  on  8th
    June 2010 applied for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.  That application was refused for the reasons set out  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 5th October 2012.  The Appellant  appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre (the Judge).
     She dismissed the appeal for the reasons given  in  her  Determination
    dated 27th March 2013.  The  Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and such permission was granted on 22nd April 2013.

 2. The appeal came before me on 14th June 2013.  On  that  occasion  there
    was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  I decided to  hear
    the appeal in the absence of the Appellant in accordance with  Rule  38
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I was satisfied
    that the Appellant had been notified of the hearing at his  last  known
    address in time, and that it would be in the  interest  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if there was an error of law in the decision of the
    Judge so that it should be set aside.

 4.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  she  found  much  of  the
    Appellant's evidence lacking in credibility.   She  was  not  satisfied
    that he had an  outstanding  application  before  the  Case  Resolution
    Directorate, and  found  that  the  Appellant  had  made  a  number  of
    determined attempts to remain in the UK at all costs.   The  Judge  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant had a relationship  with  his  claimed
    partner Ms Arslan and her son Mehmet  to  the  degree  claimed  by  the
    Appellant.  However, the Judge accepted that the  Appellant  enjoyed  a
    family life with Ms Arslan and her child which would be interfered with
    by the Appellant's removal to such a degree of gravity as would  engage
    his Article 8 rights.  However, the Judge found that such  interference
    would be proportionate.

 5. I find no error of law in the Judge's decision.  The Judge followed the
    format given by the decision in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27  and
    demonstrated that she had carried out the balancing exercise  necessary
    for any assessment of proportionality.  The Judge came to a  conclusion
    which was open to her on the evidence before her, and which  she  fully
    explained following a careful analysis of that evidence.  It is for the
    Judge to decide what weight to be attached to each factor in the  case.
    She did  so  without  any  perversity.   The  Judge  treated  the  best
    interests of the child Mehmet as a primary  consideration.   She  found
    that it would be in the best interests of the child to remain with  his
    mother in the UK and that as the relationship between the child and the
    Appellant amounted to little, the child's best interests would  not  be
    damaged by the Appellant returning to Turkey.  The Appellant is not the
    natural father of the child.

 6. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.





Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I find  no  reason  to
do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
