
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22979/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 16 January 2018                            |On 28 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr hamza akacha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Moriarty, Counsel, employed by Luqmani Thompson
&    Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge N  M  K  Lawrence  promulgated  on  24  April  2017
    following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 4  April  2017.   For  ease  of
    convenience I shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary  of
    State, who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State"  and
    to Mr Akache, who was the original appellant as "the claimant".


 2. The claimant is a national of Algeria who claims to have been  born  on
    31 August 1982.  He entered the UK illegally in April  2011  making  an
    application  for  asylum  the  following  day.   That  application  was
    withdrawn  two  days  later  and  he  effectively   went   underground.
    Certainly nothing was heard from him, although it does not appear as if
    the Secretary of State made any efforts to remove him.  It  seems  that
    while in this country he met and began living with a  British  lady  Ms
    Murray and on 31 March 2015 he made an application  to  be  allowed  to
    remain under the family and private life provisions of the Rules.  This
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision  dated
    11 June  2015.   The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and
    although that appeal was dismissed the claimant was granted  permission
    to appeal against the decision and the appeal was remitted  for  a  new
    decision by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  in  a  decision  dated  7
    February 2017.


 3. The appeal was then heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Lawrence  who,  as
    already noted above, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals against that decision pursuant to permission which was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 27 November 2017.


 4. Essentially Judge Lawrence allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  EX.1
    applied because the claimant although in this country illegally was  in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British national  and  had
    been for at least two years prior to the date of his  application.   It
    followed that he should not be removed if  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life continuing outside the UK and Judge  Lawrence
    found that there were.  The basis of the appeal  is  that  the  reasons
    given by Judge Lawrence for so finding were insufficient to allow  such
    a finding to be made.


 5. Certain of Judge Lawrence's findings are not now challenged and  indeed
    on the basis of the evidence could not be.  It is not  challenged  that
    the relationship between the claimant and Ms Murray is  a  genuine  one
    and that they are cohabiting as claimed and indeed had been  cohabiting
    for at least two years prior  to  the  application  having  been  made.
    Equally it is  not  suggested  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  that  his
    immigration history is other than as stated, that is, that he  came  to
    this country illegally, made an asylum claim which he  did  not  pursue
    and thereafter had no legitimate basis upon which he could claim to  be
    allowed to remain in this country.


 6. So far as Ms Murray is concerned  the  couple  have  now  undergone  an
    Islamic marriage although Ms Murray (who is so named at  work  although
    for these proceedings she preferred to be called Mrs  Akacha)  has  not
    converted and there has not been a civil ceremony.  However,  there  is
    as already noted no challenge to the  fact  that  they  are  a  genuine
    couple.


 7. There was evidence before Judge Lawrence relating to  the  relationship
    and also relating to  the  difficulties  that  there  might  be  within
    Algeria such as Ms Murray's inability to speak the language,  her  lack
    of any knowledge of Algerian culture, and so on.  Also  it  was  argued
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  also  apparent  from  the
    decision (see in particular paragraph 9)  that  her  current  employer,
    Queen Mary College, which is part of the University  of  London,  is  a
    very sympathetic employer who makes proper allowance  for  her  medical
    condition so as to enable her to carry out  her  job  pursuant  to  the
    requirements  of  Health  and   Safety   (Display   Screen   Equipment)
    Regulations  2002.   There  was  also   evidence   that   she   attends
    physiotherapy in this  country  for  her  condition  and  she  has  had
    numerous appointments at  Whipps  Cross  University  Hospital  in  East
    London.  Although the judge did note that there was not any substantial
    evidence relating to what treatment might or might not be available  in
    Algeria, certainly he had in mind that she  was  receiving  very  great
    care in this country, which was one of the factors which he  considered
    relevant to the issue of whether or not there would be  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to her continuing her family life with the  claimant  within
    Algeria.  The other factor which the judge had in mind was  the  advice
    given by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office warning British  nationals
    that there was a "high threat  from  terrorism  in  Algeria"  and  that
    "attacks could be indiscriminate, including  in  places  frequented  by
    foreigners" such that all British nationals within Algeria "should take
    great care at all times".  The judge did not overstate the risk  within
    his decision but stressed at paragraph 12 that the  government  through
    the Foreign Office had considered the risk to be "heightened" and  that
    "In my view, the UK government would not have put out this "Advice"  if
    it did not believe that risks to British nationals  are  "heightened"".
    The judge also said that the risk, which was  "not  a  rhetorical  one"
    would be "much more for British nationals who ... live there".


 8. With regard to the tendonitis from which Ms Murray suffered  which  was
    "a condition which needs  regular  physiotherapy"  although  the  judge
    noted that there was "no evidence before me that such treatment is  not
    available for her in Algeria", he went on to find  that  "however,  the
    medical condition coupled with the security threat as set out by the UK
    government to British nationals" supported a finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles in his family life continuing in Algeria.


 9. The basis of the Secretary of State's appeal is that the reasons  given
    by the judge lack sufficient weight to justify the  findings  which  he
    made.  I agree with Mr Moriarty, appearing on behalf  of  the  claimant
    that in effect this is a perversity challenge.  The  issue  I  have  to
    decide is whether or not on the basis of the material  before  him  and
    the reason which he gave the decision can be said to be  such  that  no
    judge considering this evidence could have reached the same conclusion.
     It is not my task to make a decision based on what I  might  or  might
    not myself have found on this evidence; it is only if I  consider  that
    the decision reached was not open to any judge on the  material  before
    him or her that I can say find there was a material error of law in the
    judge's finding.


10. Having considered the evidence very carefully indeed, I agree  with  Mr
    Moriarty that the judge set out the law correctly.  He understood  that
    he could only allow the appeal if on  the  basis  of  the  material  he
    considered the obstacles which would be faced  by  Ms  Murray  were  so
    serious as to amount to very serious  obstacles  indeed.   He  did  not
    overstate what the difficulties were, but he had in mind the two issues
    which were  raised  which  were  first  the  medical  difficulties  and
    secondly the dangers to a  British  citizen  carrying  on  life  within
    Algeria.   He  considered  that  cumulatively  they  were  sufficiently
    serious as to cross  the  threshold  required  to  establish  that  the
    obstacles could be said to be "insurmountable".  Although another judge
    may have reached a different conclusion, I do  not  consider  that  the
    decision was so outlandish that it was not open to him so to find.   He
    was entitled to take very seriously the advice  given  by  the  Foreign
    Office and he was also entitled to take account of what  is  clearly  a
    serious medical condition suffered by Ms Murray which is being  treated
    in this country at the moment and in respect of which she is  fortunate
    enough to have employers in this country who  are  sympathetic  to  her
    condition and wish to safeguard her.  These issues are in my  judgement
    just sufficient to enable a judge considering the appeal  properly,  as
    in my view this judge did, to reach the decision that he did.


11. In these circumstances, it follows  that  I  find  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in  Judge  Lawrence's  decision  and  accordingly
    there is no basis upon which his  decision  should  be  set  aside.   I
    accordingly make my decision as follows.


Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that  decision   is
dismissed, the  consequence  being  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, allowing the claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 25 February 2018

