












UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA227252015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 May 2016                        |On 16 June 2016                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                 Rachael [A]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, counsel, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on [ ] 1984. In a  decision
      promulgated on 4 September  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watson
      dismissed her appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  8
      June 2015 to refuse to issue her a residence card as a  family  member
      of her claimed sponsor,  a  French  national.  That  appeal  had  been
      considered on the papers.


   2. On  15  February  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. Her  grounds  did  not  challenge  the
      Judge's decision in relation to the validity of  the  proxy  marriage.
      Her sole argument  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  alternative
      findings as to whether the appellant was likely to  be  in  a  durable
      relationship for the purpose of Regulation  8(5)  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   3. The Judge stated at paragraph  [7]  that  whilst  Regulation  8(5)  is
      mentioned in the earlier  submission,  this  is  not  pursued  by  the
      appellant's representative.  Judge  Canavan  noted  however  that  the
      appellant had put forward witness statements and limited  evidence  of
      cohabitation. It was accordingly arguable that the Judge  should  have
      engaged with that evidence and made alternative findings  in  relation
      to Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


   4. On 6 May 2016, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on
      the basis that there had been a failure to  consider  and  assess  the
      claim  under  Regulation  8(5)  despite  there   being   evidence   of
      cohabitation in the bundle before the Tribunal.  That  constituted  an
      error of law. It was directed that the decision would be re-made on  a
      date to be arranged.


   5. The appellant's sponsor did not attend the error of law hearing  on  7
      April 2016.


      Remaking the decision


   6. At the commencement of the proceedings on the 18 May 2016,  Ms  Sharma
      applied for an adjournment on the basis that the appellant's  husband,
      [HS], had been telephoned the night before and was informed  that  his
      father was in a coma. Accordingly he made  immediate  arrangements  to
      travel to France  the  following  day.  His  coach  was  leaving  from
      Victoria Station at 1.30pm.


   7. Mr Whitwell opposed the application. [HS] had also  not  attended  the
      Tribunal on 7 April 2016 where it was asserted by the  appellant  that
      her husband was suffering from food poisoning.


   8. As regards the current circumstances, no statement has  been  made  to
      establish the circumstances of his father in law's health; nor has any
      documentary evidence been produced. [HS] has purchased a single ticket
      to France. There is no evidence to suggest that he would be  available
      on the next occasion. In the circumstances, there was no basis  served
      by adjourning the appeal.


   9. Ms Sharma stated that [HS] had been phoned  the  night  before.  As  a
      result he purchased a ticket online. His coach would be  leaving  from
      Victoria at 1.30pm 'today.'


  10. I refused the application for the adjournment. There was  no  evidence
      or any document/statement produced in support of the  contention  that
      her father in law had lapsed into a coma.  Moreover,  no  attempt  was
      made to interpose [HS]'s evidence at 10 am, at the commencement of the
      hearing. [HS]'s evidence could have been given before hearing from the
      appellant. He would  accordingly  have  completed  his  evidence  well
      before 11am. He had  already  purchased  a  ticket  online  and  would
      accordingly have been able to take the coach from Victoria without any
      practical difficulties.


  11. Ms Sharma had also informed me at  the  outset  that  the  appellant's
      father, [OA], intended to give evidence.  However,  when  the  hearing
      resumed she informed the Tribunal that he had since gone to work.


     The appellant's evidence


  12. The appellant attended the hearing and gave evidence. She adopted  her
      witness statement dated 11  August  2015.  Page  3  of  that  document
      contains a series of deletions and scribbles in blue  ink.  Ms  Sharma
      informed me that she had made notes in  the  statement  and  had  then
      crossed them out. The statements produced are those that  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. However, they were  not  in  the  appellant's
      bundle and consequently Ms Sharma had to provide copies from  her  own
      set of documents.


  13. The appellant stated that she is a  national  of  Ghana,  born  on  23
      January 1984.  She resides at [ ], Thornton Heath, Croydon.


  14. She entered the UK on 22 July on  a  visitor's  visa  valid  until  10
      January 2007. She returned prior to the expiry of  her  visa  and  re-
      entered the UK on 3 July 2007 with a  multiple  visitor's  visa  valid
      from 7 June 2007 until 7 June 2009.


  15. She stated that "since this time" she met her partner, [HS], a  French
      national residing and working in the UK. She initially met  him  on  6
      March 2009 at the West Croydon train station. They exchanged  numbers.
      This then developed  into  a  relationship  and  progressed  to  their
      marriage which took place in Ghana by proxy on 25 August  2010.  Their
      respective family members "accepted the marriage on our behalf."


  16. They do not have children together but plan on having children in  the
      future.


  17. The First-tier Tribunal had dismissed her appeal as she  had  produced
      no evidence that  French  law  recognised  her  marriage  as  a  valid
      marriage. Nevertheless, as noted, permission to appeal was granted  on
      the basis that the Judge failed to make  alternative  findings  as  to
      whether the appellant was likely to be in a durable  relationship  for
      the purpose of Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


  18. The appellant asserted that they  are  in  a  durable  and  subsisting
      relationship and prior to the date of her statement  dated  11  August
      2015 have been living together as a couple for over  two  years.   She
      asserts that documentary proof has also been produced.


  19. In her supplementary evidence in chief, she  said  that  she  and  her
      husband moved in to the  address  in  August  2010.  The  property  is
      occupied by the appellant and her husband as well as  her  father  and
      stepmother.  There are  three  bedrooms.  Her  father  and  stepmother
      occupy one room and she and her husband another. There is also a small
      room for storage. They have lived there continuously.


  20. She identified the mortgage documents in respect of  the  property  at
      page 300 of the bundle.  The mortgage is paid by her father.


  21. There is a letter written to her father  by  Santander  dated  January
      2014 in which the annual mortgage statement for 2013 was provided. The
      mortgage relates to the property at [ ], in Croydon. She said that her
      stepmother makes payments  for  gas  and  the  like.  The  appellant's
      husband makes contributions towards "energy." He  also  does  shopping
      for the household.


  22. She and her husband do not have any joint  bank  accounts.  They  have
      separate account; hers is a Lloyds account which was opened  when  she
      first came to the UK.


  23. She produced the original document of an insurance policy  from  Legal
      and General, taken out on 29 June 2012 in the  name  of  her  and  her
      husband. A copy of that document is  provided  at  B391-2.  The  lives
      assured are the appellant and her husband. The term assurance  is  for
      30 years. The policy start date was 29 June 2012 and the  expiry  date
      is 29 June 2042.


  24. When asked what their "joint interests" were  she  replied  that  they
      watch movies together; they go to church together.  She repeated  that
      they have lunch and watch movies in the afternoon.


  25. Her husband does 12 hour shifts each day. He works at a  school  as  a
      cleaner. The school is situated in the city.  He  leaves  at  6pm  and
      returns at 6am, Mondays to Fridays.


  26. She works for about 8 hours a day, on Mondays,  Tuesdays,  Wednesdays,
      Thursdays and Saturday. She is required to do  25  hours  a  week  but
      sometimes does overtime if it is  available.  She  sometimes  does  30
      hours a week. Ms Sharma produced a "certificate of  application"  from
      the Home Office dated 11 January 2016 in which it is stated  that  the
      appellant is permitted to accept offers of employment in the UK whilst
      her application is under consideration. This will continue  until  her
      appeal rights are exhausted.


  27. She was asked with whom they celebrate family occasions. On Christmas,
      they are usually together with her stepmother, father and friends.


  28. Her husband does not often go to visit his father in France. He has  a
      younger sister. She has not met her. She has spoken  to  them  on  the
      phone. She last spoke to her mother in law last month when her husband
      called her. They took the opportunity to speak to her as well.


  29. She confirmed that they plan to have children. They have tried to have
      children but this has  not  as  yet  been  successful.  There  was  an
      occasion in May/June 2015 that she became pregnant. She then  went  to
      the hospital. She was scanned and asked to return  for  another  scan.
      That evening however, there was a "blood  discharge."  They  told  her
      that she had lost the pregnancy. She did not keep the letter from  the
      hospital relating to the pregnancy. She has been given medication.


  30. Her husband gave her a watch as a present on her birthday.  Last  year
      she made a meal for him on his birthday.


  31. She claimed that  their  relationship  is  genuine;  they  have  lived
      together and are planning to have children.


  32. She was cross-examined. She accepted  that  she  had  been  granted  a
      holiday working visa - a multiple working holiday visa  valid  from  7
      June 2007 until 7 June 2009. She was  also  issued  a  visitor's  visa
      valid from  10  July  2006  until  10  January  2007.  Copies  of  the
      respective visas are produced at pages 130-131.


  33. She was asked why after the expiry of her visa in June  2009  she  did
      not then seek to renew it. She said she had met her husband  in  2009,
      i.e. about three months prior to its expiry. They planned to marry  in
      May or June 2009. They went to her father's house  and  spoke  to  her
      father. They then "took it on from there."


  34. She did not try to renew the visa on a different basis "because I  was
      still here."


  35. She does not know when her  father  moved  to  [  ],  Thornton  Heath,
      Croydon. Ever since she came, 'he was there'. That was as far back  as
      2006.


  36. Her father has not lived anywhere  else  since  her  arrival.  He  has
      returned to Ghana in the last two years.  He  went  for  a  four  week
      holiday in 2014. He also went before  that  but  she  cannot  remember
      when. Her father is a British citizen.


  37. Her husband's family live in Paris. She  does  not  know  the  address
      where they live. She is "not good in French." Her father  in  law  has
      been resident in Paris throughout their relationship.


  38. She was referred to the statutory declaration executed before the High
      Court of Justice in Accra, Ghana, dated 29 June 2012.  A copy  of  the
      declaration is produced in the bundle. In the declaration, her  father
      has given an address in the greater Accra region of Ghana. Mr Whitwell
      asked why he gave an address in Ghana.  She  said  that  is  his  home
      address "back home." The wedding took place in Ghana and "you have  to
      use the home address in Ghana." His parents are from the Ivory  Coast.
      It was her uncle who "stood in for me" at the marriage.


  39. Mr Whitwell asked her why her "future plans" were not properly set out
      in her witness statement. She claimed that she had not  been  properly
      represented. Her plans for the future  are  that  they  intend  living
      together  and  having  family  together.  They  also  want  their  own
      property.


  40. She never had a civil ceremony. Her visa had expired and was not  able
      to have such ceremony.


  41. When asked whether she had  considered  living  with  her  husband  in
      France she replied that she does not have the right to go  there.  She
      has not considered living in France.


  42. It was put to her that her husband may well be  her  landlord  at  the
      property. What evidence is there that he in fact  resides  there?  She
      repeated that she does live there with her husband. They have been  to
      court together. She explained that in 2012 they withdrew an appeal and
      made a fresh application. That took place the day  before  the  actual
      hearing.


  43. She attended a court with her  husband  "near  Heathrow."  She  cannot
      remember the date that they attended the court hearing.


  44. Mr Whitwell referred her to page 135 of the bundle which contains  her
      husband's national identity card. That shows that his card was renewed
      on 17 April 2012. He gave an address in France, [ ], Vitery Sur Seine.
      She was asked why he would renew his document with that address if  he
      had been living with the appellant.  She  said  his  family  lives  in
      Paris. She knows that he renewed his identity document.


  45. When questioned why her husband was not in  attendance  she  explained
      that his mother telephoned at 9pm the night before informing him  that
      it looked as though his father is in a coma. His  mother  was  crying.
      Her husband is "her first born". She asked him  to  be  there  because
      this situation was bad.


  46. Her husband told her that his father had been at home the  day  before
      and was not feeling well on the Monday. He had a headache. On  Tuesday
      morning he did not respond well. His mother tried to "wake him up" but
      this was not successful. An ambulance  was  called  and  he  was  then
      rushed to hospital. His mother tried to call her  son  on  his  mobile
      number but could not get through. She then phoned him in the evening.


  47. He then decided to purchase a ticket to France.  A  flight  to  France
      would be too expensive. He had to take a  coach  "this  morning".  The
      coach leaves at 1.30pm from Victoria. He spoke  to  her  earlier  this
      morning and told her that she should inform his barrister about this.


  48. Mr Whitwell put to her that as his bus was  only  going  to  leave  at
      1.30pm why would he be waiting at the station  at  10.30am?  She  said
      that he had not yet gone to Victoria when she left home.


  49. In re-examination, she stated that  her  husband  had  to  be  at  the
      station by 12.30pm. The ticket had been purchased the night before.


  50. She said that she has made three applications when she was represented
      by Justice and Law Solicitors.


  51. She was asked why she did  not  attend  the  hearing  of  one  of  the
      appeals. She said her solicitor said that it would be better  to  "put
      in a new application" because of the problems regarding her  husband's
      earnings. They accordingly amended her application so that his company
      would now pay his wages  into  his  account.  There  was  thus  a  new
      application made in 2013.


The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi:  22 April 2013


  52. I was provided with the determination and reasons of  the  appellant's
      appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rastogi,  promulgated  on  22
      April 2013. She appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated
      2 January 2013 refusing her application on  the  basis  that  she  had
      failed to satisfy the respondent  that  her  husband  is  a  qualified
      person or that she is his spouse under the 2006 Regulations.  Although
      she had requested an oral hearing the appellant  did  not  attend  the
      hearing. Nor was she represented.


  53. Judge Rastogi found that [HS]'s wage slips were  not  corroborated  by
      bank statements showing payments of his wages into  the  account.  Nor
      had the appellant satisfied the respondent that they were in a genuine
      and subsisting relationship, particularly taking into account that she
      was an overstayer at the time of their marriage.


  54. The Judge was asked to treat her absence from the hearing as  damaging
      to her credibility. Although he was not told of any  reasons  why  she
      did not attend, that factor alone would not justify the making of such
      a finding. He did however consider the effect of her  absence  on  the
      weight he was able to attach to the evidence that she has provided.


  55. The Judge was satisfied that on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  her
      husband  lived  at  his  Weybridge  Road  address.  There  were   bank
      statements provided, including a letter from Love Eternal, a wage slip
      and a letter from Legal and General, all  addressed  to  him  at  that
      address.


  56. The refusal letter did  not  expressly  use  the  words  "marriage  of
      convenience" but simply concluded that "this proxy marriage  has  been
      entered into merely to  remain  in  the  UK."  As  evidence  for  that
      assertion, the respondent relied on the appellant's remaining  in  the
      UK from 7 June 2009 as an overstayer, and the  marriage  taking  place
      whilst she was overstaying. Moreover, the Judge relied on the  absence
      of proof as to the subsisting nature of the marriage.


  57.  The  appellant  did  not  submit  a  witness  statement  within   the
      proceedings and did not attend to give evidence.


  58. Based on that evidence, the Judge was satisfied  that  the  respondent
      had discharged the evidential burden on  her  regarding  the  marriage
      being one of convenience. It fell to  the  appellant  to  satisfy  the
      Judge that it had not been a marriage of convenience.


  59. She has submitted a life insurance policy in their joint  names  dated
      29 June 2012, (which is the document  I  referred  to  earlier).  That
      policy was taken out seven weeks prior to the application being  made,
      and two years after their marriage. The Judge did  not  feel  able  to
      accept the fact of the policy alone as sufficient to satisfy him  that
      the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting marriage with [HS].


  60. Moreover, the appellant failed to submit any  additional  evidence  to
      address the respondent's concerns as to the quality  of  the  marriage
      raised in the refusal letter. The lack of such evidence taken together
      with the fact that she undertook the marriage whilst an overstayer  in
      the UK and the additional suspicions about  the  timing  of  the  life
      assurance policy meant that he was unable to find that  the  appellant
      had discharged the burden upon her to show that the  marriage  is  not
      one of convenience, which he found it was [24].


  61. Judge Rastogi also found that he did not have sufficient  evidence  to
      satisfy himself that they are in a durable relationship to  bring  her
      within the  definition  of  an  extended  family  member  pursuant  to
      Regulation 8(5).


      Submissions


  62. Mr Whitwell relied on the reasons for refusal and in particular  those
      set out from pages 12-15 where it is noted that she had made  previous
      applications for a residence card on 21 August 2012 and 4 April  2013,
      both of which had been refused. She had provided similar evidence.


  63. Other than providing up to date bank statements and utility bills, she
      has  provided  nothing  new  to  show  that  they  are  in  a  durable
      relationship. Although utility bills suggest that they are  registered
      at the same address, no evidence of any documents in joint names  have
      been provided. There thus continued to  be  insufficient  evidence  to
      suggest that they are in a durable relationship.


  64. Mr Whitwell  acknowledged  that  when  looking  at  the  history  more
      generally,  'this  may  cut  both  ways'.  The  appellant   has   made
      applications for the past three and a half years. Although this  might
      appear to be a "weighty factor" it is in fact not so. The "flip  side"
      is that  on  a  number  of  occasions,  she  has  tried  to  meet  the
      requirements and has not succeeded.


  65. When considering her credibility, regard must be had to the fact  that
      the application has been made by a person who overstayed. Furthermore,
      aspects of her evidence were  vague,  including  the  dates  that  she
      attended the hearing. She was also vague as to the family's address in
      France. That is to be contrasted  with  the  clarity  in  her  witness
      statement at paragraphs 8-10 regarding the precise date and times that
      they initially met including the venue: this amounted to a "minute  by
      minute account".


  66. Moreover, it is important to note what evidence is not presented.  The
      appellant's bundle contains six photographs, four of  which  show  the
      couple. These are at pages 395-397.  Moreover, the appellant's  father
      has  not  attended  to  support  her,  nor  has  her  partner.   Their
      statements have accordingly not been tested.


  67. The value of the premiums relating to the joint insurance  policy  are
      small. Accordingly, not much weight should be placed on that  document
      as a source of corroboration.


  68. It is also to be taken into account that her husband could be a tenant
      at this house and that they are not residing as a couple. That is  the
      limit of the documentation  that  has  been  provided.  Moreover,  the
      appellant has not met her in laws. They have never visited the UK.


  69. The limit of their plans for the future  is  to  have  children.  Such
      limited focus on  their  future  plans  also  goes  to  the  issue  of
      durability.


  70. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Sharma contended  that  the  fact  that
      three applications have been made indicates that theirs is  a  genuine
      relationship that has existed since 2009.


  71. The Home Office has been aware of the  earlier  applications  but  has
      never made any family visit. Nor were  the  parties  ever  invited  to
      attend an interview by Home Office officials.  There  has  been  ample
      opportunity for this to be done.


  72. With regard to joint finances, the appellant has only worked  for  the
      last year. Both of them already had bank statements before  they  met.
      These have continued to run.


  73. With regard to the payment of bills, it is clear that the  appellant's
      father owns the property. It is he who pays the mortgage. If the rooms
      were rented to them, she submitted that it would not be reasonable  to
      expect the tenant to pay the entire set of  bills.   There  has  never
      been any need for joint accounts. Each pays whatever he is responsible
      for. The fact is that they have  lived  together  since  2010  in  the
      appellant's father's home. This is confirmed in her  father's  witness
      statement.


  74. The appellant was of the view that she could  not  have  her  marriage
      registered in the UK as she did not have a visa at the time. They  had
      however gone through a proxy marriage in 2010. It is not disputed that
      the customary marriage took place.


  75. As to the husband's absence from the hearing, he  purchased  a  single
      ticket to Paris where his family is. His father became ill  on  Monday
      evening. He did not attend the earlier hearing because  the  appellant
      was kept waiting  for  some  time.   Ms  Sharma  accepts  that  it  is
      unfortunate that no contact was made with the solicitors  relating  to
      his father's illness.


  76. She submitted that they have shown that they spend  time  together  in
      the home. They watch TV and have meals together. Christmas is a family
      occasion. How they choose to live is a matter for them.


  77. Both work long hours. The fact that the appellant  did  not  know  the
      French address is understandable as she had not had the opportunity to
      visit them there.


  78. She has lived at the same premises with  her  father.  They  are  well
      settled here and there is no reason for them to re-start  their  lives
      in France.


  79. With regard to the hearing on 7 April 2016 her husband was  unable  to
      attend as he had food poisoning and was unwell.


     Assessment


  80. There is no definition in  the  2006  Regulations  in  respect  of  "a
      durable relationship". Whether or not the appellant is  in  a  durable
      relationship is a matter to be considered on the basis of the evidence
      as a whole.


  81. I have had regard to Mr Whitwell's submissions as to why theirs is not
      a durable relationship, including his submissions regarding  the  non-
      attendance at the hearing by the appellant's husband and father.


  82. Moreover, as he submitted, there  is  not  much  evidence  by  way  of
      documentation relating to any joint accounts at the relevant address.


  83. I have also had  regard  to  the  fact  that  there  have  been  three
      applications made by the appellant under the 2006 Regulations. I  have
      considered the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi to  which
      I have referred.


  84. The Devaseelan guidelines were approved by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Djebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 804. The provision of guidance  on  how
      appellate bodies should deal with the fact of an earlier  unsuccessful
      application  when  deciding  a  later  one  was  essential  to  ensure
      consistency of approach. The Court emphasised that the most  important
      feature of the guidance is that the fundamental  obligation  of  every
      immigration judge independently to decide each new application on  its
      own individual merits was preserved; the guidelines were  not  written
      in the language of res judicata or estoppel: Djebbar, supra at [15].


  85. The guidelines provide that matters arising since the first  appellate
      decision and facts which were not relevant to the  issues  before  the
      first Immigration Judge can be determined by the second.


  86. The first determination is generally to  be  regarded  by  the  second
      Immigration Judge as an authoritative determination of the  issues  of
      facts that were before the first appellate body. Generally, the second
      Judge should not revisit findings of fact made by  the  first  on  the
      basis of evidence that was available to the appellant at the  time  of
      the first hearing. Those facts  may  be  revisited  in  the  light  of
      evidence that was not available to the appellant at the  time  of  the
      first appeal. There may be revisited where the  circumstances  of  the
      first appeal were such that it would be right for the second appellant
      body to treat the first determination as if it had never been made.


  87. It may also be appropriate for the second appellate  body  to  revisit
      earlier credibility findings  if  the  issue  of  credibility  remains
      arguably live.


  88. If the second appeal contains asylum  or  human  rights  grounds,  the
      second appellate body in applying the Devaseelan guidelines would have
      to be mindful of the obligations  to  take  account  of  all  relevant
      material and to consider the case with the most anxious scrutiny.


  89. I note that Judge Rastogi took into account that the appellant did not
      submit a witness statement  within  those  proceedings.  Nor  did  she
      attend to give evidence. The Judge noted that although the  respondent
      raised concerns about the quality  of  the  marriage  in  the  refusal
      letter she had failed to submit any  additional  evidence  to  address
      those concerns. The lack of such evidence coupled with the  fact  that
      she undertook the marriage whilst an  overstayer  and  the  additional
      suspicion about the timing of the life assurance policy meant that  he
      was not able to find that she had discharged the burden  upon  her  to
      show that the marriage was not one of convenience.


  90. There was thus insufficient evidence to satisfy him that they are in a
      durable relationship for the purpose of Regulation 8(5).


  91. I take into consideration that some three years have passed since  the
      promulgation of the determination of Judge Rastogi.  In  that  period,
      the appellant has persisted in her efforts in  this  regard,  and  has
      continued to be supported by her husband. That resulted in  a  further
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal Watson promulgated on 4  September
      2015, which is the subject matter of  this  appeal.  There  the  Judge
      failed to consider the appeal under Regulation 8(5)  although  it  had
      been relied on.


  92. I note that neither Judge made any finding as to  the  credibility  of
      the appellant's claim under Regulation 8(5). Judge Rastogi found  that
      there was a lack of evidence produced which, together  with  the  fact
      that she undertook the marriage whilst an overstayer, resulted in  his
      finding that she failed to discharge the burden of  showing  that  her
      marriage was not one of convenience.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson
      did not make any reference to the earlier dismissal of her  appeal  by
      Judge Rastogi on the basis  that  she  had  not  shown  that  she  had
      discharged the burden that her marriage was not one of convenience.


  93.  In  her  latest  application,  the  appellant  provided  a   marriage
      certificate dated 4 July 2012 showing that the date of marriage was 25
      August 2010. That was the same marriage and  certificate  referred  to
      and relied on in her appeal before Judge Rastogi [2].


  94. I may not revisit findings of fact made by Judge Rastogi on the  basis
      of evidence that was available to the appellant at the  date  of  that
      hearing, namely on 5 April 2013.


  95. However, I am entitled to revisit those facts  in  the  light  of  the
      evidence and circumstances which have occurred  subsequently.  I  note
      that no credibility findings were made against the appellant, who  had
      not even submitted a witness statement  in  her  appeal  before  Judge
      Rastogi.


  96. The appellant has given  fairly  detailed  evidence  relating  to  the
      inception of her relationship with [HS]. She has also  contended  that
      they have continued to live together as  a  couple  for  almost  three
      years at the address in Thornton Heath.


  97. I have also taken into account her  evidence  that  they  plan  having
      children in the future. She disclosed during her  oral  evidence  that
      she had in fact suffered a miscarriage in or about May or  June  2015.
      She stated that they had planned to have children and  have  struggled
      to conceive. She became pregnant  but  after  attending  hospital  and
      having  scans  taken,  she  suffered  a  discharge  that   night   and
      miscarried.


  98. On the other hand I note that she has not kept any documentation  from
      the hospital in that regard. She stated that she was given medication.
      No  attempt  has  been  made  by  her  solicitors   to   obtain   such
      documentation. Her solicitors have in the past shown  that  they  have
      not  been   particularly   diligent   in   preparing   and   producing
      documentation required in her appeals.


  99. The appellant was not cross-examined on her evidence relating to  that
      miscarriage. Notwithstanding the absence of  supporting  documentation
      in this respect, I have no reason to  doubt  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's evidence that she and her  husband  have  been  trying  to
      start a family. I find that she did suffer a miscarriage in the middle
      of 2015.


 100. It is also not challenged that the appellant and her husband reside at
      the property  in  Thornton  Heath.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the
      appellant and her  husband  could  be  residing  at  the  property  as
      separate tenants and not as a couple.


 101. In that respect, I accept  that  there  has  been  little  by  way  of
      documentation apart  from  the  Legal  and  General  Assurance  policy
      referred to showing they are joint parties to any agreement, including
      utility bills and the like.


 102. I have had regard to the appellant's evidence showing that she as well
      as her husband have received letters and bank statements and bills  at
      the same address. Her husband's bank statements from  Lloyds  TSB  are
      set out at pages 168-294. His statements as well as letters  are  sent
      to that address. He has produced bank statements up to the end of June
      2015. The appellant made her application on 4  January  2015  and  was
      refused on 8 June 2015.


 103. I have also had regard to her sponsor's P60 to April 2015 relating  to
      his employment with Axis CSS Monthly Cleaning Staff.  I note that  EDF
      bills sent to [HS] at  the  address  as  set  out  at  pages  316  and
      following.


 104. The appellant has stated that she and her husband are responsible  for
      contributions  to  the  household  expenses.  She  purchases   various
      household necessities and he pays the various bills.


 105. I have taken into account Mr Whitwell's submissions that  neither  the
      appellant's sponsor or her father attended the hearing. Moreover,  her
      husband was not able to attend the earlier hearing as  he  claimed  to
      have been suffering from food poisoning.


 106. The appellant has given an explanation during her evidence  explaining
      why her husband has not been able to attend the hearing on her behalf,
      even though he had originally intended to appear. That is because of a
      current unexpected illness of his father who lapsed into  a  coma  the
      day prior to the hearing.


 107. Whilst I accept that his father had recently become ill, I do not find
      the sponsor's assertion that he had to ensure that he was at  Victoria
      station in order to depart at  1.30  to  be  persuasive.  He  did  not
      explain why he could still not have attended the  hearing  earlier  in
      order to give evidence.


 108. I also note that the appellant's father did attend  the  hearing  with
      the intention of giving live evidence in  support  of  his  daughter's
      appeal. He has made a witness  statement  confirming  the  appellant's
      assertions as to  the  relationship  with  her  husband.  However,  he
      departed shortly before the luncheon adjournment as he is employed  as
      a bus driver and his shift began in the early afternoon.


 109. Notwithstanding Mr Whitwell's submissions about the lack of  potential
      corroboration from  those  sources,  I  find  their  failure  to  give
      evidence was not in any way wilful.  I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant, who was not challenged in this respect,  that  her  husband
      made a last minute decision to go to Paris in order  to  be  with  his
      parents. I also find that  the  appellant's  father  has  always  been
      willing and able to give evidence in this case. However, he was unable
      to remain in attendance as he would then miss his shift.  It  is  true
      that he might have organised with his  employers  at  a  much  earlier
      stage to have a day's leave in order to attend the  hearing  and  give
      evidence. However, I do not find that  their  failure  to  attend  the
      hearing to give evidence in these circumstances  described  undermines
      the credibility of the appellant's own case.


 110. As Mr Whitwell submitted, the result of their non attendance  is  that
      their statements supporting the appellant's case have not been tested.




 111. I am satisfied from the evidence adduced,  including  the  documentary
      evidence, that the appellant and her sponsor have continued to  reside
      at the address in  Thornton  Heath  following  the  dismissal  of  the
      appellant's appeal on 22 April 2013. Moreover, updating  documentation
      has been provided since that decision.


 112.  I also note that despite  several  applications  made  in  which  the
      appellant asserted that  they  are  in  a  durable  relationship,  the
      respondent has not attended the address on any occasion. Nor have they
      ever been interviewed regarding their continued assertions  that  they
      are in a subsisting relationship.


 113. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I find  that  the  appellant
      has shown on the balance of probabilities  that  she  has  been  in  a
      relationship with her husband for a lengthy period since they  met.  I
      also find that the appellant's marriage is not one of convenience  but
      has endured.


 114. I accordingly find that the claimant is an extended family member  for
      the purpose of the 2006 Regulations.


 115. I have also had regard to Regulation 17(4) of  the  2006  Regulations.
      This provides that the secretary of state "may" issue a residence card
      to an extended family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is
      not an EEA national on application if the  relevant  EEA  national  in
      relation to the extended family member is a  qualified  person  (which
      the appellant's husband is); and in all the circumstances  it  appears
      to the secretary of state appropriate to issue a residence card.


 116. Accordingly, Regulation 17(4) provides a discretion to the  respondent
      relating to the issue of a residence card in these circumstances.


 117. In the appellant's case, the secretary of state has not considered the
      exercise of such discretion having refused her application.


 118. Accordingly, the secretary of state is in the first instance  required
      to consider the exercise of discretion before the Tribunal  is  itself
      entitled to consider the exercise of discretion: FD (EEA Discretion  -
      Basis of Appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.


     Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. I  set  it  aside  and  substitute  for  that
      decision a decision allowing the appellant's appeal  under  Regulation
      8(5) of the 2006 Regulations to the extent that her application for an
      EEA residence card remains outstanding before the secretary of state.


      Signed                             Date 16 June 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

