



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26th July 2016                     |On 4th August 2016                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  Mr G N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity Direction

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  It is
appropriate to continue that direction.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon (born 31st May  1970).   He  has
    been granted permission to appeal upon a  renewed  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly, to dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's refusal to  grant
    him leave to remain in the United Kingdom on account of his  Article  8
    ECHR private/family life.  The Respondent's refusal decision  is  dated
    3rd June 2015.

Background

 2. By way of background, the following summary of facts is set out below.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th August  2004,  with
    leave to remain (as a student) until 31st October 2006.

 4. The Appellant's future wife, M B A, also a citizen of Cameroon  entered
    the United Kingdom on 16th December 2005; initially as a  visitor,  and
    thereafter as a student.

 5. The Appellant was granted further leave to remain between 21st December
    2006 and 30th November 2007.  Another, period of leave  to  remain  was
    then granted between 13th November 2007 and 30th October 2013.

 6. The Appellant and M B A were  married,  at  the  Barking  and  Dagenham
    District Registry, on 21st July 2007.   They  have  three  children,  D
    (born on 8th April 2008), A (born on 4th September 2009), and  M  (born
    on 31st December 2013). The children were all born in the  UK  but  are
    all nationals of Cameroon.  The two eldest  children  are  settled  and
    doing well at local schools.  Social Services  are  involved  with  the
    family due to the fact M suffered an accidental burn when she was but a
    few months old.  There are however no family  court  orders  or  extant
    child-care proceedings.  The family are active members of  their  local
    Pentecostal Church.

 7. On 15th November 2013, the Appellant and his  now  wife  made  a  joint
    application for leave to remain on private  and  family  life  grounds.
    This was refused on 10th December 2013 and their  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by the Tribunal (Judge Duff) on 24th March 2014.
     They had exhausted all their avenues of appeal against  this  decision
    by 15th April 2014.

 8. On 5th March 2015 the Appellant made  yet  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain. It was on a two-fold basis.  First  he  said  that  he
    qualified for leave to remain on what  is  described  as  the  10years'
    continuous lawful residence  rule  (paragraph276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules) and secondly his removal would be incompatible with his  article
    8 ECHR rights as it would be contrary to  the  best  interests  of  his
    children. I pause here to  record  that  Judge  Kelly  found  that  the
    Appellant had not satisfied paragraph 276B by 10 years lawful residence
    in the UK and no challenge has been raised on that finding.

FtT Hearing

 9. The Appellant's appeal came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  6th
    November 2015.  That Tribunal set out fully, in a structured  way,  the
    evidence before it.  It referenced the documentary evidence at [15] and
    [16] and outlined that oral testimony was taken from the Appellant  and
    his wife [17].

10. Full findings of  fact,  with  reasons,  were  given,  stretching  over
    several  paragraphs.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  then   analysed   its
    conclusion applying the facts found to the relevant  legal  principles.
    The First-tier Tribunal firstly looked at the position of the Appellant
    and his family under  paragraph  276ADE  as  it  was  required  to  do;
    directed itself that it must  look  at  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    Appellant's children as a primary  consideration  and  reminded  itself
    that the Appellant's appeal turned on the  question  of  reasonableness
    posed by paragraph 276ADE and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

11. In the course  of  analysing  the  evidence  before  him,  Judge  Kelly
    referred to his primary findings in relation to the best  interests  of
    the Appellant's children [29] and reminded himself that the Appellant's
    three children had been born in the United Kingdom and that the  eldest
    child, born on 8th April 2008 had by the date of the hearing before him
    been in the United Kingdom for over seven years.

12. Bringing all those factors together, the judge found however, that  the
    Appellant had not made out his case.

Onward appeal

13. The  Appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision,
    originally to that Tribunal.   Permission  was  refused.   In  refusing
    permission DJ Manuell said the following:

         "2.  The Appellant's onwards grounds dated 9 December 20145 were in
             time.  The discursive grounds in summary asset that the  judge
             failed  (a)  to  have  regard  to   relevant   evidence;   (b)
             misconstrued EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874; (c)  failed
             to apply the Home Office's own  guidance  and  (d)  failed  to
             consider whether the Secretary  of  State's  duties  had  been
             complied with.

           3. The grounds have no substance at all and fail to identify  any
             arguable error of law.  The experienced  judge  gave  detailed
             consideration  to  the  evidence  and   reached   secure   and
             sustainable conclusions, referring specifically and addressing
             the evidence concerning the child and indeed also whether  the
             Secretary of State had complied with her duties.  Home  Office
             guidance is not law.  There is no basis for interfering with a
             full and careful decision which fully reflects current law."

14. The Appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal  and  Judge
    McWilliam granted permission in the following terms:

         "The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the JFtT Kelly to
         dismiss his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
         to refuse his application for leave.

         The Appellant has been here since 2004 and his wife  came  here  in
         2005.  They have three children born here  on  8.4.08,  4.9.09  and
         31.12.13.

         The Appellant relies on the grounds to the FtT.  The  eldest  child
         was aged seven at the date of the hearing.   The  judge  recognised
         the significance of seven years  and  considered  'reasonableness',
         but it is  arguable  that  his  assessment  of  reasonableness  was
         tainted  by  consideration  of  factors  which  are  arguably  less
         relevant when a child has been here for seven years and when  there
         is reliance on section 117(B)(6).  It is arguable  that  the  judge
         erred in assessing the evidence of the social worker in the context
         of the fact that it was premised on the assumption that the child's
         parents would be able to stay here."

15. Thus the matter comes before me, to  decide  initially,  whether  Judge
    Kelly's decision discloses an error of law, such that the decision must
    be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

16. Before me the Appellant was represented by Dr Mynott and the Respondent
    by Mr Diwnycz.  At the start of the hearing, Dr Mynott informed me that
    the Appellant was not present.  He had  suffered  chest  pain  and  was
    admitted to hospital on 14th July but discharged on 21st July.  He  was
    readmitted to hospital on 23rd July and remains there,  being  kept  in
    for observation.  It was agreed that this being an error of law hearing
    and the Appellant being represented, it was not  necessary  to  adjourn
    the hearing.  The Appellant's wife and children were in attendance.  It
    was agreed that if I reached a stage where I  found  an  error  of  law
    which required further evidence to be heard, then the hearing would  be
    adjourned for a continuation hearing to take place on a further date.

17. Dr Mynott's submissions went along the lines contained in the  original
    grounds seeking permission.  He said firstly the FtT had erred  in  its
    approach to the question of "reasonableness".  The judge had failed  to
    properly take into account the evidence of the social  worker  and  the
    evidence from  the  children's  school.  That  evidence  reflected  the
    children's views and those views  must  be  given  proper  weight.   He
    submitted that a fair reading of those reports,  should  have  led  the
    judge to the conclusion that the private lives of the children would be
    seriously interfered with by their parents' removal  and  that  serious
    interference would be sufficient  to  make  it  unreasonable  that  the
    children accompany their parents to Cameroon.

18.  The  FtT  erred  further  when  considering  its  assessment  of   the
    reasonableness and best interests of the children, by placing  reliance
    on EV (Philippines) and treating the instant appeal  as  on  all  fours
    with that case.  He said the judge had failed to have appreciation that
    the case before him involved a child who had been in the  UK  for  more
    than seven years, whereas this was not the case  in  EV  (Philippines).
    This he submitted tainted the judge's approach. Dr Mynott relied on the
    Tribunal decision in PD (and others) [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) BOLD

19. The final submission by Dr Mynott amounted  to  this.   The  judge  had
    failed to properly consider whether the Respondent had  discharged  her
    duty under Section 55 Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,
    because he had not  properly  taken  into  account  the  views  of  the
    children as outlined in ZH (Tanzania)[2011] UKSC 4 and in any event the
    Respondent had failed to have regard to her own  IDI  policy  regarding
    the best interests of children.

20. The Court of Appeal decision in MA and Others [2016] EWCA Civ  705  was
    referred to with reference to  the  points  above  being  made.   Seven
    years' residence is a factor which must weigh  heavily  in  an  appeal.
    The judge had not, he submitted given the appropriate  weight  to  that
    factor.

21. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the Respondent submitted a  Rule  24  response.
    Through that response he set out that the FtT was unimpeachable and the
    grounds put forward on behalf of the Appellant amounted to no more than
    a sustained disagreement with the findings made by Judge Kelly.

22. In reliance upon that, Mr Diwnycz countered Dr Mynott's submissions  by
    saying that the decision showed that the  FtT  took  into  account  the
    children's views as expressed and set out in [22]  to  [23]  inclusive.
    Contrary to what is claimed,  the  ages  of  all  three  children  were
    considered together with their length of stay in the United Kingdom  in
    great detail.  Further the judge was perfectly entitled to rely  on  EV
    (Philippines) - it is clear from a reading of the decision,  the  judge
    is simply following the principles set out in that case that  the  best
    interests of a child are in remaining with its parents.

23. So far as ZH (Tanzania)  is  concerned,  whilst  the  Respondent  would
    accept the principles of that case  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children must be a primary consideration, the  facts  surrounding  this
    appeal showed that that is precisely the course the Secretary of  State
    followed.  Equally the judge  has  referred  to  Section  55  [24]  and
    followed the principles set out  therein.   This  in  turn  means  that
    regard has been had to the IDI policy.

Consideration and Findings

24. I find, first that the FtT was wholly cognisant with  the  requirements
    which it had to take into account, when considering the  reasonableness
    test in respect of the Appellant's children, with particular  reference
    to D, the eldest child, who has now been in  the  United  Kingdom  over
    seven years.

25. In particular at [27] the judge specifically mentions that he turns  to
    consider the position of the Appellant and his family  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and then again at [30] specifically  considers  the
    question of reasonableness that is posed by  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  He directs himself that the
    question posed must be answered within the context  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect a child to follow his  or  her  parents  to  their
    country of origin. I find nothing wrong with that direction.

26. The judge reminded himself at [29]  that  his  findings  on  the  "best
    interests" of the children could be  found  in  [20]  to  [23]  of  his
    decision.  He expressly found that any claim by the Appellant that  his
    daughters would be subject to FGM was unfounded.  He placed reliance on
    this as he was entitled to do by reference to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Duff dated 25th March 2014 dismissing the Appellant's appeal when  that
    particular point was raised and argued before him.

27. Judge Kelly accepted that the children are settled and happy at school.
     Further he noted the concern made by the social worker  that  removing
    the  children  from  their  current  settled   environment   would   be
    disruptive, but in his assessment he found  that  the  social  worker's
    report did no more than state the obvious.  Criticism has been made  of
    the judge for his approach to both the social worker's report  and  the
    school report.  I find that criticism unjustified.   I  find  that  the
    judge has focused as he was tasked to do on what amounted to  the  best
    interests of the child and came to conclusions that were  open  to  him
    that even though it could be said that there would be disruption to the
    children's lives, nevertheless it was reasonable to expect the children
    to remain with their parents as part of their parents' family unit  and
    to relocate with their parents to Cameroon.  The  judge  kept  in  mind
    that although the eldest child has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  over
    seven years, nevertheless for the first four years of that child's life
    its primary focus would be its parents and family.  That is  a  finding
    and conclusion that the judge was entitled to take  into  account  when
    assessing what weight should be placed on the amount of time the  child
    has resided in the UK.

28.  I find that little turns on the complaint that the judge has  in  some
    way fallen short of make proper enquiry concerning  the  views  of  the
    children.  He has dealt with that  point  at  [24].   Equally  in  that
    paragraph the judge notes that in the Respondent's explanatory  letter,
    the decision maker in this case gives fairly detailed consideration  to
    the need to promote the welfare of the children.

29. Accordingly for the foregoing reasons, I find that the judge has  given
    full and careful consideration to the evidence before him and has fully
    considered the question of whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's children, including the eldest, to accompany their  parents
    on return to Cameroon. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
    no error of law requiring it to be set aside.  The  decision  therefore
    stands.

Notice of Decision

This  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
promulgated 27th November 2015 stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     03 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
