
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/22277/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2014                               |On 27 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     DW
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Magne (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 11 January 1978 is  a  citizen  of
    Sri Lanka.  She appealed a decision made by the respondent  on  28  May
    2013 refusing her application for further leave to remain in the UK  as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  The appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Napthine and promulgated on 26 February 2014.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

3.   In the reasons for refusal the Secretary of State relied on Appendix  A
    and the codes of practice under  paragraph  245HD  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirement  at  paragraph
    245HD(f).  The appellant's  certificate  of  sponsorship  matched  most
    closely to occupation code 421 which was not on the list of NQF level 6
    occupations, as specified in the codes of practice.  The skill for  the
    job that the appellant is being sponsored for should be  at  least  NQF
    level 6.  The appellant failed to show that she  met  the  requirements
    for long residence.

4.   In a determination the judge took into  account  that  the  Immigration
    Rules changed on 14  June  2012  and  the  appellant's  occupation  now
    appeared on the  list  of  NQF  level  6  occupations.   The  appellant
    qualified for the NQF level 4 occupation  and  was  previously  granted
    leave  on  15  August  2012  on  the  basis  of   that   qualification,
    notwithstanding that she did not meet the requirements of the rules  at
    that time.   At paragraph 17 the judge concluded that as the rules  had
    changed before the current application for an extension  of  leave  was
    made, he was unable to apply  the  rules  existing  pre  14.6.2012.  At
    paragraph 19 the judge rejected the submission that by incorporating  a
    period of leave under the statutory  "3C  leave"  the  appellant  would
    acquire ten years' lawful  residence  by  17  March  2014.   The  judge
    considered that this was not a circumstance in his contemplation as  it
    was an event  in  the  future.   The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    immigration and Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

Ground One

5.   The judge failed to consider relevant  circumstances  in  existence  at
    the date of the hearing (Section 86(4) of the 2002 Act) when  assessing
    evidence in calculating ten years'  continuous  residence.   The  judge
    failed to consider leave pursuant to Section 3C  Immigration  Act  1971
    which was within the remit of the Tribunal to determine.

Ground Two

6.   The judge erred by failing to properly apply Alvi v  SSHD  [2012]  UKSC
    33 which supported the argument that the Secretary of  State  ought  to
    have applied the Rules in existence as at the date of the  application.
    The changed Rules were not in force and ought not to have been applied.
     The codes were not incorporated until 19 July 2012.

Ground Three

7.   The judge erred in his approach to private life and failed to  properly
    identify what purpose was served  by  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control by relying on the ratio of Philipson v SSHD [2012] UKUT  00039.
    If paragraph 77D(ii) to Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  protected
    those who have previously been granted leave on the basis of  sponsored
    employment at NQF level 4, then arguably it  followed  that  grants  of
    leave to remain subsequent to 12 July 2012 on the basis of this  skills
    level should also be protected on renewal.

Permission to Appeal

8.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  refused  permission  to
    appeal on 18 March 2014.  At  paragraph  2  she  endorsed  the  judge's
    decision that as at the date of the hearing the ten year period had not
    been  met  and  accordingly  the  appellant  should  make  a   separate
    application.  She further observed that the period of  the  appellant's
    leave expired on 19 April 2013.

9.   In paragraph 3 of the decision the judge  rejected  the  argument  that
    the principles of Alvi were  not  properly  applied  because  the  only
    appeal before the judge was against the respondent's decision dated  28
    May 2013 in relation to the  appellant's  application  dated  18  April
    2013.

10.  Dealing with the Article 8 issue, the judge reasoned that the  Tribunal
    considered evidence of the appellant's private life,  made  appropriate
    findings and gave cogent reasons for coming  to  his  decision  placing
    weight on evidence as appropriate.

11.  Renewed grounds of appeal requested an oral hearing for the  permission
    application relying on grounds one to three.

12.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    papers for the following reasons:

         "On Ground one of the renewed grounds, there is a  decision  which,
         though not cited in them, may be in the appellant's  favour,  since
         it seems to suggest, though with strong reservations on the  merits
         of the individual case, that the necessary  ten  years'  residence,
         for the purposes of paragraph 276B, may be acquired by someone with
         only Section 3C leave pending appeal: MU ('statement of  additional
         grounds'; long residence; discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442."

Rule 24 Response

13.  In a response dated 14 May 2014 the respondent opposed the appeal.   At
    the date of hearing the appellant was not eligible for lawful residence
    under paragraph 276B Immigration Rules and which was distinct from  the
    issue under the current appeal.  The grounds of appeal  have  no  merit
    and amount to a disagreement with the cogent findings of the judge  who
    considered the evidence available to him and came to a conclusion based
    on the evidence, Rules and relevant law.



Error of Law Hearing

14.  Mr Magne produced three bundles; bundle  A  submitted  on  13  November
    2013, bundle B submitted on 13 December 2013 and bundle C containing  a
    skeleton argument and legal authorities.  In  addition  he  produced  a
    list of references in support of grounds one and two only and  set  out
    his detailed arguments in a skeleton argument. Mr Magne addressed me at
    length cross referring at each stage to evidence in support  identified
    in the  bundles.   I  do  not  propose  to  repeat  here  the  detailed
    submissions.  In summary the first ground was the failure to apply  the
    principles of Alvi and Adelola and that the judge erred by  reaching  a
    contrary decision as to the application of changes in  the  Rules  with
    regard to the occupational codes.  The second ground pertained  to  the
    argument that "3C leave "was a matter arising at the  date  of  hearing
    and ought to have been taken into account by the judge  in  calculating
    the period of lawful leave.  Mr Magne submitted that the judge erred in
    the determination by referring to changes in the Rules whereas in  fact
    it was not the Rules that had changed rather guidance,  which  did  not
    have the force of law.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant  made  her
    application before new Rules came into operation  which  accounted  for
    the previous grant of leave on 15 August.  The respondent applied Rules
    in existence as at the date of her application.  With regard to the  3C
    point Mr Magne submitted that the appellant  had  acquired  ten  years'
    lawful residence less 28 days (a permissible period to be  disregarded)
    and that her leave under 3C was entirely foreseeable  by  dint  of  the
    operation of procedural and statutory Rules having regard to the  dates
    by which the determination  was  to  be  promulgated.   It  was  not  a
    speculative  event  but  was  a  relevant  matter  arising  before  the
    Tribunal.

15.  Mr Deller submitted that the simple fact was  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to meet the requirements of the Rules  which  included  the  NVQ
    level 6 occupation at the time she renewed her application.  The  Rules
    are subject to alteration  and  change  from  time  to  time  and  what
    happened previously  was  irrelevant  to  the  decision   applying  the
    requirement of an NVQ level 6.

16.  Mr Deller forcefully submitted that  it  would  be  remarkable  if  the
    combination of Section 85(4) 2002 Act together with "3C leave" resulted
    in giving the Tribunal power to  waive  the  need  to  meet  calculable
    periods of time where those requirements were not met.  The judge could
    not be expected to rely on the concept of 3C leave and take a  decision
    that was speculative and not  a  foregone  conclusion.   The  statutory
    provision exists to afford protection where ground of appeal have  been
    issued and a lawful decision is awaited.


Discussion and Conclusions

17.   I  find  no  merit  whatsoever  in  the  second   ground   of   appeal
    notwithstanding MU (cited  above).   The  issue  in  MU  concerned  the
    serving a statement of additional grounds in response to a Section  120
    notice and contemplated that an appellant may accrue ten years'  lawful
    leave (including leave extended by Section 3C of the  1971  Act)  while
    his appeal was pending.  I  find  the  argument  put  by  Mr  Magne  is
    somewhat different in complexion and although MU was not relied  on  at
    the First-tier Tribunal, the issue is pursued  on  the  basis  that  3C
    leave was a matter arising at the date of hearing and  ought  therefore
    to have been in the judge's consideration.  I find no material error of
    law in the judge's determination.  The  judge  clearly  stated  in  his
    determination that it was  open  to  the  appellant  to  make  a  fresh
    application under the Rules in the event  that  she  met  the  required
    period of lawful residence.  As at the date of hearing  it  was  by  no
    means a certainty that the appellant would in future acquire ten years'
    lawful leave having regard to the effect of 3C leave and having  regard
    to  the  statutory  and  procedural  powers   covering   hearings   and
    promulgation of determinations.  It is plain that the judge  considered
    the argument, rejected the same and gave sound reasons for so doing  at
    [19] of the determination.

18.  With regard to the first ground of appeal I find that  the  judge  made
    his decision having considered all the arguments  put  before  him  and
    reached a conclusion open to him namely, that at the time the  decision
    was made the Secretary of State applied the  Rules  in  force  at  that
    date.  The judge found no support for the argument that the  provisions
    applicable at the date the application for leave under Tier 2 was made,
    ought to have applied.  He relied on Miah v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2013] QB 35.  Mr Magne pursued his appeal  with  force
    and made meticulous references in support however, I conclude that  the
    force of his argument was essentially a disagreement with the  decision
    made by the Secretary of State rather than any error of law on the part
    of the Tribunal judge.

Decision

19.  I dismiss the appeal.  The determination shall stand.



Signed                                  Date 24.6.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


Anonymity direction made

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 24.6.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
