

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/22151/2015

                                                    IA/22147/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 12 June 2017                          |     On 5 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between


                                     AOB
                                   C L G-B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. On 10 April 2017, the Upper Tribunal found a judge  of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal had materially erred in law  such  that  the  earlier
        decision was set aside. A copy of the  error  of  law  decision  is
        appended to this judgment in Appendix A.
     2. Directions were  given  regarding  the  future  management  of  the
        appeal, with a view to the Upper Tribunal being able to remake  the
        decision which it was agreed could be disposed of by way of written
        submissions being made by the advocates.
     3. Mr Kotas, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  filed  his  written
        submissions dated 22 April 2017 on that date. Mr Balroop, on behalf
        of the appellant, filed written submissions  dated  27  April  2017
        received by the Upper Tribunal on 8 May 2017.
     4. Both  documents  have  been  considered  together  with  all  other
        available evidence and it is not considered necessary to  reconvene
        to hear oral submissions or  for  any  additional  evidence  to  be
        provided.




Discussion



     5. The background is set out in the Error of Law  finding  at  [4]  to
        [33] and need not be repeated at this stage of the decision  as  it
        is accessible to a reader in the annex below.
     6. The finding by the First-tier Tribunal the appellants  were  unable
        to succeed under the Immigration Rules was  preserved  as  was  the
        finding of the existence of family life between the appellant's son
        D and his mother.
     7. The issue in this appeal is whether  the  decision  to  remove  the
        appellants, who it is accepted had this appeal only involve them as
        individuals would have been likely to fail, is disproportionate  in
        light of the situation of D set out in the error of law finding.
     8. There is no dispute between the parties that an assessment  of  the
        merits of the appeal under Article 8  ECHR  outside  the  Rules  is
        necessary although it is submitted by Mr Kotas that the failure  of
        the appellants to satisfy the Immigration Rules should be  accorded
        considerable weight in the balancing exercise as made clear by  the
        Supreme Court in R (on the application  of  Agyarko  and  Ikuga)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.
     9. As noted by Mr Kotas at [6]  of  his  written  submissions  "as  is
        common ground these appeals  essentially  hinge  on  the  effective
        removal on their son/stepson D who has PTSD.
    10. It is not disputed, as asserted  by  Mr  Kotas,  that  D  only  has
        limited leave to remain and can, as a matter of choice, follow  his
        parents  to  Jamaica,  and  that  the  appellants   have   remained
        unlawfully  in  the  UK  since  2008  and  2002  respectively  with
        knowledge that this is so.
    11. The assertion by Mr Kotas that little weight should be attached  to
        the family life between the appellants and D  pursuant  to  section
        117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  is  noted
        although this is a case where family  life  existed  by  virtue  of
        Strasbourg jurisprudence whilst D was  a  dependant  minor  if  the
        family were within a Member State.  Although family life recognised
        by Article 8 would have ended when D became dependent, as a  result
        of the impact of his service for the British Army outlined  in  the
        Error of Law finding such family life has come back into existence.
    12. The assertion by Mr  Kotas  is  that  D's  condition,  although  an
        important and indeed weighty consideration, is not of such severity
        that  it  could  properly  be  described  as  exceptional  or  very
        compelling given the ordinary meaning of those terms and  the  high
        threshold they import.
    13. In relation to the earlier decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Blake, it was found  that  removing  D  from  the  UK  would  be  a
        disproportionate breach of Article 8. Mr Kotas submits that finding
        was based upon particular factors which would need to be  revisited
        in view of developments that have arisen since  that  decision  was
        made in 2013.
    14. There is no successful appeal against the earlier  decision  which,
        therefore, will form the starting point in any appeal  that  D  may
        bring if an attempt is made to remove him from the  United  Kingdom
        whilst the need for  treatment  still  exists.  Even  though  D  is
        heavily dependent upon the appellants for his  day-to-day  support,
        and although there may be family connections in Jamaica, this  does
        not show that the type of support D needs  for  his  combat-related
        stress will be available in Jamaica.
    15. A key aspect of the respondent's case is set out at [17  -  26]  of
        the written submissions in the following terms:


        17.   FtJ Blake also found that D would not receive the  specialist
             treatment he required for combat stress. The SSHD submits that
             this finding was very much made in the context  of  things  as
             stood at the time of that appeal hearing. At present  however,
             D does not appear to be getting any ongoing specialist medical
             treatment. Indeed  the  only  reference  in  D's  most  recent
             statement dated 18.04.2016 is that he is  being  supported  by
             Combat Stress which is a charity. Similarly  Dr  Lyle  in  her
             2016  report  refers  to  D  having   continued   to   receive
             substantial and regular support from other veterans.


        18.  The UT is invited to note that the reference  to  the  ongoing
             treatment D receives is hardly mentioned in his own  statement
             and only briefly touched on in the expert report.


        19.  Properly understood therefore, D does  not  currently  receive
             any medical  intervention  and  the  SSHD  would  respectfully
             submit that the support  the  appellant  does  get  from  this
             charity albeit of importance to his emotional  well-being,  is
             not so acute or specialised  such  that  it  should  be  given
             substantial weight in the balancing exercise.


        20.  Indeed, as is made clear in  the  witness  statements  of  all
             three  interested  parties  to  this   appeal,   these   cases
             principally put on the dependency  on  his  parents  which  by
             definition will continue in Jamaica.


        21.  The SSHD submits that ultimately if this  family  support  can
             continue in Jamaica, the only basis for asking the appellants'
             appeal to be allowed is because D would lose the support of  a
             charitable organisation. This with the greatest respect is not
             the sort of case that can be described as very  compelling  or
             exceptional. More over as part of that evaluative  exercise  D
             will receive medication and also some mental  health  care  in
             Jamaica albeit not as specialised.


        22.  Finally since the decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Blake  the
             immigration rules  have  changed  and  critically  the  public
             interest features in the 2002 Act have come into  force.  This
             is another reason to depart from the findings of FTJ Blake.


        23.  As stated above one is essentially considering  the  effective
             removal on D's private life. Yet D only has limited  leave  to
             remain, and therefore his continued  presence  in  the  UK  is
             contingent  on  a  further  grant  of  leave.  As   such   his
             immigration status is deemed  precarious.  The  tribunal  must
             therefore give little weight to the effective removal  of  the
             appellants on D's private life in the UK pursuant  to  117B(5)
             of the 2002 Act.


        24.  Finally the fact neither appellant is financially  independent
             and A2 is heavily  reliant  on  the  NHS  must  count  heavily
             against them in the proportionality exercise is found  by  FTJ
             Clarke.


        25.  Overall therefore whilst at first blush the  appellant's  case
             appears to have an attractive quality in view of D's situation
             and the previous findings of FTJ Blake, when the present facts
             are properly viewed through  the  relevant  jurisprudence  and
             statutory considerations, the strengths of  their  appeals  is
             significantly weakened,  and  the  SSHD  would  submit  cannot
             outweigh the public interest in immigration control which  has
             now been given statutory force.


        26.  The Tribunal is  therefore  invalid  invited  to  dismiss  the
        appellants appeals.


    16. On behalf of the appellants' Mr Balroop records  at  [5]  that  the
        applicant takes a completely different view  to  the  Secretary  of
        State.
    17. It is submitted on the applicants' behalf  that  the  Secretary  of
        States fails to address the fact the Tribunal has found it will  be
        a breach of D's article 8 rights to remove him as per the  judgment
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake which  has  not  been  appealed,
        meaning the respondent cannot remove D or force him  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom.
    18. If it is accepted that D is dependent upon  the  appellants'  as  a
        result of his PTSD and mental health problems and if the appellants
        are removed D will have to go with them which  it  is  argued  will
        breach his Article 8 rights.
    19. The appellant submits that D's treatment is exceptional and/or very
        compelling and it  is  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
        submissions gloss over the reasons for D's PTSD which was not as  a
        result of a serious accident or something similar but as  a  result
        of D engaging in combat whilst serving as a British soldier. It  is
        submitted that specialist treatment is required  and  that  it  has
        been found that Jamaica will be  unable  to  provide  the  required
        care.
    20. It is submitted the report from Dr Lyle, dated 1 June 2016,  states
        that D 'receives substantial  regular  support,  particularly  from
        other veterans...' and that D  is  experiencing  suicidal  thoughts
        approximately three or four times a week. Treatment is ongoing  and
        would be ongoing for an indeterminate  period  which  is  treatment
        only available in the United Kingdom for D.
    21. In all the circumstances the appellants submit the decision  should
        be remade and the appeal allowed.
    22. This is not a normal "run-of-the-mill" case involving a family who,
        on the face of it, would have no right  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, who have overstayed,  formed  a  private  or  family  life
        during a period where their status is precarious, and now  seek  to
        rely upon Article 8  to  prevent  their  removal  from  the  United
        Kingdom. It takes accepted Article 8 does not permit  a  person  to
        choose where they wish to live in is about  preventing  unwarranted
        interference with a protected right.
    23. Adopting a  structured  approach,  the  right  being  protected  in
        relation to this appeal is the family life that exists between  the
        appellants and D.  It has  been  found  that  D  has  a  degree  of
        dependency on account of his PTSD and mental health problems  which
        is something more than normal emotional  ties.  There  is  also  an
        element of private  life  which  in  relation  to  D  involves  his
        connection with the medical and support services.
    24. What makes this case somewhat  different  is  that  the  underlying
        factor leading to D's problems arise out  of  his  service  in  the
        British Army whilst on active service for the  Crown  in  a  combat
        zone. The impact of that service is set out in  the  report  of  Dr
        Lyle referred to in some detail in the Error of Law finding.
    25. The Secretary  of  State  submissions  make  no  reference  to  the
        Military Covenant by virtue of which the Ministry of Defence as  an
        obligation to ensure that those injured in active service  properly
        provided for both in terms of medical  and  pastoral  care/support.
        There also appears no consideration of what weight should be  given
        to the public interest concerning a  member  of  the  Armed  Forces
        suffering as a result of combat service, who does no more than  ask
        that his mother and father be allowed  to  remain  to  continue  to
        support him in assisting during his period of rehabilitation.
    26. It is not disputed that D has made some progress but in the section
        of the report headed 'Discussion and Conclusions' set out  at  [26]
        of the error of law finding it was found on 1 June 2016:


        "D is saying that he experienced  suicidal  thoughts  approximately
        three or four times a week and I consider that the support  of  his
        mother and stepfather is even more necessary for  him  now.  It  is
        important that he has the opportunity  to  undergo  the  specialist
        Behaviour Therapy treatment with Dr Wilde  which  I  have  outlined
        above. Given the recent deterioration in D's mental health state  I
        consider that it is even more important that he should continue  to
        have the support of his mother and stepfather and indeed  he  feels
        very threatened of the prospect of them potentially being  required
        to leave the country. At  present,  they  are  a  major  factor  in
        preventing  his  suicidal  thoughts  from  being  carried  out   in
        reality."


    27. Whilst it is  accepted  that  there  are  psychiatric  services  in
        Jamaica the thrust of the expert evidence is that what  D  requires
        is specialist intervention and treatment/assistance. Those of  real
        benefit to D are likely to be the veterans with whom he is able  to
        talk about his experience and who have personal  knowledge  of  the
        reality of war  in  a  very  high  pressure  and  dangerous  combat
        environment. It was found in [29] of the Error of law finding  that
        what is recognised is that those who  have  suffered  in  a  combat
        environment experience things that members of the normal population
        never have to contemplate. This is not a case of D  just  suffering
        from PTSD but an  individual  suffering  the  consequences  of  the
        trauma of a combat role in Iraq which has been accepted as credible
        by both  the  Secretary  of  State,  medical  professions  and  the
        Ministry of Defence.
    28. I find that the medical evidence clearly  shows  there  remains  an
        ongoing need  for  specialist  treatment  and  also  for  D  to  be
        supported during the period of such  treatment/assistance  both  to
        "be there" for D but also to ensure his personal safety and welfare
        as demonstrated  by  D's  mother  retaining  and  handing  out  his
        medication to prevent any risk of overdose.
    29. It is arguable that the public interest, whilst  ordinarily  strong
        in relation to an appeal of  this  nature  without  the  additional
        circumstances peculiar to D, would need to be very strong  for  the
        appeals to fail.  It is arguable  that  the  weight  given  to  the
        public interest is lessened in a case of this nature.
    30. As noted in the Error of Law finding at [18], D accepted there  was
        a real risk of suffering serious harm when he  agreed  to  join  HM
        Armed Forces as part of their normal day to day activities, but  it
        is also been accepted in this case that  D  has  suffered  harm  as
        direct result of his combat experience, that  assistance  has  been
        provided in helping him cope with the same and that he was  granted
        a period of leave to remain in the United Kingdom to enable him  to
        receive the specialist treatment the United Kingdom has to offer.
    31. There is no medical evidence before this Tribunal  showing  that  D
        has made sufficient progress not to require the services  that  can
        be offered in the  United  Kingdom,  especially  in  light  of  the
        heightened risk of suicide arising from perceptions  of  insecurity
        following the attempted break-in into  his  mother's  house,  which
        resulted in a worsening of his symptoms.
    32. Although Mr Kotas attempts to encourage  this  tribunal  to  depart
        from the findings of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blake,  the  core
        finding that the removal of  D  breaches  his  rights  pursuant  to
        article 8 ECHR was properly made  and  accounts  for  the  leave  D
        currently has.
    33. It is necessary in this case to consider all  relevant  aspects  of
        the matter together. It is not possible, as Mr Balroop submits,  to
        separate the reasons for D suffering from PTSD and to approach this
        decision without incorporating the additional  element  of  service
        within the British Army.
    34.  This  tribunal  does  not  accept  the  submission  made  on   the
        appellants' behalf that D's treatment  will  be  ongoing  for  ever
        although it is not known at this stage how long D will require  the
        expertise available in the UK. For as  long  as  he  requires  such
        assistance it is arguably made out that D requires the  support  of
        his parents and that the consequence of  removing  his  parents  is
        likely to result in D deteriorating very quickly,  leading  to  his
        likely suicide, it cannot be said on the facts of this matter  that
        remove the  appellants  at  this  stage  is  proportionate  to  the
        legitimate aim relied upon by the Secretary of State.
    35. It is known that D has applied for an extension  of  his  leave  to
        remain and much may depend upon his status. If evidence is provided
        to the  Secretary  of  State,  which  appears  likely,  to  show  a
        continued ongoing need for treatment in the United  Kingdom  it  is
        likely a further short period of leave will be granted. In  such  a
        situation, it is arguably appropriate that the appellants should be
        granted a period of leave in line with D to enable them to continue
        to provide  him  with  the  support  referred  to  in  the  medical
        evidence.
    36. To remove the appellants from the  United  Kingdom  at  this  stage
        will, the tribunal finds, be a disproportionate  interference  with
        D's protected rights and therefore a breach of Article 8 ECHR.
    37. It  appears  a  pragmatic  solution  to  this  matter  is  for  the
        appellants' to be granted leave in line with D with  a  requirement
        for there to be a periodic review of the nature of the treatment  D
        is receiving and its impact upon his well-being, together with  any
        prognosis, and to assess the situation of this family in line  with
        the  specialist  medical  evidence.  It  is  noted,  for   example,
        reference by Dr  Lyle  to  not  only  Combat  Stress  but  also  to
        specialist treatment at King's College Hospital in  London  by  the
        named individual referred to in  the  Error  of  Law  finding.  The
        Secretary of State should be able to assist  D  in  overcoming  the
        barriers to accessing such treatment as a result of his immigration
        status.
    38. If D is deemed to have benefited from such further intervention  to
        the extent that he no longer needs to remain in the United  Kingdom
        in the opinion of the medical experts, can manage on the  basis  of
        general psychiatric services in Jamaica, or if appropriate  support
        and intervention is offered  which  D  for  no  justifiable  reason
        refuses to avail himself  of,  then  the  Secretary  State  may  be
        entitled to review the matter further in relation to any period  of
        leave granted or curtailment decision.
    39. In conclusion, it is found when considering all relevant aspects of
        this case that the respondent has failed to discharge the burden of
        proof upon her to the required standard to show that  the  decision
        is proportionate. Although the appellants' in isolation would  fail
        with this appeal, their involvement in  the  protection  and  well-
        being of D and the  related  family  and  private  life  associated
        therewith, if lost as a result of removal decision, will amount  to
        an unwarranted interference in a protected right.


Decision

    40. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    41. The anonymity order made  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 shall continue until
        further order.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 June 2017
































                               Annex A

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/22147/2015

                                                    IA/22151/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 10 April 2017                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AOB
                                   C L G-B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr Balroop instructed by Greenland Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G
        Clarke ('the Judge') promulgated on 21 September 2016 in which  the
        appeals of the above-named Jamaican nationals, against the  refusal
        of their applications for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
        based on their family and private life, were dismissed.
     2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Shimmin on 1 February 2017 for the following reason:


        "It is arguable that the judge has materially erred in law  in  the
        assessment of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  [D]  which  is
        accepted by the judge to be beyond normal emotional times,  bearing
        in mind the mental health of [D]."


   3. The use of the letter 'D'  to  identify  the  second  appellant's  son
      arises as a result of the anonymity order made in these proceedings.



Background


     4. The first appellant was born in 1962 is a national of Jamaica.  The
        second appellant who was  born  in  1964  is  also  a  national  of
        Jamaica. The appellants' immigration history set out at  [4  -  21]
        and need not be repeated in this decision.
     5. The Judge sets out his findings from [39  -  91]  of  the  decision
        under challenge. At [40] the Judge writes:


        40.  I find that the Appellants  were  married  in  Jamaica  on  14
             August 1999. They live together with CLG-B's son,  D.  I  find
             that D enlisted  with  the  British  Army  shortly  after  his
             arrival in the United Kingdom and served from 2003 to 2007.  D
             served a term of duty in Iraq from October 2005 to March 2007.
             D now suffers from severe mental health  problems  and  has  a
             diagnosis of PTSD as a result  of  his  experiences  in  Iraq.
             There was  a  report  from  Dr  Ronald  Lyle,  Consulting  and
             Chartered Clinical Psychologist  and  other  medical  evidence
             relating to D's mental health which I have taken into  account
             in making my decision. I have  also  taken  into  account  the
             letter dated 9 March 2016 from the Armed  Forces  Compensation
             Scheme awarding D an interim payment.


     6. The Judge's finding that both the  above-named  appellants  have  a
        poor immigration history, AOB having been an over stayer  since  30
        August 2008 and CLG-B since 6 May 2002, is a factually correct  and
        sustainable finding [41]. The Judge also found that the  appellants
        have extensive family  connections  in  Jamaica  and  that  neither
        appellant could qualify for a grant of leave in  respect  of  their
        family life in the  context  of  Appendix  FM.  Similarly,  neither
        appellant was able to succeed on the basis there were parents of  a
        qualifying child as D is not under the  age  of  18  nor  is  he  a
        British citizen. The Judge also considered  the  family  life  they
        sought to  rely  upon  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  and
        similarly found they could not succeed on that basis either  which,
        again, is a sustainable finding.
     7. At [64] the Judge found:


        64.  The  Appellant's  family  life  and  private  life  have  been
             considered under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE(1). I am not
             satisfied  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  for  a
             consideration outside the Rules because the Appellant's family
             and private life have been considered under the Rules.


     8. Had the Judge gone no further there would have been a  clear  error
        of law as the jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  is  a  human  rights
        jurisdiction. The Judge was also required  to  consider  the  human
        rights of not only the appellants' but also  other  family  members
        affected by this decision, as per  the  guidance  provided  by  the
        House of Lords in Beoku-Betts v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2008] UKHL 39. The relevant family member  is  D  whose
        situation is not provided for by reference to the Immigration Rules
        under the family and  private  life  provisions  according  to  the
        Judge. However, at [65] the Judge states "In the event  that  I  am
        wrong, I will now make such an assessment."  This  finding,  albeit
        expressed as being in the alternative,  means  that  no  procedural
        error is made  out  in  the  structure  of  the  determination,  in
        relation to the aspects the Judge did actually consider.
     9. The Judge found at [68] that the appellants have family  life  with
        each other and that there will be no interference with their family
        life as it is proposed that they be  removed  together  to  Jamaica
        where such family life can continue. It is noted at [69]  that  the
        appellants claim to have family life with D who was  born  in  1986
        and who at the date of the hearing was just over 30 years of age.
    10. In relation to D the Judge writes at [71]:


        71.  In 2005, D volunteered to serve in Iraq and completed an eight-
             month period of duty. D has developed PTSD as a result of  his
             experiences in Iraq. I have considered  the  detailed  account
             that D  provided  in  his  witness  statement  of  his  health
             problems. D describes how he was diagnosed  in  2012  and  was
             referred to Combat Stress, a charity that provides counselling
             for service personnel. D believes that had it not been for the
             care of the Appellants he  would  have  committed  suicide  or
             committing a criminal offence. He continues  to  rely  on  his
             mother and stepfather to assist his continued recovery. In her
             oral  evidence,  Mrs  G-B  stated  that  her  son  was  on  an
             antidepressant and a sleeping tablet.


    11. In [72] the Judge finds "I am satisfied that  D  has  a  degree  of
        dependency on his mother and stepfather on account of his PTSD  and
        mental health problems that is something more than normal emotional
        ties and therefore I find that there is  family  life  between  the
        Appellants and D". This answered the first of the Razgar questions.
        The Judge also found the appellants had a private life built up  in
        the United Kingdom since their respective dates of entry.
    12. At [76] the Judge found that the decision turns  on  the  issue  of
        proportionality. The Judge stated that consideration was  given  to
        the family life between the appellants and D and the impact on D of
        the appellant's removal.
    13. The Judge attached considerable weight to  the  fact  that  neither
        appellant was able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules  and  stated  that  it  could  not  be   ignored   that   the
        proportionality assessment must be made as per AQ and others [2015]
        EWCA Civ 250 "through the lens" of the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is
        stated the  failure  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules
        militates strongly against the appellants. Little weight  was  also
        attached  the  private  life  built  up   whilst   the   appellants
        immigration status was precarious, in accordance with Section 117 B
        of the 2002 Act.
    14. The requirements of the Rules set out the respondent's position  in
        relation to how Article 8  should  be  interpreted  by  Courts  and
        Tribunals and does form part of the balancing exercise when looking
        at the respondent's position. The government has also  incorporated
        a number of principles to  be  found  in  the  Rules  and  European
        jurisprudence relating to Article 8 into Section 117  of  the  2002
        Act which is intended to  provide  a  structured  approach  to  the
        application of Article 8 which produces,  in  all  cases,  a  final
        result which was compatible with Article 8. However, it must always
        be recognised by decision-makers, at whatever level, that there may
        be circumstances  appertaining  to  a  case  that  require  special
        consideration especially if they do not fit within the  established
        framework. It is for this reason that when  considering  Article  8
        cases great care must be  taken  to  identify  all  relevant  facts
        accurately before undertaking the proportionality assessment.
    15. In addition to these proceedings D has himself had an appeal  which
        was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake  who  promulgated  his
        decision on 7 October 2013, allowing D's appeal against the refusal
        of his application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
        Article 8 grounds. It is not disputed that in  his  decision  Judge
        Blake made the following findings:


   i. D has been in the UK since he was 16 years of age and enlisted in  the
      Army.
  ii. D has endured horrific experiences, which has left him suffering  with
      mental  health  problems  and  in  particular  post-traumatic   stress
      disorder.
 iii. D's character changed after his tour  of  duty  in  Iraq  and  he  was
      suffering with problems relating to those experiences.
  iv. D has been assessed by the Institute of Psycho-Trauma in  East  London
      NHS Trust and he required specific therapy for his PTSD and he  should
      attend Combat Stress...  There  is  doubt  that  the  type  of  highly
      specialised treatment that D required would be available to him if  he
      were returned to Jamaica.
   v. There is nothing in the objective material to  suggest  that  D  would
      benefit from the identified specialist treatment he  required  in  the
      form of Combat Stress if returned to Jamaica..
  vi. D is a vulnerable and fragile  individual  who  was  suffering  mental
      health problems arising out of his experiences whilst serving  in  the
      British Armed Forces.


    16. Judge Blake's decision was not appealed and D was granted a  period
        of leave. The grounds of appeal note that D has made an application
        for further leave which is still pending before  the  Secretary  of
        State.
    17. At [84 -  91]  the  Judge  sets  out  the  operative  part  of  the
        proportionality assessment in the following terms:


        84.  Mr Malik in his submissions that I should find a way of giving
             effect to the decision of Judge  Blake.  While  I  have  taken
             Judge Blake's  as  my  starting  point,  I  find  that  it  is
             proportionate to remove the appellants. I so find  because  it
             will be a choice for  D  whether  he  remains  in  the  United
             Kingdom until his leave expires or chooses to return with  his
             mother and stepfather to  Jamaica.  I  have  also  taken  into
             account that when Judge Blake made his decision in 2013, D was
             awaiting treatment for combat stress. Crucially, the  evidence
             before me is that D has finished his specialist treatment. The
             anticipated specialist treatment involved a  six-week  course.
             In his Witness Statement at Paragraph 26 he states, "... As  I
             was advised to seek  combat  counselling  I  was  referred  to
             Combat Stress a charity which provides counselling for service
             personnel. I was placed on  a  six  week  intensive  treatment
             course  and  medications  including  Amitriptyline   which   I
             continue to take till (sic) 2014.  I  am  still  dependent  on
             sleeping tablets and Vitamin B6."


        85.   I find that D's  specialist  course  of  intensive  treatment
             finished three years ago although in his Witness Statement  he
             states that he is still supported by Combat Stress and  if  he
             had to go to Jamaica he  would  not  receive  the  support  of
             Combat Stress. I remind myself that the  burden  of  proof  is
             upon the Appellants to prove each element of their case. There
             is no  credible  evidence  before  me  that  there  is  not  a
             functioning mental health service in Jamaica. The contrary  is
             the case as the Reasons for Refusal  letter  quotes  from  the
             Jamaican Information Service, Ministry of Health, accessed  on
             17 September 2009 which reported:


             "The mental health services are  delivered  through  a  three-
             pronged  system  consisting  of:  a  residential  hospital   -
             Bellevue Hospital, outpatient community mental health services
             at primary health care facilities island wide, and residential
             outpatient rehabilitation units  -  Ken  Royes  Rehabilitation
             Centre."


        86.  The Respondent also refers to the WHO Country Profile  Jamaica
             2005  which  lists  the   following   therapeutic   drugs   as
             Carbamezepine,   Phenobarbital,   Phenyltoinsodium,    Sodiaum
             Valoprate,    amitriptyline,     Chlorpromazine,     Diazepam,
             Fluphenazine, Haloperidol and Lithium. Also on  4  June  2008,
             the Jamaica Information Services reported that the Ministry of
             Health and Environment planted to  develop  a  community-based
             mental health service. I am therefore  fortified  in  my  view
             that there is mental health provision in Jamaica which D could
             avail of. I also find that by modern means of communication, D
             could continue to  keep  in  touch  with  Combat  Stress  from
             Jamaica.


        87.  The Appellants and  D  make  the  case  that  his  mother  and
             stepfather have been instrumental  in  his  care  and  looking
             after him. I find that the Appellants will be able to continue
             to provide care to D if he decides  to  return  with  them  to
             Jamaica. Up until the expiry of his leave, it is a  matter  of
             choice whether he returns with the Appellants. However, I find
             there is nothing in these circumstances  that  would  tip  the
             balance in favour of the Appellants  and  against  the  public
             interest.


    18. It was not raised before the Judge and  not  discussed  before  the
        Upper Tribunal at the error of law stage as to whether the  fact  D
        is suffering to the extent he is as a result of active  service  on
        behalf of the United Kingdom  should  be  a  relevant  factor  when
        assessing the weight to be given to  the  public  interest.  It  is
        accepted that when  individuals  join  HM  Armed  Forces  they  are
        accepting that there is a real risk of their suffering serious harm
        as part of their normal day-to-day activities, but whether this  is
        an absolute issue in a case in which an individual has  been  shown
        to suffer symptoms which have no organic origin and for  which  the
        UK Government has accepted responsibility and provided treatment is
        an interesting question.
    19. The Judge found that the balance of  the  proportionality  exercise
        tipped "firmly in favour of the public  interest"  [90]  and  found
        that the decision was proportionate.
    20. The Judge had available information that D had received input  from
        Combat Stress. This is a charitable organisation who specialise  in
        helping former members of the Armed Forces who leave their  service
        with  complex  mental  health  problems.  Combat  Stress   describe
        themselves as experts in the treatment  of  Service-related  mental
        health issues. In addition  to  offering  a  24-hour  helpline  and
        community  support  they  also  offer  more   intensive   treatment
        programmes including a six-week  specialist  Post-Traumatic  Stress
        Disorder Intensive Treatment programme which is that D attended.
    21. Combat Stress note that  PTSD  is  a  problem  for  a  minority  of
        Veterans and  that  around  1  in  25  Veterans  of  the  Iraq  and
        Afghanistan wars are likely to develop PTSD, similar to that in the
        general public. Their website goes on to state "however, while  the
        rate of occurrence is similar, the complexity of the disorder tends
        to be much  greater  in  Veterans.  Furthermore,  it  often  occurs
        alongside other medical  problems  such  as  pain,  disability  and
        substance abuse, particularly alcohol abuse."
    22. In relation to the question of whether it is possible to cure PTSD,
        Combat Stress state on their website:


        "PTSD has been left untreated for a number of years or decades will
        require more intensive treatment. There are still  positive  health
        outcomes for  sufferers,  and  the  potential  for  a  life  beyond
        symptoms,  but  seeking  suitable,  timely  treatment  is  key   to
        maximising the chances of recovery. If PTSD is diagnosed early  and
        the sufferer receives the right treatment in the right environment,
        rates of recovery are  very  positive.  Veterans  can  live  normal
        fulfilling lives, able to work with  the  condition  and  generally
        become symptom-free for long periods.


        There is a risk of delayed-onset of PTSD,  where  symptoms  do  not
        occur for years or decades after the traumatic events. Veterans who
        present with delayed-onset PTSD have  often  been  exposed  to  the
        effects of multiple traumas over a  longer  period  of  time.  This
        suggests that those who served multiple tours are more at  risk  of
        developing PTSD several years after leaving the military.


    23. The  Judge  had  available  to  him  evidence  from  Combat  Stress
        including a letter from the Outpatients  Department  together  with
        reports written by Dr Lyle dated 4 September 2013,  26  April  2015
        and 1 June 2016.
    24. In the 2013 report Dr Lyle writes:


        Psychological symptoms


        D has dwelt a lot on all of his experiences in the  Army  including
        both the bullying and the traumatic experiences he had in Iraq.  He
        was particularly affected by the episode when the vehicle was blown
        up by an explosive device, killing and severely  injuring  many  of
        the occupants. He has since  experienced  nightmares  in  which  he
        wakes up in the night in a panic,  agitated  and  looking  for  his
        helmet and body armour. This reminded him of the situation in  Iraq
        when he might be rudely awakened from his sleep by having a  mortar
        shell landed close by his bed. He explained that there was no "hard
        cover". His sleep still remains very disturbed. He has continued to
        be plagued by flashback episodes in which he will  relive  some  of
        the many  traumatic  experiences  that  he  had  whilst  on  active
        service. He describes having "sense of the fear of knowing you  can
        die". Sometimes he sees himself being  chased  by  a  Vehicle-Borne
        Explosive Device, which was a particular hazard  his  unit  had  to
        face in Iraq.  D explained that although he was  a  gunner  he  was
        often cast in the role of infantry and would  have  to  go  out  on
        patrol as all the other soldiers did. Even when back in Germany  or
        the UK, D remained suspicious of litter bins or unattended luggage.
        He was also unnerved by people looking through windows or shouting.
        All of these were particularly likely to trigger flashbacks.  These
        could also be set off by low-flying planes  which  sounded  to  him
        very similar to the Chinese-made rockets which bombarded  his  unit
        in Iraq. Typical anxiety symptoms experienced include  an  increase
        in heart rate, sweating to excess and handshaking.


        .......


        Self-harm


        D admitted to one attempt at self-harm in Iraq. He described how he
        had loaded his gun and had his finger on the  trigger.  On  another
        occasion after he went absent without leave, he planned to crash  a
        car and kill himself. There is a documented attempted  overdose  in
        June 2013 which  provoked  a  response  by  the  [.........  Crisis
        Service ]who have been monitoring him since. D is staying with  his
        mother but she is afraid to leave him alone in the house in case he
        might again try to kill himself.


        Opinion


        D is a young man who whilst on  active  service  with  the  British
        Forces suffered  a  number  of  traumatic  experiences  which  have
        resulted in him developing a severe combat-related  Post  Traumatic
        Stress Disorder. He has been assessed by the Institute  of  Psycho-
        trauma at the East London NHS Trust. Their report concluded that he
        required specific therapy for his PTSD and suggested that he should
        attend Combat Stress. There are however apparently issues about the
        availability  to  him  of  treatment  because  he  does  not   have
        guaranteed residency within the UK. I would be  extremely  doubtful
        if the type of highly specialised treatment  D  requires  would  be
        available to him in Jamaica. He specifically  requires  either  Eye
        Movement Desensitisation or Bilateral Stimulation treatment,  which
        are the treatments recommended in the  NICE  guidelines  for  Post-
        Traumatic Stress Disorder. I  have,  since  seeing  D  specifically
        written to his GP requesting a change of antidepressant medication,
        but I have indicated that his mother should hold and  disperse  the
        medication, as I consider that  he  still  represents  an  overdose
        risk.


        It cannot be doubted that D is still in a very vulnerable state  in
        terms of his mental health. He is scoring at nearly the maximum  on
        depression and he also has a score indicating a quite severe degree
        of anxiety. There is an established recent  history  of  a  suicide
        attempt by D and in my opinion does very much need the support  and
        help which continues to be provided  by  his  mother.  If  he  were
        forced to return to Jamaica I do not think it will be  long  before
        he became a completed suicide.


    25. The 2015 report was written following an interview  with  D  on  23
        April 2015 to review his progress. Dr Lyle notes that  D  had  been
        assessed  and  inducted  into  treatment  by  the   Combat   Stress
        organisation and had undertaken a six  week  intensive  residential
        programme and that he  continues  in  treatment  with  them,  being
        followed up on a weekly outpatient basis. Some improvement  in  D's
        clinical condition was noted and his  mother  was  now  willing  to
        leave him alone in the house for short periods, but not  overnight,
        as even then she still checks up on him. It  is  noted  that  D  is
        still troubled by suicidal thoughts and there had been at least one
        serious attempt that is known about. On page 3 of the report it  is
        written:


        "D has still not  found  a  medication  which  suits  him,  and  he
        struggles with feelings of rage. His sleep is still very disturbed.
        He continues to suffer from feelings of depression which  "hit  him
        hard" and he describes the feelings as being of "complete loss". He
        continues to be disturbed by the  "humming  noise  of  jets"  which
        reminds him of the rocket fire which he would sometimes  experience
        in Iraq. He finds also that cars "with flashing lights"  recall  to
        him the car bombs he encountered on active service. In response  to
        the treatment he is receiving, the flashbacks have receded and  are
        now mainly triggered by such reminders. D is still  unfit  to  work
        and he's totally reliant on his family for emotional support and to
        keep him from  self  harm.  In  my  view  the  maintenance  of  the
        programme which he has so far [intelligible] is heavily  predicated
        on him being able to stay in the  UK  in  touch  with  his  ongoing
        treatment programme and with his family. He has  also  particularly
        appreciated the contact with and support of other veterans who have
        undergone similar experiences, and some of whom are still  affected
        by psychiatric injuries sustained as long ago as the Falklands War.


        D's parents provide vital stability and close support to D  who  is
        slowly trying to claw his way back to some sort of normality, after
        suffering a severe form of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder whilst on
        active service  with  the  British  Army.  I  consider  that  their
        presence is a major factor  in  facilitating  and  maintaining  the
        improvement he has managed so  far,  and  in  dissuading  him  from
        suicide. I very much fear that if D's parents are  not  allowed  to
        stay in the UK to continue to look after him, D would not  be  able
        to survive independently in the community.


    26. In the report dated 1 June 2016 Dr Lyle records that  D  found  the
        course with Combat Stress helpful although he still has mood swings
        and reports still having suicidal thoughts. It is recorded that D's
        mother continues to hold and dispense his  psychotropic  medication
        to prevent him overdosing and that although D  feels  he  had  been
        making some overall progress he suffered a setback in November 2015
        when he had to confront two individuals breaking into his  mother's
        house which ended up  in  him  being  "bottled"  on  the  head  and
        sustaining a head wound, which has led to him not  to  now  feeling
        safe at his mother's house in case those individuals should return.
        It is noted D has been prescribed psychotropic medicine by his  GP.
        Dr Lyle summarises the content of the  clinical  interview  with  D
        before setting out his professional opinion in the following terms:

        Discussion and Conclusions


        I was sorry to see that D is not much further improved,  indeed  he
        seems to have taken  several  steps  backwards.  This  is  probably
        largely attributable to the fracas which resulted when he tried  to
        stop two youths from breaking into his mother's house. This  seemed
        just to confirm to him that the world was still  a  very  dangerous
        place and it has resulted in a worsening of his symptoms of PTSD.


        I have some recommendations to make about  future  treatment  which
        may be helpful to D. In the first  instance  I  would  recommend  a
        reinstatement   of   his   treatment   with   the    antidepressant
        Amitriptyline working up to a larger dose. This  should  help  with
        the ongoing sleep problems which are considerable. Whilst at Combat
        Stress  Leatherhead  he  was  prescribed  additional  antipsychotic
        medication and I will be writing to his GP to suggest that this  be
        reinstated too. Regarding the ongoing difficulties with  going  out
        of doors, I  would  suggest  a  programme  of  desensitisation  and
        treatment along Behaviour Therapy  lines.  I  will  be  writing  to
        suggest a referral to Dr Jennifer Wilde at Kings College  Hospital,
        London where there is particular  expertise  in  applying  this  to
        sufferers of PTSD. There may however be a wait  before  he  can  be
        taken into treatment.


        D is saying that he is experiencing suicidal thoughts approximately
        three or four times a week and I consider that the support  of  his
        mother and stepfather is even more necessary for  him  now.  It  is
        also  important  that  he  has  the  opportunity  to  undergo   the
        specialist Behaviour Therapy treatment with Dr Wilde which  I  have
        outlined above. Given the recent deterioration in D's mental health
        state I consider that it is even  more  important  that  he  should
        continue to have the support  of  his  mother  and  stepfather  and
        indeed he feels very threatened of the prospect of them potentially
        being required to leave the country. At present, they are  a  major
        factor in preventing his suicidal thoughts from being  carried  out
        in reality."


    27. It is clear from the evidence before the  Judge  that  D  is  still
        suffering  as  a  result  of  his  earlier  experiences.  Dr   Lyle
        identifies  two  sources  of  future  treatment,   being   chemical
        intervention  through  the  form  of  prescription  medication  and
        specialist treatment at  Kings  College  Hospital  in  London.  The
        decision  under  challenge  finds  that  Jamaica  has   psychiatric
        services which is not disputed before the Upper Tribunal, but  that
        is not the only issue. The Judge was arguably required to  identify
        not  only  whether  psychiatric  services  exist  but  whether  the
        services offered are capable of meeting D's specialist needs.
    28. A consequence of the war in Iraq and Afghanistan  is  that  medical
        professionals in the United Kingdom, both those who served  in  the
        Armed Forces as their chosen profession who  were  seconded  to  or
        assisted the Armed Forces in the field  of  combat  and  those  who
        dealt with the effects of combat within the UK such as those in the
        hospitals within Birmingham, have gained world leading expertise in
        dealing with the effects of combat and war. This applies  not  only
        to the ability to deal with physical injuries such as wounds caused
        by gunfire, bomb blasts, or other forms of direct trauma, but  also
        the  psychological  impact  of  experiencing  such  a  hostile  and
        dangerous environment.

    29. It is recognised that in dealing with psychological illnesses  such
        as PTSD one of the therapies involves an understanding of the  root
        cause(s). What is recognised is that those who have suffered  in  a
        combat environment experience things that  members  of  the  normal
        population, fortunately, never have to contemplate.  A  reading  of
        the decision under challenge indicates that this unique element  of
        this  case  was  not  properly  understood  or  factored  into  the
        balancing exercise by the Judge who appears to have treated D as  a
        person     suffering     from     PTSD     with     no     apparent
        consideration/understanding of the trauma of serving  in  a  combat
        role in Iraq, which has been  accepted  as  credible  by  both  the
        Secretary of State,  medical  professionals  and  the  Ministry  of
        Defence, and what future treatment is required. It is of concern to
        note that in the paragraphs  set  out  above  the  Judge  makes  no
        mention of the specialist treatment  recommended  by  Dr  Lyle  and
        fails to assess whether those delivering  psychiatric  services  in
        Jamaica possess the appropriate training and  experience,  to  deal
        with PTSD arising from combat experiences.

    30. The medical report clearly shows there remains an ongoing need  for
        specialist treatment. Whilst it is accepted D is not the subject of
        any order for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  the  medical
        evidence clearly shows the role D's mother plays in both  providing
        support but also in ensuring his personal safety and welfare,  such
        as retaining and handing out D's medication to prevent any risk  of
        overdose. The impact of the appeal  being  dismissed  is  that  the
        Secretary of State would be able to issue a removal  direction  and
        remove the appellants. The Judge fails to consider what impact that
        would have upon D which on the face of the medical  evidence  would
        be catastrophic, more likely than not, resulting  in  D  committing
        suicide.


    31. The Judge's solution to this is set out in [84] that  the  decision
        was proportionate as it will be a choice for D whether  he  remains
        in the United Kingdom or chooses to  return  with  his  mother  and
        stepfather to Jamaica. D has leave pursuant to article 8 in his own
        right based upon his situation, presentation, and needs, which were
        accepted as making any decision to remove him  disproportionate  by
        Judge Blake. If the only option D is left with, if his parents  are
        removed, is to accompany them to Jamaica it  may  be  necessary  to
        consider  the  lawfulness  of  such  a  decision.   The  effect  of
        compelling D to have to follow his parents to continue  to  receive
        their ongoing support may result  in  a  breach  of  his  protected
        rights. If so it cannot, arguably, be a lawful  decision.  This  is
        not a  matter  of  choice  in  the  way  that  term  is  ordinarily
        understood, where a person has options in relation to  which  there
        is relative freedom of choice as  to  which  one  to  take,  but  a
        situation where D will be faced with either following his mother to
        ensure he has  her  ongoing  support  but  without  the  specialist
        treatment it appears he still requires that has not been  shown  to
        be available in Jamaica, or he remains in  the  United  Kingdom  to
        access such treatment without the support  of  his  mother.  Either
        option appears on the face of  the  professional  medical  evidence
        likely to result in a fatal outcome for D.
    32. I find in this case that the Judge has materially erred in  law  in
        undertaking the assessment of the proportionality of  the  decision
        based upon the information that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

    33. The rejection of the appellant's case under the  Immigration  Rules
        has not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error and shall
        be preserved. The finding of the existence of family life between D
        and  his  mother  is  also  a  sustainable  finding  and  shall  be
        preserved.


    34. The Upper Tribunal was not able to go on a remake the  decision  at
        the hearing but it was agreed that this may be a process  that  can
        be completed on the basis of  the  information  available  to  this
        Tribunal, after time has been provided for the parties  to  provide
        written submissions in relation to the Article 8  ECHR  element  of
        this case.

    35. The following  directions  shall  therefore  apply  to  the  future
        management of this case:


   a. The determination of First-tier Judge G Clarke shall be set aside.
   b. The dismissal of the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  shall  be  a
      preserved finding as shall be the finding that family life  recognised
      by Article 8 ECHR exists between D his mother and his stepfather as  a
      result of  D's  PTSD  and  mental  health  problems  and  the  related
      emotional and other forms of dependency referred to in the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision.
   c. The Secretary of State shall file and  serve  written  submissions  in
      relation to the remaking of the Article 8 ECHR element of  the  appeal
      to be received no later than 4  PM  12  May  2017,  allowing  for  the
      intervening Easter holiday period.
   d. The appellant shall have leave to file written submissions in relation
      to the remaking of the Article 8 ECHR element of the  appeal,  and  in
      reply, providing the same received no later than 4 PM 19 May 2017.
   e. The appeal shall be listed before Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson  to  be
      determined on the basis of the evidence available  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and the written submissions filed in  accordance  with  these
      directions, on the first open date after 22 May 2017.



Decision

    36. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. Directions have been  given  in
        relation to the future conduct of this appeal.


   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 April 2017


