










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA227232015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 February 2016                  |On 9 June 2016                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                              Mr Osazee Owegie
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Durojaiye, Solicitor, Moorhouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 28 September 1977.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge J S Pacey who dismissed his appeal against the decision  of  the
      respondent dated 16 June 2015,  who  refused  his  application  for  a
      residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006
      Regulations"). His appeal was decided on the papers.


   2. The appellant applied for a residence  card  as  the  husband  of  his
      sponsor, a national of France. She had worked for  Spark  Legend  (UK)
      Ltd in permanent employment. The respondent  however  noted  that  the
      company had been dissolved on 17 March  2015  and  the  appellant  had
      failed to provide evidence that his sponsor was working.


   3. In his  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
      asserted that the sponsor had been employed by Spark  Legend  but  was
      now employed by Apex Recruiting Agency, a sister company. Evidence had
      been supplied to this effect [6]. The appellant  also  stated  in  his
      witness statement that his sponsor is now employed by Apex Recruitment
      Agency.


   4. In paragraph 4 of  her  witness  statement,  the  appellant's  sponsor
      stated that both Spark Legend and Apex Recruiting Agency were owned by
      the same organisation and when Spark Legend was dissolved,  those  who
      had been working with Spark Legend were absorbed into Apex Recruitment
      [9].


   5. The Judge had regard to a letter from Spark Legend dated  22  November
      2013, confirming the sponsor's employment. There was a payslip dated 6
      December 2013 and a letter from Apex Recruitment Agency Ltd  dated  24
      August 2015 in which it was stated that the sponsor had been  employed
      by them since 1 August 2015.


   6. At [12] the Judge noted that Spark Legend had  been  dissolved  on  17
      March 2015 and that the sponsor began  working  for  Apex  Recruitment
      Agency on 1 August 2015. There was thus a  gap  of  four  and  a  half
      months when she was not employed. There was no evidence of  any  other
      employment during that period or  that  she  engaged  in  job  seeking
      activities. At the date of decision therefore, she  had  not  provided
      satisfactory evidence that the sponsor was  at  that  time  exercising
      Treaty rights [12]. The appeal was  accordingly  dismissed  under  the
      2006 Regulations.


   7. On 7  January  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  White  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. He noted that the Judge dismissed  the
      appeal on the basis that the sponsor was not working at  the  date  of
      the respondent's decision.  That  is  an  approach  that  is  arguably
      inconsistent  with  the  authority  of  Boodhoo  (EEA  Regs:  relevant
      evidence) Mauritius [2013] UKUT 346 (IAC).


   8. Mr Durojaiye submitted that the case "was on all fours" with Boodhoo.


   9. On behalf of the respondent, Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  two  wage
      slips from Apex did not reveal  that  she  was  working.  The  Judge's
      findings were in accordance with the evidence.


      Assessment


  10. In Boodhoo, supra, the Upper Tribunal - Mr Justice Blake -  held  that
      in an appeal under the 2006  Regulations,  a  Tribunal  has  power  to
      consider any evidence which it thinks relevant to the substance of the
      decision, including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the
      date of the decision. In that case, evidence of comprehensive sickness
      cover, which began after the date of decision  appealed,  fell  to  be
      considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  as  it  was  plainly
      relevant to the substance of the decision, albeit that it arose  after
      the date of decision.


  11. The evidence before Judge Pacey included a letter  from  Spark  Legend
      which confirmed the sponsor's employment. There was,  in  addition,  a
      letter from Apex Recruitment Agency dated 24  August  2015  confirming
      that the appellant's sponsor has been employed as a cleaner  in  their
      organisation since 1 August  2015.  It  is  also  confirmed  that  her
      contract of employment is permanent.


  12. The appellant also produced two payslips from Apex Recruitment  Agency
      as well as her bank statement confirming payments in on 21 August  and
      28 August 2015, consistent with these payslips.


  13. Judge Pacey stated that she took account of  all  the  evidence  [10].
      That included the letter of employment and the payslips. She  accepted
      the letter from Apex Recruitment Agency and the payslips produced.


  14. The evidence of the sponsor's employment which began after the date of
      the respondent's refusal in June 2015 was relevant to the substance of
      the Tribunal's decision. The reference by the Judge to the dissolution
      of  Spark  Legend  in  March  2015  and  her  re-employment  by   Apex
      Recruitment Agency in August 2015, resulting in a gap  of  about  four
      and a half months when she was  not  employed,  failed  to  take  into
      account  that  as  at  the  date  of  decision,  the   appellant   had
      subsequently  become  re-employed,  and  had  produced   evidence   in
      confirmation.


  15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal thus involved the making of an
      error on a point of law. I accordingly set it aside  and  re-make  it.
      From the foregoing, I find that there has been  satisfactory  evidence
      adduced confirming that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights as at
      the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


      Notice of Decision


      The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 31 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

