

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/22046/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 February 2016                       |On 29 February 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          OLUWAFEMI SAMUEL ORESAJO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan (Citadel Immigration Lawyers)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (of  9  April  2015)  allowing  the  original
       appeal of Oluwafemi Samuel Oresajo, a  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  10
       September 1986, against the decision to refuse him an  EEA  residence
       card (of 6 May 2014) based on the durable relationship he claimed  to
       enjoy with his Irish partner Adebisi Moriam Taiwo.


    2.  The  application  was  originally  refused  on  7  March  2014,  and
       reconsidered and again refused on 6 May and  17  November  2014.  The
       refusal letter against which the appeal was brought to the First-tier
       Tribunal found that the relationship was  not  established  to  be  a
       genuine one because email correspondence supplied on the  application
       was too intermittent to show that theirs was  a  loving  relationship
       between partners as opposed to being simply a  friendship,  and  that
       the other evidence of cohabitation was unsatisfactory given  that  it
       demonstrated only that they had lived together for some ten months in
       Coventry: their account that they had subsequently  lived  separately
       because of rental costs was not accepted as plausible.  The  evidence
       from friends and family was considered insufficient to displace these
       concerns. Accordingly it was not accepted that the relationship was a
       genuine one. The fact of Ms Taiwo's exercise of Treaty Rights in  the
       United Kingdom was not challenged in the refusal letter.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal evaluated the oral and  documentary  evidence
       before it, and noted that their relationship had begun in earnest  in
       2011 when the  Sponsor  visited  the  Appellant  in  Nigeria  for  an
       extended period. On balance of probabilities the First-tier  Tribunal
       accepted that the relationship was a genuine  one,  bearing  in  mind
       that their evidence was wholly consistent as to its details.  It  was
       true that for a time they had lived separately for some days  of  the
       week, as noted by the decision maker,  but  this  could  be  seen  as
       occasioned by the Sponsor's need to work in London,  typical  of  the
       circumstances of many couples  in  the  modern  era,  and  driven  by
       economic circumstances, and was not suspicious in the  light  of  the
       weight of material they had put forward that affirmatively  supported
       their case: indeed the Judge concluded that the Secretary of  State's
       case theory to the contrary was somewhat baffling.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appeal should be  allowed,
       as the relationship was a genuine one and so discretion  should  have
       been exercised in favour of the Respondent.


    5. Grounds of appeal did not dispute the lawfulness of the  findings  as
       to the durability of  the  relationship,  but  took  issue  with  the
       decision to allow the  appeal  outright  rather  than  to  a  limited
       degree, leaving the question of the  propriety  of  the  exercise  of
       discretion outstanding before for the Secretary of  State.  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Lambert recognised the force of these grounds
       and granted permission to appeal on 8 June 2015.


Decision and reasons


    6. Before me the parties were agreed that the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal was flawed for the reasons contended  by  the  Secretary  of
       State.


    7. Regulation 8 as amended by the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
       (Amendment) Regulations 2011 (in force from 2 June  2011)  is  headed
       "Extended family members". At Regulation 8(2) it provides:


           "(5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph  if  the
           person is the partner of an EEA national  (other  than  a  civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with the EEA national ...
           17  Issue of residence card ...
           (4) The Secretary of State may issue  a  residence  card  to  an
           extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
           not an EEA national on application if-
           (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
           member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent
           right of residence under regulation 15; and
           (b) in all the circumstances it  appears  to  the  Secretary  of
           State appropriate to issue the residence card."


    8. The Tribunal in YB (EEA reg 17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast
       stated at [23] that  "We  cannot  see  that  such  reference  can  be
       assimilated to an examination of whether the comparable national  law
       criteria are met. To seek to reduce it solely to such criteria  would
       run contrary to a general principle of Community law, namely that  of
       proportionality. It would also overlook that the power given  by  the
       Directive  to  decide  such  cases  "in  accordance   with   national
       legislation"  is  paired  with   another   Directive   principle   or
       requirement that there be "an extensive examination of  the  personal
       circumstances". This demonstrates that the  existence  of  a  durable
       relationship is essentially a question of fact, one  which  has  been
       resolved in  the  Respondent's  favour  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       without challenge by the Secretary of State.


    9. However, as stated in YB (EEA reg  17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory
       Coast  [2008]  UKAIT   00062:   "Neither   the   Citizens   Directive
       (2004/38/EC)  nor  regulation  17(4)  of  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006 confers on an "other  family  member"
       or "extended family member" of  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
       rights a right to a residence card; consistent  with  the  Directive,
       reg 17(4) makes it discretionary."


   10. So it can be seen  that  bare  acceptance  of  an  individual  as  an
       extended family member is not sufficient to call for the grant  of  a
       document attesting to her EEA rights, however, as there  remains  the
       discretion in Regulation  17(4)  "if  in  all  the  circumstances  it
       appears ... appropriate to issue the residence card".  As  stated  in
       Aladeselu & Ors (2006 Regs - reg 8) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 253 (IAC)  at
       [31]: "Whilst we can consider whether a  discretionary  power  should
       have been exercised differently, we cannot seek to do that  if  there
       has as yet been no exercise of that power. It follows that the appeal
       can only be allowed to the extent that it remains outstanding  before
       the Secretary of State."


   11. Accordingly it can be  seen  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal contains a material error of law. Given the pragmatic stance
       of the parties, it is appropriate to move directly  to  consideration
       of the appeal's substance.


   12. Given the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, the durability of  the
       claimed relationship with an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights is
       clearly established. The appeal is allowed to the extent that, whilst
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to the genuine  nature  of
       the relationship stands, its decision to allow the appeal outright is
       replaced by one that instead allows the appeal to the extent that the
       EEA  decision  refusing  the  residence  card  is  set   aside.   The
       application for a  residence  card  remains  outstanding  for  lawful
       determination based on the discretion of the Secretary of State,  who
       will doubtless take account of the findings as to the genuine  nature
       of their relationship and thus of the need  to  respect  private  and
       family life, rights protected not only by the Human Rights Convention
       but additionally by the Charter of Fundamental Rights.


          Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  flawed  by
    material error of law.
    The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the  decision  refusing  a
    residence card is identified as not in accordance  with  the  law.  The
    application remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.


          Signed:

[pic]
Deputy           Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Symes
         Date: 22 February 2016




