
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA225542015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 22 May 2017                             |On 30 May 2017             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               MUSHTAQ GURMANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs J Moore of Drummond Miller, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 16  November  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born  on  20  September  1972  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan. On 2 June 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain on the basis of his marriage  to  a  British
citizen.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Farrelly ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  18  April  2017  Judge
Hodgkinson gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The grounds argue that the Judge erred as  follows:  Ground  1,  in
      failing to refer to the oral evidence, in  providing  no  reasons  for
      rejecting such  evidence  and  in  not  evidently  having  given  such
      evidence any regard in the context of the claimed relationship; Ground
      2, in failing to appreciate that the provisions of  section  117B  (4)
      and (5) of the 2002 Act permitted  discretion  in  their  application;
      Ground 3, in failing properly to apply the "insurmountable  obstacles"
      test as to whether the appellant's disabled and visually impaired wife
      could be expected to relocate to live in Pakistan with the appellant.


      3. In relation to Ground 1, the Judge makes  no  reference  to  having
      taken into  account  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his
      witnesses as part of her assessment of the genuineness or otherwise of
      the marriage, which arguably amounts to an error of law. There  is  no
      substance to Ground 2, the Judge's consideration of section 117B being
      sustainable itself. It is arguable  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of
      "insurmountable obstacles", so far as it applies  to  the  appellant's
      wife, fails adequately to take into account all of  her  circumstances
      and history, linked to her significant disabilities and the fact  that
      the appellant heralds from Pakistan.  Permission is granted on Grounds
      1 and 3 only.

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Moore, for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told
me that (at the hearing before  the  First-tier)  the  appellant  and  three
other witnesses gave oral evidence and that, although the Judge carries  out
a detailed analysis of documentary evidence, there is  no  analysis  of  the
oral evidence. She told me that it is impossible to discern from a  balanced
and impartial reading of the decision what evidence  of  the  witnesses  was
accepted, what was rejected, and why. She told me that, in  focusing  solely
on the documentary evidence, the Judge carries out  an  incomplete  analysis
of the evidence placed before him.

(b) Mrs Moore turned to the remaining ground of appeal and told me that  the
Judge's assessment of the "insurmountable obstacles"  test  is  flawed.  She
told me that the appellant's wife has been a registered blind  person  since
the mid-1990s, and has never left Fife. She told  me  that  the  appellant's
wife's ability  to  pursue  the  ordinary  activities  of  daily  living  is
restricted, that that evidence was before the Judge, and that the Judge  had
failed to correctly apply the "insurmountable obstacles" test. She  reminded
me that guidance about that  test  is  now  contained  at  paragraph  43  in
Agyarko v SSHD  [2017] UKSC 11.

(c) Mrs Moore urged me to allow the appeal,  to  set  the  Judge's  decision
aside and to remit the case to the First-tier so that an entirely new  fact-
finding exercise can be conducted.

6. (a) Mr Matthews, for the  respondent,  said  that  the  first  ground  of
appeal is made out. He told me that the Judge made no findings  and  carried
out no analysis of the oral evidence, but told me that that did  not  affect
the outcome of the case. He told  me  that  the  "insurmountable  obstacles"
test has been correctly applied, and so the Judge's decision should stand.

(b) Mr Matthews took me to [33] to [43]  the  decision  and  told  me  that,
there, the Judge sets out  a  detailed  proportionality  balancing  exercise
taking account of all of the relevant evidence. He referred me to  paragraph
44 of Agyarko v SSHD  [2017] UKSC 11 and told me that there  the  definition
of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  contained  in   paragraph   EX.2   of   the
immigration rules is endorsed. He told me that  that  is  a  test  that  the
Judge correctly applied and, because that test has been  correctly  applied,
the appellant cannot succeed.

(c) Mr Matthews told me that although there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
decision, it is not a material error of law. He  urged  me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. Between [6] and [17] the Judge records that he heard  evidence  from  the
appellant and three witnesses, and then summarises what that  evidence  was.
Between [23] and [32] of the decision, the Judge analyses the evidence.  The
analysis of the  evidence  is  primarily  an  analysis  of  the  documentary
evidence placed before the  Judge,  but  the  analysis  is  carried  out  by
reference to the totality of evidence. The first sentence  of  [27]  records
something that was said in the appellant's oral evidence. A fair reading  of
the analysis indicates that the oral evidence  that  he  summarises  between
[6] and [17] is placed against the documentary evidence in the analysis  set
out between [23] and [32].

8. [24] of the decision contains a clear error of  law,  because  there  the
Judge considers caselaw relevant to an  application  under  the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations, and this  case  concerns  an  application  for  leave  to
remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds. Although that is a clear  error,
it is not a material error because the Judge incorrectly places  the  burden
of establishing that the marriage  is  a  marriage  of  convenience  on  the
Secretary  of  State.  That  error  does  not  place  the  appellant  at   a
disadvantage, and, after carefully analysing the evidence, the  Judge  finds
at [32] that the appellant is not  a  party  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship. If the Judge had correctly placed the burden of proof  on  the
appellant his conclusion would have been the same.

9. Despite the Home Office presenting officer's view that the  first  ground
of appeal is made out, I find that it is not. The first ground of appeal  is
that the Judge does not make reference to the oral  evidence  and  gives  no
reason for rejecting that evidence. Between [6] and  [17]  of  the  decision
the Judge records the oral evidence. Between [23] and [31] the  Judge  gives
adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion set  out  at  [32].  The  Judge
does not take each witness's oral evidence line by line,  but  between  [23]
and [31] he clearly takes a holistic view of all of the  evidence  and  sets
out adequate reasons for finding that there are contradictions  between  the
documentary evidence and the oral evidence.

10. The Judge commences [31] by saying

      Documentation showing them as a couple was really what was needed.

That sentence makes it clear that the Judge found the totality  of  evidence
placed before him to be unreliable. The Judge sets out what is missing  from
the evidence, having analysed each source of evidence.

11. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

12. I find that the Judge does make reference to the oral evidence  as  well
as the documentary evidence, and between [23] and  [31]  sets  out  adequate
reasons for finding that the evidence is not reliable because  the  evidence
is contradictory. Those findings lead the Judge to the conclusion  at  [32].
The conclusion at [32] is fatal to the  appellant's  appeal.  The  remaining
ground of appeal is entirely dependent on the first ground of  appeal  being
made out. As I find the ground one is not made out, the appeal is  dismissed
and the decision stands.

13.  The  second  (originally  third)  ground  of  appeal  relates  to   the
"insurmountable obstacles" test. It is argued that the Judge did  not  apply
the  test  correctly,  and  that,  had  Mrs  Copeland's  circumstances  been
properly considered, then the only conclusion that could have  been  reached
would be that there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
elsewhere.

14.  The  Judge's  finding  that  there  is  no   genuine   and   subsisting
relationship  is  also  a  finding  that  family  life   does   not   exist.
Nevertheless, the Judge considered the case further on the  hypothesis  that
family life does exist. In support of this appeal, it  is  argued  that  the
Judge   had   not   factored   Mrs   Copeland's   circumstances   into   his
proportionality assessment. That is wrong. A fair  reading  of  [35],  [36],
[37] and [40] shows that the Judge took account of Mrs Copeland's  interests
as one part of all of the facts and circumstances of this case. At [38]  the
Judge clearly analyses "insurmountable obstacles"  in  a  manner  consistent
with the definition given in EX.2 of the immigration  rules,  and  a  manner
consistent with the guidance given in  Agyarko v SSHD  [2017] UKSC 11.

15. A report from Fife Society for the Blind, dated  21  May  2017,  is  now
produced for the appellant. That is not evidence which was before the First-
tier. It is not  evidence  which  has  previously  been  considered  by  the
respondent. It may be that the appellant has further evidence which  can  be
placed before the respondent to support a renewed application, but  that  is
a matter for the appellant to consider.

16. There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact-finding  exercise.  Despite
the error  made  at  [24]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  applied  the  law
correctly.  The  Judge  clearly  sets  out  his  reasons  for  reaching  his
conclusion at [32] of the decision. The finding that the appellant fails  to
establish that the relationship is either genuine or subsisting  is  clearly
sustainable. That finding is the fulcrum of this case. Because that  finding
stands, the appeal cannot succeed.

17. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 25 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

