





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22928/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                  |                                           |
|Heard at: Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated             |
|On: 10 June 2015                  |                            On: 25 June    |
|                                  |2015                                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                               MR Aziz Hussain
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     No attendance and no representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The notice of hearing, setting out the date, time  and  place  of  the
      hearing, was sent to the appellant at his address on record on 20  May
      2015. On the 10 June 2015 his appeal was stood down until  after  3pm.
      However, neither the appellant nor any representative  on  his  behalf
      attended.


   2. No application for an adjournment had been made.  There  has  been  no
      explanation for  such  non-attendance.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am
      satisfied that it is in the interests  of  justice  to  determine  the
      appeal in the absence of the appellant.


   3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 25 February 1985.  He
      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision
      dated 14 May 2014 to refuse to grant him further leave to remain as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student.


   4. The appellant did not appear before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
      date of his scheduled appeal hearing, namely 13 November 2014.


   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn was satisfied that it was  appropriate
      to hear the appeal in his absence in accordance with Rule  28  of  the
      2014 First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules.


   6. The relevant facts are that in February 2011 the appellant was  issued
      with a student visa valid until 12 October 2013. He subsequently  made
      an application for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
      Student.


   7. The respondent in refusing this  application  stated  in  her  reasons
      dated 14 May 2014 that she had not awarded him any points  claimed  as
      he had not provided a Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)
      that was valid. The  CAS  submitted  with  the  application  had  been
      withdrawn by the sponsor. She had therefore been unable to assess  the
      level of funds that he required.


   8. The appellant's grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  were
      as follows:


         "I am not satisfied with the decision of the Home  Office.  I  will
        provide the true facts before the honourable Court according to the
        immigration rules and regulations."


   9. The appellant however failed to submit any evidence before  the  Fire-
      tier tribunal to counter the respondent's assertion that his  CAS  was
      no longer valid. He did not provide any documents from the institution
      where he claimed to study [11].


  10. In the circumstances Judge Flynn  was  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that he did  not  have  a  valid  CAS  at  the  date  he
      submitted his application. He accordingly dismissed his  appeal  under
      the rules.


  11. The Judge noted that the appellant did not raise Article 8  issues  in
      the grounds of appeal. He nonetheless considered the appeal on Article
      8 grounds and followed the guidance set out in Gulshan (Article 8- new
      rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).


  12. He noted that the appellant was aware before coming to the UK that his
      leave was granted only on a temporary  basis.  He  had  no  reasonable
      expectation that he would be granted further leave to remain unless he
      were able to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  rules.  He  had  not
      provided any evidence of any family or private life established in the
      UK and there are no details of any circumstances which would  make  it
      disproportionate to expect him to return to Pakistan.


  13. The Judge accordingly did not consider that there was any  basis  upon
      which  to  conclude  that  the  respondent's  decision  represented  a
      disproportionate interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for  his
      private life.


  14. The appeal was accordingly dismissed both under the rules and on Human
      Rights grounds.


  15. His grounds of appeal supporting his  application  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal contended that  he  did  not  attend  the
      hearing because he was unaware of the hearing date. He  had  indicated
      that he would like an  oral  hearing  and  that  he  would  be  giving
      evidence before the Court. The appeal  should  accordingly  have  been
      adjourned.


  16. He also stated that the Judge made a finding on Article 8 without  the
      appellant being heard. That was unfair. The  Article  8  findings  are
      very brief and do not deal properly with his private  life,  which  he
      has established in the UK.


  17. The Judge's "refusal" to  adjourn  the  hearing  without  hearing  the
      appellant on Article 8 constituted errors that were made.


  18. On 8 April 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted
      the appellant permission  to  appeal.  He  stated  that  a  difficulty
      appears to have arisen as a result of a  change  of  address.  In  the
      circumstances, an arguable error of law has occurred since  the  Judge
      proceeded with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.


  19. The appellant was then sent directions in which  he  was  required  to
      serve on the Upper Tribunal and on the respondent not  later  than  21
      days after the directions were sent, an indexed and  paginated  bundle
      containing all the documentary evidence upon which it is  intended  to
      rely at the forthcoming hearing, pursuant to Rule 15(2A)  and  whether
      it is intended to develop the grounds of appeal.


  20. I have had regard to a letter sent to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  10
      February  2015  from  the  appellant's  former  solicitors,   Lincolns
      Solicitors, in which they note that they represent the appellant. They
      requested a copy  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination.  Their
      client had not received the determination which they were informed had
      been sent to him on 27 January.


  21. I have also had regard to the notice of hearing of his  appeal  before
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  20  June  2014.  The  appellant  was
      notified of the date, time and place of the hearing, at  Taylor  House
      on 13 November 2014. The  notice  was  sent  to  the  appellant  at  [
                     ], the address that the appellant had supplied  in  his
      appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  address  where  he  can  be
      contacted was the same address to which I have referred.


  22. Accordingly, the notice of hearing was sent to the appellant's address
      on record.


  23. The appellant had been informed by way of directions which accompanied
      the notice of hearing that he was to supply to the Tribunal as well as
      the other party a bundle of the documents he  wished  to  rely  on  in
      support of the appeal.


  24. However, as noted by Judge Flynn, no such document or any evidence was
      submitted to counter the respondent's assertion that his  CAS  was  no
      longer valid.


  25. Nor has the appellant contended otherwise in  his  grounds  of  appeal
      addressed to the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant has  asserted  in  his
      current grounds in respect of which permission has been granted,  that
      the findings relating to Article 8 private life are brief and  do  not
      properly deal with his private life and that it is simply stated  that
      he has established a private life in the UK.


  26. However,  the  appellant  has  still  not  provided  any  evidence  or
      statement or made any submissions as to what that private life amounts
      to.


  27. Moreover, as noted by Judge Flynn, the appellant  did  not  raise  any
      Article 8 grounds in his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
      simply stated that he was not satisfied with the decision of the  Home
      Office and would provide "the true facts" to the Court.


  28. Judge Flynn went on to consider Article 8 despite the fact  that  they
      had not been raised in the grounds of appeal.   I  have  set  out  his
      findings at paragraphs 12-13 above.  Judge  Flynn  concluded  that  it
      would not constitute a disproportionate interference with his right to
      respect for private life to expect him to return to Pakistan.


  29. That is a sustainable conclusion from the evidence  and  documentation
      before the Judge.  It is neither irrational nor perverse.


  30. No further evidence has been adduced or submissions made that  renders
      that conclusion unsustainable.


  31. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was in accordance with  the  law  and  the  immigration
      rules applicable.


           Notice of Decision


         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  involve  the
making of                  any material error on a point of  law  and  shall
stand.


         The appeal is dismissed.


         No anonymity direction is made.


         Signed                              Date 19 June 2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

