


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22654/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 11 November 2014                         |On : 12 November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           SHAPLA BEGUM CHOWDHURY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 23 February  1987.  She
   has been given permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  25  May  2014  with  a
   visitor visa valid from 8 May 2014 until 8 November 2014. When questioned
   upon arrival by a Border Force Officer (BFO) she  claimed  that  she  was
   visiting a cousin for four weeks and had a  return  ticket  for  25  June
   2014. She said that her husband was in Bangladesh. She was unable to give
   full details about her sponsor and the BFO was  therefore  not  satisfied
   that she qualified for the leave conferred by her  entry  clearance.  Her
   leave to enter was suspended and she was required to  submit  to  further
   examination.

3. Further to telephone contact with the appellant's  cousin,  a  search  of
   her baggage which was found to contain a  number  of  letters,  greetings
   cards and photographs and an unsuccessful attempt to contact her  husband
   in Bangladesh, the appellant was interviewed again by  a  different  BFO.
   Following the interview, in which  the  appellant  was  asked  about  the
   whereabouts of her husband, Sheikh Mohammad Delowar Hussain, the BDO  was
   satisfied that she had employed false representations in  order  to  gain
   entry clearance and her entry clearance was accordingly cancelled.

4. The appellant was refused leave to enter  under  paragraph  321A  of  the
   immigration rules on  the  basis  that  false  representations  had  been
   employed or  material  facts  were  not  disclosed  for  the  purpose  of
   obtaining  the  leave,  or  that  there  had  been  such  a   change   of
   circumstances in her case since the leave had been granted that it  ought
   to be cancelled. The reason given for that decision was that, contrary to
   the information provided in her visa application and on arrival that  her
   husband  was  in  Bangladesh,  the  appellant  had  admitted  at  further
   interview that her husband was  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was  noted
   further that her husband had been issued with a Tier  4  general  student
   visa on 27 September 2009 valid until 28 October 2012 and had no  current
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The respondent was satisfied  that
   the  appellant  had  employed  deception  and  accordingly   any   future
   applications for entry clearance or leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
   would be refused under paragraph 320(7B) of the immigration rules.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision, asserting  in  her  grounds
   of appeal that  her  husband  was  in  Bangladesh  and  that  the  person
   considered by the respondent to be her husband  must  be  another  person
   with the same name. The fact that the  appellant's  marriage  certificate
   confirmed their marriage to have taken place in Bangladesh on 20 December
   2011 indicated that her husband was  in  Bangladesh  at  that  time.  The
   respondent had failed to  produce  any  evidence  to  show  that  he  had
   returned to the United Kingdom thereafter and had failed to  produce  any
   evidence that he was currently in the United Kingdom.

6. In response to the grounds of appeal, the respondent noted that  evidence
   in the form of correspondence sent by  the  appellant's  husband  to  the
   appellant from the United Kingdom, UK visa records relating  to  him  and
   the appellant's own statements  admitting  his  presence  in  the  United
   Kingdom, confirmed that her husband was in the  United  Kingdom.  A  card
   sent by him to the appellant containing his photograph, which matched the
   photograph on his visa application forms, confirmed that  the  respondent
   was considering the correct person. The fact that the appellant  and  her
   husband were married in Bangladesh in December 2011 did not detract  from
   the claim that he was currently in the United Kingdom  as  he  had  leave
   which allowed him  to  return  to  Bangladesh  and  re-enter  the  United
   Kingdom. The correspondence held by the appellant from her husband,  from
   a United Kingdom address, confirmed his presence in  the  United  Kingdom
   after his leave had elapsed.

7. The appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 28  August
   2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juss.   The   appellant   appeared
   unrepresented before the judge, who noted that she had in fact elected to
   have her appeal considered "on the papers" although the appeal  had,  for
   some unknown reason, been listed for oral  hearing.  The  appellant  gave
   oral evidence before the judge. She claimed that her husband had been  in
   the United Kingdom but had returned to  Bangladesh  via  France  and  was
   running a business there. She could  not  remember  having  said  at  her
   interview that he was currently in the United Kingdom. The judge did  not
   believe the appellant. He concluded that  there  had  been  a  change  in
   circumstances since the grant of entry clearance  to  the  appellant  and
   found that she had made false representations and exercised deception  in
   her application. He dismissed the appeal.

8. Permission to appeal was sought by the  appellant.  In  her  grounds  she
   claimed that her husband was in Bangladesh and that  she  was  a  genuine
   visitor.

9. Permission to appeal was granted on 26  September  2014  on  the  grounds
   that the judge had erred  in  his  reference  to  the  provision  of  the
   immigration rules under which the applicant was refused  leave  to  enter
   and in his reference to the party bearing the burden  of  proof.  It  was
   considered to be arguable that the judge had failed to turn his  mind  to
   whether the respondent had shown that the appellant had  fallen  foul  of
   paragraph 321A and that it was unclear what evidence was relied  upon  to
   show that deception had been exercised.

Appeal hearing and submissions

10. For the hearing, the appellant produced written  grounds  in  which  she
   claimed that the immigration officials had twisted her words and that she
   had always maintained that her husband was in Bangladesh. Since  she  was
   detained she  had  not  been  able  to  produce  proof  that  he  was  in
   Bangladesh. However she was producing evidence in the form of a  copy  of
   her husband's passport showing his arrival in Bangladesh on  10  December
   2011. She claimed that her husband was in the UK as a student  from  2009
   until 10 December 2011 and then returned to Bangladesh. They were married
   in Bangladesh on 20 December 2011 and the marriage certificate  confirmed
   that. The respondent's claim that her husband had been issued with a Tier
   4 student visa valid until October 2012 and had thereafter overstayed was
   fabricated and false.  She  had  not  exercised  any  deception  and  had
   complied with the requirements of the immigration rules as a visitor. She
   had no intention of remaining in the United Kingdom but  wished  only  to
   visit relatives and friends before returning to Bangladesh.

11. Ms Kenny submitted that the respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
   proof on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which consisted  of
   the record of the appellant's interview at the airport,  the  refusal  of
   leave to enter report, the notice of  refusal  and  the  appellant's  own
   admission at interview.  The  appellant  had  been  dishonest  about  her
   husband's  whereabouts.  The  judge  found  the   appellant   devoid   of
   credibility and noted that she had not intended to give  evidence  before
   the Tribunal, having requested a papers consideration of her  appeal.  No
   evidence had been submitted to the Tribunal  to  rebut  the  respondent's
   allegations. Ms Kenny submitted further that  the  judge's  reference  to
   paragraph 320(7B)  rather  than  paragraph  321A  was  immaterial  as  it
   involved the same evidence, considerations and conclusions. There was  no
   error of law.

12. The appellant, in response, claimed to have told the truth when  stating
   that her husband was in Bangladesh and said that the interpreter  at  the
   interview must have misunderstood her. She  asked  if  she  could  submit
   photographs of her husband as proof that he returned  to  Bangladesh  via
   France, but I declined to consider the documents as  they  had  not  been
   before the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration and findings

13. In my view there are no errors of law in the judge's decision such  that
   it ought to be set aside. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

14.  As is noted in the grant of permission, Judge Juss  referred  in  error
   to paragraph 320(7B) as the provision by which the decision had been made
   to refuse the appellant leave to enter the United Kingdom. Reference  was
   indeed made to paragraph 320(7B) in the  respondent's  decision,  but  in
   relation to the basis upon which future applications would be refused  as
   a result of the employment of deception in the current  application.  The
   decision to refuse the appellant leave to enter was made on the basis  of
   paragraph 321A. However it is plain  from  the  judge's  observations  at
   paragraph 3 of his determination that  he  was  perfectly  aware  of  the
   correct basis upon which  the  decision  had  been  taken,  namely  false
   representations having been made and a change in circumstances since  the
   grant of entry clearance. It is also plain that his findings were made on
   the basis of the correct provision, and that in any event both provisions
   involved the same evidence and the same considerations, and accordingly I
   do not consider that anything material arises out  of  the  reference  to
   paragraph 320(7B).

15. The grant of permission also indicates an arguable error in the  judge's
   consideration of where the burden of proof lay. Indeed, it  is  the  case
   that the judge referred, at paragraph 13 and 15 to the burden of proof to
   be discharged by the appellant. However it  is  clear  from  the  judge's
   findings overall that he was aware that it was for the respondent to make
   out her case. That much is clear from his  conclusion  at  paragraph  13,
   following a detailed consideration of the  evidence  in  support  of  the
   allegations of false  representations  and  changed  circumstances,  that
   "paragraph 320(7B) stands to be applied". It is also  apparent  from  his
   conclusion at paragraph 15 that "the reasons given by the  respondent  do
   justify the refusal".  Accordingly it seems to me that, whilst the  judge
   could have been more specific in his statement as to where the burden  of
   proving the allegations lay, he was plainly aware of the requirement upon
   the respondent to justify the  allegations  and  thus  to  discharge  the
   burden which lay upon her to prove her case.  Therefore,  again,  I  find
   that no materiality arises in any arguable error in that respect.

16. Turning next to the evidence justifying  the  allegations  made  against
   the appellant, I consider that  there  was  ample,  and  that  the  judge
   properly referred to and relied upon that evidence. At  paragraph  13  he
   referred to the appellant's lack of credibility and to her  own  evidence
   at her interview, where she repeatedly contradicted  herself  as  to  her
   husband's whereabouts but then went on to specifically confirm  that  her
   husband was currently in the United Kingdom (questions  22  and  27).  He
   noted that she had not intended to give oral evidence in support  of  her
   appeal but had in fact requested a papers consideration. He  referred  to
   the evidence before the respondent which was contrary to the  appellant's
   claim that her husband was in Bangladesh and which confirmed that he  had
   remained in the United Kingdom  beyond  the  expiry  of  his  visa.  Such
   evidence included correspondence sent from him to her,  from  the  United
   Kingdom, after the expiry of his leave to remain.

17. On the basis of the appellant's own  evidence  at  interview  confirming
   that  her  husband  was  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  opposed  to   her
   contradictory claim that he was in  Bangladesh  and  had  remained  there
   after returning in December  2011,  and  the  evidence  relied  upon  and
   produced by the respondent, the judge was perfectly entitled to  conclude
   that there was sufficient evidence to justify the conclusion that she had
   made false representations and exercised deception in her application for
   entry clearance and that there had been a change in  circumstances  since
   that time.

18. Whilst the appellant now relies upon further evidence, namely a copy  of
   her husband's passport, to the effect that he returned to  Bangladesh  on
   10 December 2011, that evidence was not before the judge at the  time  he
   determined the appeal. In any event,  in  the  absence  of  the  complete
   passport, the evidence does not show that he remained in  Bangladesh  and
   did not return to the United Kingdom, whereas the  correspondence  relied
   upon by the respondent and the appellant's  own  admission  at  interview
   clearly indicated that that was the case.

19. In the circumstances it seems to me that the  judge  gave  adequate  and
   cogent reasons for concluding that the respondent was  justified  in  the
   allegation of deception and in making the decision  to  refuse  leave  to
   enter on the basis that she did. The grounds of appeal disclose no errors
   of law in his decision.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 11 November
2014
