
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/22208/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14th July 2016                        |   On 27th July 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     E S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Callaghan, Counsel for Ravi Sethi Solicitors,
Hounslow
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the USA born on  13th  August  2009.   He
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  8th  May  2014
    refusing to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the
    Immigration Rules.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Baldwin on 21st January 2015 and 19th June 2015 and  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22nd June 2015.  An application for permission to appeal
    was lodged and permission was refused by Designated First-tier Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 23rd  September  2015.   A  further  application  for
    permission to appeal was lodged with the Upper Tribunal and  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 27th October 2015.   The
    permission states that it is arguable that  the  judge's  findings  are
    unsupported by evidence and constitute speculation, particularly as the
    welfare of a young child is in issue.  It states  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must take particular care to  ensure  that  its  findings  are
    evidence based.  The Appellant and the Respondent are expected to  make
    detailed enquiries into the evidence which was available to the  Family
    Court when it granted a residence order in favour  of  the  Appellant's
    aunt and the reasons for this.  The Respondent also put on notice  that
    this may be an appropriate time for further enquiries to  be  conducted
    relevant to the child's current circumstances and likely  circumstances
    in Sierra Leone.  The  permission  goes  on  to  state  that  no  doubt
    appropriate case management  directions  can  be  given  if  the  Upper
    Tribunal decides there has been an error of law and both parties should
    be prepared to update the Tribunal on relevant enquiries.

 2. There was a Rule 24 response lodged on 2nd February 2016.  This  states
    that there is an agreed Protocol arrangement between the  Tribunal  and
    the Family Court and the Respondent asks the  Upper  Tribunal  to  make
    enquiries with the Family Court again, regarding the  residence  order.
    There is at present no agreement between UKVI and the Family Court  for
    disclosure of information but the Appellant's aunt is  best  placed  to
    provide the original and  supporting  evidence  that  was  provided  to
    CAFCASS and to the Family Court.  The solicitors who were dealing  with
    the matter in the Family  Court  ought  to  provide  any  documentation
    available to assist the Tribunal in making its decision.

 3. There is a decision by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Latter  on  file,
    promulgated on 14th March 2016  relating  to  this  case.  The  hearing
    before him was a first-stage error of law hearing. In  this  he  states
    that he was not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  adequate
    evidence before him to make an  informed  decision  of  what  the  best
    interests of the child are.  He found that there are material errors of
    law in the First-tier Judge's decision, firstly because  he  failed  to
    exercise his discretion to adjourn and give directions, in  an  attempt
    to obtain sufficient evidence to enable a proper assessment to be  made
    of the Appellant's best interests and, secondly,  by  failing  to  take
    into account a number of relevant factors  in  the  assessment  he  did
    carry out.  The decision states that the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
    has to be set aside and should be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   He
    states that the parties should carry out further enquiries  and  should
    file further evidence relating to the Appellant's best interests.

 4. The Presenting Officer raised a preliminary matter, referring  to  last
    minute evidence having been produced.  He referred to paragraph 298  of
    the Immigration Rules and submitted that the Respondent  had  tried  to
    get the matter of the  residence  order  revisited  but  this  was  not
    achieved and in the circumstances there seems to be  no  reason  why  I
    cannot be the primary decision maker in this case and  so  the  hearing
    can proceed on submissions only.

 5. Paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules states that leave can be granted
    inside the Rules where a relative is settled in the United Kingdom  and
    there are "serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
    make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements  have
    been made for the child's care".  It is clear  that  in  spite  of  the
    changes introduced to  the  Rules  on  9th  July  2012,  paragraph  298
    continues unabated.  It survives the changes wrought by Appendix FM  to
    other categories of leave.  It is not  affected.   It  seems  that  the
    Respondent has not considered paragraph 298 at all.

 6. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that based on the  evidence  before
    me the residence order in favour of the Appellant's aunt is genuine, as
    shown by the CAFCASS report.

 7. The  Presenting  Officer  asked  about  sleeping  arrangements  in  the
    Appellant's aunt's house and was told that his aunt sleeps  in  bedroom
    1, her two daughters sleep in bedroom 2  (aged  16  and  13),  and  the
    Appellant sleeps in the sitting room on a mattress.  The house  is  not
    overcrowded under the terms of the Housing Act.

 8. Counsel for the Appellant  referred  me  to  paragraph  298(i)(d).   He
    submitted that the terms of  this  part  of  paragraph  298  have  been
    satisfied.  The Sponsor in this case, being the  Appellant's  aunt,  is
    British and she has a residence order for the Appellant.

 9. He submitted that there are other compelling reasons why the  Appellant
    should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom in his  aunt's  care.
    Although the child is an American citizen he has no-one in  America  as
    he does not know his father who is not  even  mentioned  on  his  birth
    certificate.  He submitted that the Appellant's mother is  from  Sierra
    Leone but has been working for the UN as a  project  manager  in  South
    Sudan and based on the objective evidence at the present time  this  is
    not a safe place.  Counsel submitted that what has to be considered are
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the
    relevant Immigration Rule.  He submitted that the  position  in  Sierra
    Leone has to be considered.   The  evidence  is  that  the  Appellant's
    mother is not there and his aunt, who used to be  there,  has  died.  A
    death certificate has been provided.

10. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's mother had  to  make  a  choice.
    Her present partner was not unwilling to look after the  Appellant  but
    his family would be unhappy if they knew that she had had a  child  out
    of wedlock so his mother arranged for the  Appellant  to  move  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He submitted that his mother has  not  abandoned  him.
    She keeps in touch  with  him  but  her  choice  was  to  continue  her
    relationship with her husband and the Appellant's aunt  in  the  United
    Kingdom is happy to support the Appellant and look after  him.   I  was
    referred to Macdonald's Immigration Law & Practice 9th Edition at 11.94
    which refers to voluntary abandonment.

11. Counsel submitted that when the Rule is properly considered,  voluntary
    abandonment of a minor is likely to  make  the  circumstances  of  that
    minor compelling.  He submitted  that  the  factors  that  have  to  be
    considered are whether there is an adult overseas who  is  willing  and
    able to look after  the  child  and  that  his  living  conditions  are
    satisfactory.  He submitted that there is no-one else to look after the
    child. His mother is in South Sudan and the  Appellant  is  vulnerable.
    He submitted that the Appellant has a loving aunt in the United Kingdom
    and lives with her in safety, with his two cousins who are  very  close
    to him.

12. I was then referred to Section 55 of the 2009 Act and Article 8 of ECHR
    and Counsel submitted that the relevant  Immigration  Rule  encompasses
    both of these.  He submitted  that  if  the  case  succeeds  under  the
    relevant Rule, Article 8 bleeds into this.

13. I was referred to the said Upper  Tribunal  decision  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Latter.   Counsel submitted that it is now accepted that
    the residence order is genuine and there is a plausible explanation  of
    why the Appellant is in the United Kingdom.   The  Appellant  is  doing
    well at school and has a  good  relationship  with  his  aunt  and  his
    cousins and he submitted that paragraph 298(i)(d) has been satisfied.

14. The Presenting Officer accepted that paragraph 298 has been  satisfied.
    He submitted that what is important is whether there  is  a  compelling
    and serious argument for the Appellant to be in the United Kingdom  and
    he  submitted  that  the  residence  order  is  sufficient  for   this.
    Responsibility has been given to the Appellant's  aunt  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He submitted that  for  the  residence  order  to  have  been
    granted, the Family Court  must  have  found  there  to  be  compelling
    reasons for the Appellant to  be  here  with  his  aunt,  so  paragraph
    298(i)(d) is satisfied.  He submitted  that  if  the  Appellant's  aunt
    decides to relinquish her  care  of  the  Appellant,  the  matter  will
    require to go back to the Family Court.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant is under the age of
    18 and legally came to the United Kingdom on a visit visa.  He made his
    further application on time.  He submitted that the Respondent  accepts
    that the accommodation is satisfactory and is satisfied with  the  bank
    statements and pay slips and accepts the Appellant's aunt's employment.
     He submitted that it is clear that the Appellant  is  not  leading  an
    independent life.

16. There is no reason why I cannot be the primary decision maker  in  this
    case  as  the  Respondent  was  not  successful  in   getting   further
    information from the Family Court within the required timescale.

17.  Additional  evidence  has  now  been  produced  by   the   Appellant's
    representative.  Counsel has submitted  that  paragraph  298(i)(d)  has
    been satisfied as the Appellant is the child of a relative present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom and  there  are  serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for  the  child's
    care.  I find that all the criteria of this paragraph of the Rules have
    been satisfied.  The Appellant's aunt is present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and is British  and  there  appear  to  be  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    Appellant undesirable.  His mother lives in a  dangerous  country.   He
    has no-one in Sierra Leone.  His mother's new partner and family do not
    know that the Appellant exists.  He is not a Sierra  Leonean  national.
    He cannot reside in the United States  because  he  has  no-one  there.
    Suitable arrangements have been made for his care and the Family  Court
    has approved the situation and granted a residence order.  The terms of
    the Immigration Rules have been satisfied.  I find that his  Article  8
    rights are also engaged and it would be a disproportionate interference
    to remove him from the United Kingdom.  Section 55 of the 2009 Act  and
    the welfare of the child is a primary consideration  and  an  important
    aspect of Article 8.  The decision refusing  to  vary  the  Appellant's
    leave under Article 8 is disproportionate and cannot stand.

18. The Respondent has accepted that the terms of paragraph 298  have  been
    satisfied.



Notice of Decision

19. The Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights
    grounds is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 27th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray








