
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22346/2015
                                                               IA/22349/2015
                                                               IA/22352/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2017                              |On 10th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                            FOD (First Appellant)
                           AED (Second Appellant)
                            ARD (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria and they appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  of  29th
    May 2015 to refuse to grant  them  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal against  that
    decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on  15th  May
    2017.

Background

 3. The background to this appeal is that the First Appellant (the  mother)
    entered the UK as a visitor in 2007 or 2008.  The Second Appellant, the
    First Appellant's son, was born in the UK  on  [  ]  2009.   The  Third
    Appellant, the First Appellant's daughter, was born in the UK  on  [  ]
    2012.  The Appellants were dependants on an application  for  leave  to
    remain made by the First Appellant's  husband.   That  application  was
    refused and an appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge E M M Smith in a decision promulgated  on  5th  February
    2013.  The First Appellant submitted a further application for leave to
    remain on 29th January 2015.  The basis of this  application  was  that
    the First Appellant is no longer with her husband.   It  is  the  First
    Appellant's case that she and her son are sickle cell carriers and  her
    daughter has sickle cell disease.  It is her case that her husband left
    the family on 17th April 2014.  The  First  Appellant  fears  that  her
    daughter would be subject to female genital mutilation if  they  return
    to Nigeria.  It is the First Appellant's case  that  she  suffers  from
    severe levels of depression and anxiety and has lost contact  with  her
    family in Nigeria.

 4. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the Presenting  Officer  made
    an application for an adjournment on the grounds that an allegation  of
    trafficking had been made by the  First  Appellant  and  that  she  had
    received a reasonable grounds decision on 10th August 2016 but that  no
    final decision had been made. It was submitted that the First Appellant
    should claim asylum. That application was opposed  by  the  Appellants'
    representative who said that the First  Appellant  did  not  intend  to
    claim asylum.  The judge refused the  application  for  an  adjournment
    being satisfied that it was in the interests of justice for the  appeal
    to proceed without further delay. The appeal proceeded on human  rights
    grounds only.

 5.  In  her  findings  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that   the
    Appellants' representative had acknowledged that the Appellants  cannot
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the judge  agreed
    with that.  She noted that the appeal was solely on the basis of  human
    rights and the judge concluded  that  there  were  strong  grounds  for
    considering Article 8 outside the  Rules  as  it  was  clear  that  the
    children have lived continuously in the UK since  birth  and  that  the
    Second Appellant is now over 7 years old [35].   The  judge  considered
    the case law and found at paragraph 43 that the First Appellant  was  a
    credible witness, noted that the First Appellant was reasonably  likely
    to be a victim of trafficking and considered that  this  decision  adds
    weight to the First Appellant's account.

 6. The judge considered  the  evidence  from  Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr
    Fairweather  and  the  report  of  an  independent  social  worker,  Mr
    Horrocks.  The judge made a number of findings of fact at paragraph 48.
     The judge assessed the best interests of the children and  found  that
    it is in the best interests of the children to remain in  the  UK  with
    their mother.  The judge attached weight to the fact  that  the  Second
    Appellant is a qualifying child.  The judge took account of  the  Third
    Appellant's serious medical needs.  The judge took into account Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  judge
    concluded at paragraph 58 that the circumstances of the Appellants  are
    exceptional for the following reasons:

         "The mother's serious  mental  conditions;  the  third  Appellant's
         serious  physical  conditions;   and   the   professional   opinion
         (including the other reports that I have read but not quoted)  that
         all three of them have suffered and are affected by trauma".

 7. The judge allowed the appeals of the Second and Third Appellants on the
    basis that it would be unduly harsh to remove the children  from  their
    settled life in the UK  to  a  country  where  they  have  no  ties  or
    knowledge and it would be  difficult  for  the  children  to  integrate
    there.  As the judge considered it unreasonable to separate the  mother
    and her children she also allowed the appeal of the First Appellant.

Discussion

 8. The Secretary of State relies on four main grounds of appeal which were
    amplified by Mr Tufan at the hearing.  The first ground  contends  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to make any finding as to  whether
    the First Appellant meets the  Immigration  Rules  under  private  life
    before embarking on a freestanding Article 8 analysis.  In the grant of
    permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert points out  that
    at paragraph 35 of the decision the judge specifically finds  that  the
    Appellants cannot satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Mr Tufan did not therefore rely on this ground but did submit that  the
    judge had to look at whether there were compelling circumstances before
    going on to consider the case outside of the Rules  under  freestanding
    Article 8.  However, it is clear to me on reading paragraph 35  of  the
    decision that the judge accepted the concession made by the Appellants'
    representative that the Appellants cannot satisfy the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and the judge went on to find that there are:-

         "strong grounds for considering Article 8 outside the Rules,  since
         it is clear that the children have lived  continuously  in  the  UK
         since birth and that this is now over seven years in  the  case  of
         the Second Appellant".

 9. In these circumstances I  am  satisfied  the  judge  did  consider  the
    situation in relation to the Rules and did  give  consideration  as  to
    whether it was appropriate to go on to  consider  Article  8  in  these
    circumstances before doing so.  There is no error in relation  to  this
    matter.

10. The second contention put forward by the Secretary of State within  the
    first ground is that the judge's consideration of the  public  interest
    is both inadequate and incomplete.  It  is  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to consider all of  the  public  interest  considerations  under
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   In
    particular, it is contended the judge failed to  consider  whether  the
    parties are financially independent and not a burden on  taxpayers.  It
    is contended that on the facts of  this  case  this  family  is  wholly
    reliant on public finances for maintenance and  accommodation  and  has
    derived significant benefit for complex care needs  from  the  NHS  for
    treatment for all the family and the children have  received  education
    in the UK at significant cost when they have had no lawful status.   It
    is contended that, given the significant burden on  the  public  purse,
    this was  a  matter  that  should  have  weighed  heavily  against  the
    Appellants in the  proportionality  exercise.   It  is  contended  that
    little weight ought to have been accorded to  the  Appellants'  private
    lives in the balancing exercise.  Mr Tufan  submitted  that  the  judge
    should have considered all of the factors in  Section  117B,  including
    117B(6) in light of the decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.
    He contended that the judge had to consider whether it  was  reasonable
    for the children to leave the UK and  that  reasonableness  had  to  be
    looked at in light of all of their circumstances.

11. Mr Bundock submitted that when the decision is read as a  whole  it  is
    clear that the judge was aware of the public funds issue  from  Section
    117B(2).  He pointed out that at paragraph 55 the judge said  that  the
    best interests of the children must be weighed against other  important
    factors  "including  the  Respondent's   important   public   duty   of
    maintaining  effective  immigration  control,  to  which  Section  117B
    requires me to  attach  important  weight".   He  submitted  that  this
    demonstrates that the judge had in mind  all  of  the  requirements  of
    Section 117B.  He also submitted that, in citing the guidance  from  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 which set out  all  of  the  relevant
    factors in assessing the best interests of the child, the judge  showed
    that he was mindful of all relevant matters, including the  Appellants'
    reliance on public services.

12. I accept Mr Bundock's submission in this regard.   In  my  view  it  is
    clear in particular from paragraph 55 the judge had in mind all of  the
    requirements of Section 117B as weighing in favour of public  interest.
    The judge again referred to the public interest as set out  in  Section
    117B at paragraph 56.  The judge took into account that the immigration
    history of the First Appellant is poor and that most of  her  residence
    has been without leave.

13. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge acted  unfairly  in
    refusing to adjourn the appeal in the light of  the  fact  that  a  new
    matter had been raised in relation to the  allegation  that  the  First
    Appellant had been trafficked.

14. Mr Tufan submitted that at paragraph 48 where the judge concluded  that
    it is reasonably likely  that  the  First  Appellant  is  a  victim  of
    trafficking, he failed to have regard to the fact that  the  reasonable
    grounds decision was not conclusive in  relation  to  that  issue.   Mr
    Bundock agreed with that assessment of the reasonable grounds decision,
    however he submitted that it was clear that the judge  was  determining
    the appeal only on Article 8 grounds.  He submitted that the judge  did
    not attach undue weight  to  this  issue  and  he  submitted  that  the
    reasonable grounds decision was taken into account only after the judge
    had made positive credibility findings about the First Appellant.

15. At paragraph 43 the judge said that she found the First Appellant to be
    a credible witness and noted that the reasonable grounds  decision  had
    not yet been made in relation to  a  conclusive  grounds  decision  but
    concluded that this decision adds weight to the Appellants' account.  I
    accept Mr Bundock's submission that it is clear  that  the  judge  made
    positive credibility findings in relation to the  Appellants  and  took
    the reasonable rounds decision  into  account  only  in  this  context.
    There is no error in the judge's approach to that part of the evidence.



16. I accept Mr Bundock's submission that there was no  unfairness  in  the
    judge's approach to the adjournment request as the Secretary  of  State
    had been given an opportunity to consider the matter  before  the  case
    proceeded and an opportunity to cross-examine the First Appellant.

17. The third ground of appeal contends that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in law in relation to the medical issues.  It is contended
    by the Secretary of State that the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
    Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC) which  says
    that it is  important  to  recognise  that  the  countervailing  public
    interest in removal will outweigh the consequences for  the  health  of
    the claimant because of a disparity of healthcare facilities in all but
    very few rare cases.  Mr Tufan submitted that a health case has  to  be
    an exceptional case among exceptional cases.  Mr Bundock submitted that
    the judge  has  not  given  the  healthcare  needs  of  the  Appellants
    disproportionate  weight.  In  his  submission  this  was  a  secondary
    consideration. He submitted that the focus in the judge's  decision  is
    on the social vulnerability of the children and the  trauma  they  have
    experienced.  He submitted that there  was  no  error  in  relation  to
    Akhalu.

18. I accept that the judge did not give any undue weight  to  the  medical
    issues.  The judge noted the Third Appellant's serious  medical  needs,
    but attached significant weight  to  the  fact  that  there  is  strong
    evidence to show that the Third Appellant:-

         "would be unlikely to be able to access such help (in Nigeria)  due
         to her poor mental health and non-existent support from her  family
         as well as the high degree of likelihood that she  would  not  have
         sufficient funds".

19. It is clear that the judge attached  significant  weight  to  the  best
    interests of the children, their unusual vulnerability, the  difficulty
    the First Appellant would have in coping upon return to Nigeria and her
    lack of support there [49 to 51].  The judge also took account  of  the
    fact that the Second Appellant is a qualifying child and the challenges
    he would find in making the  transition  to  life  in  Nigeria.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge took into account the health issues but in the
    wider  context  of  all  of  the  evidence   as   to   the   particular
    vulnerabilities of the First Appellant and the difficulties the  family
    would face in accessing healthcare in Nigeria.  There was no  error  in
    this approach.

20. The fourth ground of appeal contends that the judge failed to reconcile
    the apparent precarious situation the family would face upon return  to
    Nigeria with the fact that the First  Appellant  was  able  to  support
    herself or be supported there for 37 years of her life before coming to
    the UK.  Mr Bundock submitted that the judge's focus was  correctly  on
    the current and future position of the First Appellant rather than  how
    she had survived in Nigeria in the past and the judge had reached clear
    findings on the basis of her  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellants.  I agree that the judge was looking at the  situation  upon
    the First Appellant's return to Nigeria with two children  rather  than
    her  previous  stay  there  as  a  single  person.   In  terms  of  the
    adaptability of the young children, Mr Bundock submitted that the judge
    had that factor in mind as set out in the extract from the report  from
    the social worker at paragraph 46 of the decision.  I  agree  that  the
    report of Mr Horrocks sets out the particular  vulnerability  of  these
    children and the potential trauma they  would  suffer  if  required  to
    relocate to Nigeria.  It is clear that the judge took into account  the
    particular evidence in this case.

21. In response to Mr Bundock's submissions Mr Tufan highlighted  the  fact
    that the Secretary of State's bundle contained the previous decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  E  M  M  Smith  in  relation  to  the  First
    Appellant's husband.  He submitted that it is clear that the judge  did
    not use this decision as her starting  point  in  accordance  with  the
    principles set out in the case of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.  Mr
    Bundock pointed out that this issue had not been raised in the  Grounds
    of Appeal.  I note that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith
    relates to the First Appellant's husband.  There  is  no  reference  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn's decision to  any  submission  on  the
    part of either party that that decision should form the starting  point
    for her findings in accordance with the guidance in Devaseelan.   There
    is no criticism of the judge's decision in this regard in the Secretary
    of State's Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Although Mr  Tufan
    submitted that this was an obvious issue I do not agree as it could  be
    that because that decision related to  the  First  Appellant's  husband
    rather than to the First Appellant that it was decided  that  it  would
    not form the basis for First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn's decision.   In
    any event, there is nothing before me to indicate one  way  or  another
    why that was not the approach taken by the Secretary of  State  at  the
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn.  As this has not formed
    part of the Grounds  of  Appeal  and  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I do not consider it appropriate to open this issue.

22. Considering all of the Grounds of Appeal I am satisfied that the  judge
    took into account all of the evidence before her.   The  judge  reached
    findings in relation to that evidence which were open  to  her  on  the
    basis of the evidence.  There are no material errors in this  decision.



Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 7 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 7 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
