
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: IA/22577/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 August 2016                          |On 10 August 2016                |
|Prepared on 9 August 2016                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. R.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ali, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  whose  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen  was
      refused on 1 June 2015, when the Respondent also made  a  decision  to
      remove  him  from  the  UK.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against   those
      immigration decisions was dismissed on  all  grounds,  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 4 January 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal that decision on 3 June
      2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Page on the basis  it  was  arguable
      the Judge's approach to paragraph 322(10) of the Immigration Rules was
      flawed.
   3. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4. The Appellant was invited to interview on 28 April 2015, but  did  not
      respond to that  invitation  within  the  time  allowed,  and  so  the
      interview was cancelled. The Appellant was then invited  to  a  second
      interview on 20 May 2015, but again did not respond to that invitation
      within the time  allowed,  and  so  this  second  interview  was  also
      cancelled. There is no dispute about that, or about the fact that  the
      Appellant  therefore  failed  to  attend  either  of  two  interviews.
      Moreover there is no dispute over the fact that the Appellant was duly
      served with both invitations.
   5.  The  Appellant's  case  on  appeal  was  that  he  had  a  reasonable
      explanation for his behaviour in  relation  to  both  interviews.  His
      evidence to the Judge (whether  written  or  oral)  does  not  however
      appear to have engaged with the first interview, but  in  relation  to
      the second interview his case was  that  he  was  told  by  his  legal
      representative that he did not need to attend and that  the  interview
      had been cancelled.
   6. The Judge  remarked  upon  the  failure  of  the  Appellant's  written
      evidence to engage with his explanation for his  behaviour,  and,  the
      failure to provide evidence from the representative who  it  was  said
      had told him he need not attend the interview and the term in which he
      did so.
   7. Despite the clear conflict of interest between the Appellant  and  the
      firm, he was represented at the hearing by an  employee  of  the  same
      firm.
   8. Before me is produced a witness statement from the senior  partner  of
      the firm, which continues to act for the Appellant, and which has  now
      instructed Mr Ali who was not previously instructed on behalf  of  the
      Appellant. The content of Mr Farani's statement dated 19 January  2016
      begs a large number of questions, as Mr Ali freely accepts. It appears
      to have been drafted upon the mistaken impression that passage in  the
      Judge's decision which set out the Appellant's evidence  are  findings
      of fact.  They  are  not.  Whilst  the  statement  contains  the  bald
      admission that the Appellant did not attend the interviews because  of
      the negligent actions of an employee of the firm, no details are given
      of what that employee admits to having done which  was  negligent,  or
      rather what Mr Farani believes that employee did which was  negligent.
      No file notes, or records of telephone  conversations  held  with  the
      Appellant, are exhibited to the statement or referred  to  in  it.  No
      details are given of any enquiries Mr Farani has conducted.
   9. Mr Ali accepts that  he  has  been  placed  in  a  difficult  position
      professionally by the stance apparently taken by Mr  Farani,  who  has
      never advised the Appellant to seek alternative  advice  from  another
      firm of solicitors, and who does not  suggest  that  he  has  reported
      these matters to his firm's professional indemnity  insurers.  Mr  Ali
      told me that consistent with his obligations to  the  Appellant  as  a
      member of the Bar, he intended to  advise  the  Appellant  as  to  his
      position at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  before  me.  In  those
      circumstances I did not myself enquire as to whether the Appellant had
      been required to fund either the application for permission to appeal,
      or the hearing before me. Nor was it appropriate for me to enquire  as
      to the specific nature of the advice that would  be  tendered  to  the
      Appellant.
  10. Mr Ali accepted that before any rehearing of the appeal he would  wish
      to supplement the evidence currently available.  (There  was  also  an
      issue over whether the bundle of  papers  prepared  for  the  original
      hearing of the appeal was served and filed in its complete form, or in
      an incomplete form. Certainly the bundle on the Tribunal file did  not
      contain all of the documents that Mr Ali had been instructed it should
      contain. The Respondent's files contained no copy  of  the  bundle  at
      all.)
  11. In all the circumstances Mr Diwnycz quite properly  accepts  that  the
      Respondent, the Tribunal, and the  Judge,  were  through  no  personal
      fault of the Appellant deprived of material evidence as to  what  did,
      or did not occur, upon the Appellant's receipt of the two  invitations
      to interview. I agree. That is not to prejudge the view  the  Tribunal
      will  ultimately  take  of  the  evidence  that  is  relevant  to  the
      explanation that the Appellant offers for his failure to attend either
      interview,  it  is  simply  to  recognise  that  as  set  out  in   MM
      (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  105  that  the  principle  of
      fairness is engaged by what has occurred. On any view  the  Judge  was
      mistakenly given the impression that the  Appellant's  representatives
      were not prepared to offer any evidence as to what exchanges had taken
      place between their employee and the Appellant. The  existence  of  Mr
      Farani's statement shows that even if the  individual  who  had  dealt
      with the Appellant was not prepared to do so, the firm as a whole was.
      Not surprisingly that impression did play some  part  in  the  Judge's
      reasoning, because he commented upon the  failure  to  do  so  in  the
      course of his  decision.  That  is  enough  to  demonstrate  that  the
      mistaken impression played some material part in his  reasoning,  even
      if it were not decisive.
  12. Accordingly, since both parties were agreed that the decision  had  to
      be set aside and remade, the focus of the hearing then turned  to  the
      mechanism for doing so.  I  have  in  these  circumstances  considered
      whether or not to remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal  for  it
      to be reheard, as requested by both parties. In the  circumstances  of
      the appeal I am satisfied  that  this  is  the  correct  approach.  In
      circumstances where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not
      properly been considered by the First Tier  Tribunal,  the  effect  of
      that error of law has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity
      for his case to be properly considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
      paragraph 7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012.
      Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise is such that
      having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
      appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b)
      of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Having  reached  that
      conclusion, with the agreement of the parties  I  make  the  following
      directions;
     i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
        to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings of  fact  are
        preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Fisher.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The Appellant must serve upon the  Respondent  and  file  with  the
        Tribunal by 5pm on 15 October 2016  a  consolidated  bundle,  which
        should include any further evidence he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 15 October 2016.




Decision

  13. The decision promulgated on 4 January 2016 did involve the  making  of
      an error of law sufficient to require it  to  be  set  aside  and  the
      appeal to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set
      aside and the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
      i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
         to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings of  fact  are
         preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Fisher.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The Appellant must serve upon the  Respondent  and  file  with  the
        Tribunal by 5pm on 15 October 2016  a  consolidated  bundle,  which
        should include any further evidence he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 15 October 2016.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 9 August 2016


