
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22532/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2016                           |On 20 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR ASHRAFUL AMIN BHUIYAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mrs F Farrell, Peter G Farrell, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  by
      Designated Judge Murray allowing an appeal by Mr Ashraful Amin Bhuiyan
      (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant".


   2. The claimant was born  on  10  January  1978  and  is  a  national  of
      Bangladesh.  On 28 September 2012 the claimant applied  for  leave  to
      remain in the UK on the basis of 14 years' residence,  asserting  that
      he had  been  in  this  country  since  1995.   The  Designated  Judge
      considered the evidence of the  claimant  and  a  supporting  witness,
      together with documentary evidence, and  accepted  that  although  the
      claimant was working illegally in the UK, he had demonstrated that  he
      had been here at least since 1997.

   3. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
      relied on a statement from HMRC to the effect that  the  claimant  had
      made use of a National Insurance Number which did not  belong  to  him
      and a PAYE reference which did not  relate  to  any  business.   These
      numbers were used on the claimant's pay slips and on P45s produced  by
      him.  In relation to this issue the Designated Judge  found  that  the
      Secretary of State had "not discharged the higher  standard  of  proof
      required for paragraph 322(1A) to apply" and found in  favour  of  the
      claimant.  The Designated Judge concluded at paragraph 45 that she did
      not find that this claimant had tried to gain leave  by  deception  by
      using false documents.  He had been working illegally in the UK but he
      had been here for 14 years and was entitled to leave to remain on this
      basis.

   4. The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal  contending
      that the Designated Judge had applied too high a  standard  of  proof.
      The only higher standard of proof  than  the  civil  standard  of  the
      balance  of  probabilities  was  the  criminal  standard   of   beyond
      reasonable doubt.  The judge  erred  in  law  by  demanding  a  higher
      standard of proof in civil proceedings.  Reference was made  to  Re  B
      (children) [2008]  UKHL  35.   This  matter  affected  the  Designated
      Judge's credibility findings.  If the  claimant's  employment  history
      was found to be false he would not be eligible to qualify under the 14
      year rule.  In addition, the fact  that  HMRC  had  demonstrated  that
      documentary evidence relied upon by the claimant was  false  attracted
      the mandatory operation of paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules
      so that the appeal was bound to be dismissed.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the basis that it  was
      unclear what standard of proof the judge had applied.

Submissions

   6. At the hearing before us Mrs O'Brien,  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
      submitted that the Designated Judge had applied a higher  standard  of
      proof than the balance of probabilities.  Paragraph 322(1A) applied to
      false documents or false representations.  The  information  given  by
      HMRC showed that the National Insurance Number and the PAYE  Reference
      used by the claimant were not genuine.  Accordingly the  claimant  had
      relied  upon  false  documents.   This  went  against  the  claimant's
      credibility and should have led to the appeal  being  dismissed  under
      paragraph 322(1A).  Reference was made to the  case  of  AA  (Nigeria)
      [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

   7. For the claimant, Mrs Farrell  contended  that  a  witness  from  HMRC
      should have been called to give oral testimony.  It was  pointed  out,
      however, that no witness summons had been sought and no  evidence  had
      been produced indicating that the National Insurance  Number  or  PAYE
      reference was genuine.

   8. Mrs Farrell continued that the standard of proof was correct  but  the
      test of the balance of probabilities was towards the higher end of the
      spectrum.  She also referred to the existence of evidential  rules  on
      the admission of evidence from official records.

   9. It was noted that no rule 24 notice had been submitted.   Mrs  Farrell
      was asked if she had anything to add in relation to  Article  8.   She
      pointed out that the claimant had been in the UK for 20 years.

Discussion

  10. We note that in the Secretary of State's bundle at F1-F2 there  was  a
      statement from an  official  of  HMRC  with  regard  to  the  National
      Insurance Number and  PAYE  reference  used  by  the  claimant.   This
      statement is dated 18 May 2015 and signed by the  official  concerned.
      As  already  indicated,  the  statement  records  that  the   National
      Insurance Number used by the claimant does not belong to him  and  the
      PAYE reference used for employers for whom he claimed to  have  worked
      does not relate to any business.

  11. Although the question was raised before us as to the admissibility  of
      this document, we observe  that  although  we  must  ensure  that  the
      principles of fairness are followed, we  are  not  required  to  apply
      strict rules of evidence.  The evidence provided by HMRC at F1-F2  was
      admissible and the Tribunal was entitled to have  regard  to  it  even
      without any witness to speak to it.  Although the statement is  headed
      "England and Wales only" and is on a form clearly used for the purpose
      of courts and tribunals in England and Wales, we do not consider  that
      this detracts from the information provided in the form or the  weight
      to be attached to it.  The form appears to have been completed  by  an
      officer of HMRC working in Wales and therefore the  form  normally  in
      use in that part of the UK has been provided.

  12. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, we are satisfied on  the
      basis of the decision of the House of Lords in Re B and  the  decision
      of the Inner House in Scottish Ministers v Stirton and Anderson [2013]
      CSIH 81 that there is only one standard of proof  in  a  civil  matter
      such as this and that is the balance of probabilities.   The  standard
      of proof does not change because there is an allegation  of  fraud  or
      deception which is subject to proof.   We  find  that  the  Designated
      Judge erred in law at paragraph 44 of her decision by making reference
      to a higher standard of proof than the balance of probabilities.  This
      standard of  proof  applies  not  only  to  allegations  of  fraud  or
      deception in general in civil proceedings but  also  in  the  specific
      context of paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

  13. Paragraph 322 sets out grounds on which leave to remain and  variation
      of leave to enter or remain in the UK must be  refused.   Subparagraph
      (1A)  states  that  an  application  must  be  refused   where   false
      representations have been made or false documents or information  have
      been submitted (whether  or  not  material  to  the  application,  and
      whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material  facts  have
      not been disclosed, in relation to the  application  or  in  order  to
      obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third party required
      in support of the  application.   In  terms  of  AA  (Nigeria),  where
      reliance is placed upon false documents this will  lead  to  mandatory
      refusal under paragraph 322(1A)  even  though  the  claimant  may  not
      personally have been aware that the document was false.

  14. It is not disputed that the claimant relied upon pay  slips  and  P45s
      submitted in support of his application  to  the  Secretary  of  State
      which contained a National  Insurance  Number  to  which  he  was  not
      entitled and a PAYE reference which did not relate  to  any  business.
      The P45s are to be found in Annex G of the Secretary of State's bundle
      and the pay slips are to be found later in the same annex.  These P45s
      and payslips are false documents which were submitted to the Secretary
      of State in relation to an application or applications  for  leave  to
      remain.  On this basis, the application which is the  subject  of  the
      current appeal fell to be refused under paragraph 322(1A).

  15. As we have already indicated, the Designated Judge  erred  in  law  by
      applying a higher standard of proof than appropriate  in  relation  to
      the evidential burden upon the Secretary of State, who relied  on  the
      statement from an HMRC  official  at  F1-F2.   On  the  basis  of  the
      evidence before her, there is only one decision the  Designated  Judge
      could have reached on the appeal, which is that the refusal  of  leave
      to remain was mandatory under paragraph 322(1A) and on this basis  the
      appeal should be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

  16. Having allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, the  Designated
      Judge  did  not  separately  address  Article  8,  although  this  was
      addressed both in the Secretary of State's refusal decision and in the
      grounds of appeal.  At the hearing before  us  Mrs  Farrell  submitted
      that the claimant had now completed 20 years' residence in the UK, but
      the finding made by the  Designated  Judge  at  paragraph  43  of  her
      decision was that the claimant had been residing in the UK since 1997.



  17. The application of the long residence provisions in  paragraph  276ADE
      was addressed in the Secretary of State's refusal  decision.   It  was
      pointed out in the decision that under paragraph 276ADE(1)(i), as  the
      claimant submitted false documents with his claim he  could  not  meet
      the suitability requirements.  We note,  however,  that  the  relevant
      requirement, in S-LTR.2.2, is  discretionary  rather  than  mandatory,
      unlike paragraph 322(1A).

  18. We observe that on the basis of the evidence before her the Designated
      Judge was satisfied that the claimant had  been  residing  in  the  UK
      since 1997 and had been working here during  the  period  since  then,
      albeit illegally.  We further observe  that  these  findings  are  not
      necessarily vitiated by the Designated Judge's error  in  relation  to
      the standard of proof in relation  to  the  allegation  of  deception.
      Although it was submitted before us that the error would have affected
      the credibility of the claimant's evidence in respect of having worked
      in the UK, we do not accept that this necessarily follows from the use
      of a National Insurance Number to which the claimant was not  entitled
      and the use of a false PAYE reference.  We  have  not  heard  evidence
      from the claimant or from the other witness who was before the  First-
      tier Tribunal and accordingly we do not  conclude  that  the  findings
      made by the Designated Judge in respect of the  claimant's  length  of
      residence and illegal working should be set aside.   Nevertheless,  it
      is not disputed that the claimant  was  an  illegal  entrant  and  has
      throughout his residence in the UK been residing here  unlawfully  and
      working without  permission.   This  may  be  relevant  under  section
      117B(4) of the 2002 Act, in terms of which  little  weight  should  be
      given to a private life that is established by a person at a time when
      the person is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   We  re-iterate,
      however, that we have not heard evidence as to the  claimant's  length
      of residence, which may be the subject of a further claim.


  19. To conclude, the only decision under the Immigration Rules  which  was
      open to the Designated Judge when hearing the appeal in December  2015
      was to dismiss the appeal as refusal of the application was  mandatory
      under paragraph 322(1A).


Conclusions

  20. The making of the decision of Designated Judge involved the making  of
      an error on a point of law.


  21. We set aside the decision.

  22. We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal. We have not
been asked to make such an order and we see no reason of substance for
doing so.



Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

