
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22806/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th June 2016                             |On 8th July 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               rajwinder kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Malik of HUMD Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Cox made following a hearing at Bradford on 10th December 2015.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of India born  on  15th  October  1985.   She
    entered the United Kingdom with leave as a Tier  4  Student  under  the
    points-based system on 30th August 2009, and was  subsequently  granted
    further leave to 20th September 2014.

 3. On 27th May 2014 the Secretary of State  told  the  claimant  that  her
    college's licence as a highly trusted sponsor had been revoked and  her
    leave would be curtailed on 1st August 2014.

 4. On 31st July 2014 she made a combined application for further leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student but was refused under the  general
    grounds of refusal, paragraph 322(1A) and 322(3).

 5. The Secretary of State believed that the claimant had been  working  in
    the  United  Kingdom  without  immigration  permission  to  do  so  and
    therefore that leave to remain, or  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain, should follow the normal course and be refused.

 6. She also refused under paragraph 322(1A), which is a  mandatory  ground
    on the basis that the claimant had made  false  representations  having
    said that she had not been working in the UK without permission.

 7. It was the claimant's case that  she  was  on  a  work  placement  with
    Inglewood Residential Home Limited, for which  she  was  last  paid  in
    August 2014, and which was allowed under her conditions of  stay.   She
    had been on maternity leave between March 2013 and April 2014 and  then
    resumed her placement from April 2014 so as  to  complete  her  course.
    She relied on the Home Office guidelines which state that Tier  4  work
    placements which exceed the permitted time limit  due  to  a  statutory
    requirement are exempt from time limits.

 8. The judge concluded that the claimant was entitled  to  return  to  her
    work placement in April 2014, although once  her  college  licence  had
    been revoked she was no longer  on  a  work  placement  with  a  highly
    trusted sponsor, and therefore, by August 2014,  she  would  have  been
    working contrary to the conditions of her stay.

 9. The judge accepted that, even if the claimant did not know  whether  or
    not she was allowed to work, she ought to have had doubts  and  he  did
    not know whether she did anything to clarify  her  situation.   On  the
    other hand she stopped working at the residential care home  in  August
    2014 which was consistent with her account that she  was  only  at  the
    home as a part of her work placement.

10. He concluded as follows:

         "Further  the  burden  of  proof  is  on   the   respondent.    The
         respondent's original decision was found not to  be  in  accordance
         with the law and the appellant states that this was so as  to  give
         the respondent an opportunity to interview her.  The respondent has
         not provided  any  information  to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
         account of what happened at the earlier appeal is erroneous.

         On the totality of the evidence I find that the  respondent  failed
         to discharge  the  burden  of  proof.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant was working in breach of the conditions of her  stay  and
         it is possible that she may have known that she was not allowed  to
         continue with her work placement.  However in my view  it  is  more
         likely that she genuinely believed that she was allowed  to  finish
         her work placement.  I rely on the fact that she stopped working in
         August 2014.

         Further the respondent choose not to interview the appellant and in
         the absence of an interview I am satisfied that the respondent  has
         failed to demonstrate that the appellant  deliberately  gave  false
         information.

         Accordingly I am satisfied that the respondent acted unlawfully  in
         relying on Rule 321(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

         As to  rule  323,  this  is  a  discretionary  ground  of  refusal.
         Although I am satisfied that the appellant was working in breach of
         her conditions, the respondent has failed  to  satisfy  me  on  the
         balance of probabilities that the appellant knew she was working in
         breach of her conditions.  In these  circumstance  I  am  satisfied
         that the respondent ought to have exercised her discretion  in  the
         appellant's favour and the respondent erred in law  in  seeking  to
         rely on rule 322(3)."

The Grounds of Application

11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had made a material error of fact.  There was no  documentary
    evidence to show that the  claimant  was  on  a  work  placement.   The
    Tribunal had listed the deficiencies in the case and yet speculated  in
    her favour despite her having not appeared at the  hearing  to  support
    her evidence and failing to provide any independent evidence  from  the
    residential home.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Adio on 23rd May 2016 for the
    reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

13. Mrs Pettersen  relied  on  her  grounds  and  submitted  that,  on  the
    evidence, the judge had reached an impermissible conclusion.

14. Mr Malik submitted that the key to the determination was that the judge
    had properly applied the correct standard of proof and  the  respondent
    had failed to prove her case to the requisite standard;  there  was  no
    error in the judge so finding.

Findings and Conclusions

15. It has always been the claimant's case that she was on a work placement
    between April and August 2014.

16. In her original grounds of appeal she said that the  payments  made  to
    her were maternity pay as she had undertaken a work placement as a part
    of her course which was permitted under her previous grant of leave  to
    remain.

17. Mrs Pettersen observed that the claimant had not  given  oral  evidence
    before the judge but of course there was no obligation on her to do so.
    The fact that she did not is not an adequate basis for discounting  her
    case.

18. It is right that, before the immigration judge,  there  was  no  direct
    evidence from the residential home that the  claimant  was  on  a  work
    placement, and he weighed the omission up in assessing the  credibility
    of the case. Moreover the judge was entitled to rely on the  fact  that
    she gave up working at the residential care home in August  2014  which
    was consistent with her account that she was only there as  a  part  of
    her work placement.  The work  at  the  care  home  is  plainly  highly
    relevant to her diploma which is in healthcare management.  He did have
    a copy of her immigration card which states that she  was  entitled  to
    work on work placements.

19. In summary, the Secretary of State made her decision on the basis  that
    she had information from the Inland Revenue that the claimant had  been
    paid in August 2014.  There was no other evidence from the  respondent.
    Against that the judge had to  weigh  the  claimant's  claim  that  she
    genuinely believed that she was allowed to continue her work  placement
    which was a part of her course.

20. It was open to him to come to the view that this was her genuine belief
    and there is no error of law in his so doing.

21. Accordingly there can be no complaint that the appeal was allowed under
    Rule 322(1A). Since 322(3) is a discretionary ground  for  refusal,  he
    was perfectly entitled to conclude that the Secretary of  State  should
    have exercised discretion in her favour.

22. The Secretary of State's grounds amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

23. The  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  fails.   The  decision  of  the
    Immigration Judge will stand.



[pic]
Signed                              Date 6 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
