
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2015                           |On 12 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              FRED KATO KIVUMBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Van As, Legal Representative,  Visa Inn


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of Judge Drabu CBE promulgated on 23 July 2015 following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 25 June 2015.  The Secretary of State  appeals  against
    the determination of Judge Drabu who allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Fred
    Kivumbi under the Immigration Rules. For the purposes of  continuity  I
    shall refer to Mr Kivumbi as the appellant as he was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The matter arose  in  this  way.   The  appellant  appealed  against  a
    decision of the respondent refusing him a variation of leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as the victim of domestic violence and the giving
    of directions for removal under  Section  47  of  the  2006  Act.   The
    refusal of the application was made in a letter dated 2 May  2014.  The
    appellant is a national of Uganda. His date of  birth  is  22  February
    1968. He stated that he came to the United Kingdom on 24  January  2005
    and was subsequently granted leave to remain.

 3. On 24 February 2012 he was granted leave to remain as  a  spouse  of  a
    person settled in the United Kingdom until 24 February 2014.  It was on
    that date that he made a further application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a victim of domestic  violence.    The  application  had  the
    effect of continuing his leave until it was finally determined pursuant
    to s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  appeal  was  set  down  for
    hearing on 23 January 2015.  The issue arises because the Secretary  of
    State by her own volition  had  decided  to  serve  a  s.  120  notice.
    Section 120  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    requires  an  appellant  when  served  with  such  a  notice  to  state
    additional grounds or reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. The appellant responded  by  seeking  leave  to  remain
    under the long residence provisions (as they were then were) as he  had
    by then accrued 10 years lawful residence.  In such  circumstances  the
    application made under the umbrella of  a  s.  120  notice  has  to  be
    determined by the Secretary of State as a result of the service of  the
    notice.

 4. The appellant argued that he had produced the relevant  information  in
    support of his claim of being granted indefinite leave to remain  as  a
    person who had lived continuously and lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the last ten years.  The application was the subject of a  response
    by the Secretary of State in a letter written on 22 March 2015. It  was
    written to the appellant's representative and the  Secretary  of  State
    said:

         "Your  client  already  has  an  outstanding  appeal  against   the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse your  client's  application
         for leave to remain as  the  victim  of  domestic  violence.   Your
         client is restricted from making a  fresh  application  whilst  his
         appeal  is  outstanding  in  accordance  with  Section  3C  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971.  Your client may  apply  to  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal to have your client's application for leave to
         remain as the victim of  domestic  violence  to  be  treated  as  a
         variation of your client's grounds of appeal*   To  this  end  your
         client's documents have been retained on the Home Office's files as
         they may be considered as part of your client's  existing  appeal."
         [*Should this be a reference to the long residence application?]

 5. Section 3C provides for a person who has leave  but  makes  an  in-time
    application for a variation of his leave but whose leave expires before
    the fresh application is decided by the respondent.   Such  a  person's
    original leave is continued until the application is decided.  However,
    a person is restricted to making a single application; he  cannot  keep
    making a further application as a means of  permanently  extending  his
    leave. Thus, s. 3C(4) provides:

         'A person may not make an application for variation of his leave to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom whist that leave is  extended
         by virtue of this section.'

 6. In other words the decision that was made by the Secretary of State was
    that although notwithstanding the fact that the s. 120 notice had  been
    served, s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 prevented the grounds  raised
    in the s. 120 notice from being adjudicated upon.  That to my  mind  is
    thoroughly inconsistent with the purpose  of  s.  120  which  expressly
    requires the applicant to present what is, or may be, an application on
    a different basis from that which is advanced in the appeal before  the
    Tribunal.

 7. Judge Drabu was required therefore to deal with this  appeal  and  that
    required him to deal with the application identified by  the  appellant
    in the s. 120 notice.  There had been no response from the Secretary of
    State to say what view the Secretary of State took to  the  application
    on the basis of ten years continuous leave  failed  or  why  it  should
    fail. It was open, indeed in my judgement it was a requirement  of  the
    s. 120  procedure,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  provide  a
    response.  It was for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  say  whether  she
    accepted the applicant had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for
    a ten year period if there were matters, (for example, the  appellant's
    misbehaviour during the period  of  ten  years)  or  there  were  other
    reasons why the application should not succeed under the ten year route
    then that was  a matter for the Secretary of State  to  raise.  It  was
    perfectly possible for the Secretary of State to raise it by way  of  a
    letter prior to the hearing.

 8. During  the  course  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  where  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Miss Pountney  the respondent put
    forward no positive case  that the requirements of the  Rules  had  not
    been met. The best that we have is this passage in the determination of
    Judge Drabu:

         "I find that the appellant has lived  lawfully  in  the  UK  for  a
         continuous period of ten years.  I am also satisfied  that  he  has
         produced relevant evidence relating to  the  requirements  on  life
         skills and language. I  have given due regard to the argument  made
         by Miss Pountney that the decision on  the  claim  on  lawful  long
         residence should be made by the respondent and not the Tribunal but
         I fear that in the circumstances of this case, I  must  reject  it.
         Firstly because it would make a mockery of s. 120 and secondly  the
         respondent has had more than enough time to  meet  the  claim  made
         under the relevant Immigration Rule.  It would also be against  the
         interests of justice to put this appellant through further expense.
          And finally no public interest would be served  by  not  making  a
         substantive decision on the claim lawfully and properly  raised  by
         the appellant."

 9. In those circumstances he allowed the appeal.

10. It is said on behalf of the Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal
    that that is quite wrong and that what should have  happened  was  that
    the Judge should have gone through all of the requirements of leave  to
    remain and made appropriate  findings of fact upon it. It seems  to  me
    that is an entirely unreal suggestion to make in the  circumstances  of
    this case.  Miss Pountney made no assertions that the  requirements  of
    the Rules had not been met. The appellant was not cross-examined as  to
    whether he had been continuously in the United Kingdom for  ten  years;
    nor was it suggested that the evidence that he had produced was lacking
    or that there are holes in the evidence  or  that  there  were  matters
    which required further evidence  which  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    provide.

11. In those circumstances it does not seem to me that there was any option
    but for the judge to find that that there was no basis upon  which  the
    Secretary of State should be permitted to make another  decision  at  a
    different time.

12. It is to be borne in mind that there may be  cases  where  there  is  a
    discretionary element that can only be determined by the  Secretary  of
    State. However, looking at the requirements of paragraph 276B  and  the
    requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the grounds of long residence in the United Kingdom, the issues that
    are required to be raised are whether the appellant has had ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom, a matter upon  which
    the Judge made a positive finding of fact and,  having  regard  to  the
    public interest, there are no reasons why it would be  undesirable  for
    him to be given indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
    residence, taking into account various factors.

13. In relation to the public interest, no reasons  were  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State either in a letter which predated  this  application
    or in response to the s. 120 notice or at the hearing  why  the  public
    interest made it undesirable for indefinite leave  to  remain   on  the
    ground of long residence.  Nothing was said about the  appellant's  age
    which might  give  any  cause  for  concern  or  the  strength  of  his
    connections in the United Kingdom or his personal circumstances or  his
    domestic circumstances or compassionate circumstances.   There  was  no
    reason at all from those listed in paragraph 276B why  the  application
    should not be  granted.   It  was  a  requirement  that  the  appellant
    demonstrated sufficient knowledge of English language but he did so and
    that was a positive finding of fact made by the judge and there  is  no
    suggestion made by Miss Pountney that the appellant was  in  breach  of
    the Immigration Rules (except for  any  period  of  overstaying  for  a
    period of 28 days or less which could  properly  be  disregarded).   In
    those circumstances I see no reason whatever for the judge not to  make
    up his mind there and then as he was required to do.

14. It seems to be that there is a  general  point  principle  involved  in
    these cases where a s. 120 notice is concerned as to what is the proper
    procedure to be adopted by the Secretary of  State  when  dealing  with
    such a claim.  First, it is the Secretary of State's sole  decision  to
    serve a s. 120 notice.  Nobody requires her to do so but, if  she  does
    so, then there is an obligation imposed upon the appellant  with  which
    he must comply.  This occurred in this case.  Consequently it was  then
    for the respondent, if there was an objection to the fresh claim raised
    in response to the s. 120 notice, to make clear what  those  objections
    were.  If that required further time to  make  further  enquiries  that
    would be a legitimate reason why the appeal might be adjourned  but  no
    application was made to that effect.

15. Furthermore, in the  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  Secretary  of
    State's objection s to the  s. 120 claim (if I may call  it that) were,
    apparently, waived by the letter of 22 March 2015 which in effect  told
    the Tribunal that it was  to  get  on  with  it,  something  which  the
    Tribunal felt it had to do.  It  was  not   helpful  to  say  that  the
    Secretary of State could  not  make  a  decision  under  s.  3  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  In my judgement  that  is  simply  not  arguable
    bearing in mind the fact that s. 120 was operated at the option of  the
    respondent. It was she  who  set  the  hare  running  and  it  was  not
    therefore open to her to respond by  saying  s.  3C  prevents  such  an
    application being made.

16. In those circumstances the Secretary of State has to be  bound  by  the
    procedure that she herself as adopted in this case.  No  positive  case
    was advanced at the hearing before the judge and he was not required to
    do any more than deal with the issues that were before  him. There  was
    only one live issue  about  which  he  heard  evidence.  He  reached  a
    sustainable finding of fact in relation to that.  It is said  that  the
    decision of MU  (Statement  of  additional  grounds  -  long  residence
    discretion) was binding upon the judge in this case and that it was for
    him to accede to the request by Miss Poutney that the matter should  go
    back to the Secretary of State to decide the issue.

17. In my judgement that simply  is  not  an  available  option  where  the
    Secretary of State effectively ambushes the appellant at  the  date  of
    the hearing who does not know what case he has to meet. There as to  be
    a principle of fairness in this case where  each  side  sets  out  what
    their respective responses are to the application which is  before  the
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State failed to do  it  in  this  case  and
    accordingly I find no error in the  way  Judge  Drabu  approached  this
    appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  dismissed  with  effect  that  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                             9 December 2015
