
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22047/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th February 2014                           |On 5th March 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr md saiful azam

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Azam in person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh who was born  on  30th  June
    1981.  He had first entered the United Kingdom on 19th July  2004  with
    leave as a student and had subsequently been granted leave to remain as
    a student thereafter until September 2009.  On 4th  September  2009  he
    was granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until
    31st July 2010.  He  was  granted  further  leave  to  remain  in  this
    category until 13th May 2012.

 2. On 5th April 2012 he made a combined application for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  and  for  a
    biometric  residence  permit.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 28th September 2012 under paragraph 245FD  and  a
    decision was made to remove the Respondent by way of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The basis upon which the Secretary of State refused his application was
    that on the basis of the documents that he had provided for the date of
    award under Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  did  not  demonstrate
    that he qualified for the points in this area.  Furthermore he was  not
    entitled to 20  points  for  qualification  under  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules from the evidence provided as he had not provided the
    results of his dissertation.  It was noted in the decision that as  the
    Immigration Rules stated that the date of  the  award  must  be  within
    twelve months directly prior  to  the  date  of  the  application,  the
    Respondent was not awarded points in that  area.   The  claimed  points
    under Appendix B English language were refused due to  the  failure  to
    meet the requirements for the eligible award.

 4. Mr Azam appealed that  decision  and  it  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ross) sitting at Hatton Cross on  26th  November  2012.
    In a determination promulgated on 4th December 2012  and  having  heard
    the evidence of the Respondent, he allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent
    that it was remitted to the Respondent as not being in accordance  with
    the law.  In that determination he recited the account given by Mr Azam
    that his course had ended on 3rd February 2012 and  that  the  evidence
    confirmed that he was still awaiting the results of  his  dissertation.
    It further recorded at paragraph 3 that the university did  not  inform
    him that he had been awarded the degree until 16th  May  2012  and  the
    degree was issued or awarded on 31st May 2012.  Mr Azam  had  explained
    before the judge that he had  not  sent  the  Secretary  of  State  the
    documentation concerning the date of his award because he had  received
    a letter on behalf of UKBA dated 18th May 2012 which had expressly told
    him not to send  documents  unless  requested  to  do  so.   The  judge
    considered the decision of the Court of Appeal in AQ v SSHD [2011] EWCA
    Civ 833 but found that that could not assist the  Respondent.   However
    he considered that there was a general duty on the Secretary  of  State
    to act fairly and that Mr Azam had failed to notify  the  UKBA  of  the
    fact that he had obtained his degree before the decision  was  made  in
    September because of the letter which had been written him telling  him
    not to send documents to the UKBA unless  requested.   Thus  the  judge
    recorded at paragraph 11 that he considered that the caseworker  should
    have enquired whether the degree had been  awarded  before  making  the
    decision and if that had been done "no doubt  the  Secretary  of  State
    would have allowed the Appellant to amend his application by submitting
    the additional evidence."  Therefore he found the decision not to be in
    accordance with the law and remitted it to the Secretary of State.

 5. In addition, in respect of the removal direction under  Section  47  of
    the 2006 Act, the First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly  identified  that
    that was an unlawful  decision  and  therefore  found  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and remitted that matter to  the  Secretary  of
    State also.  Following  the  promulgation  of  the  determination,  the
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  and  on  18th  December
    2012 permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.

 6.  Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Monson) on 26th March 2013.  In a  determination  promulgated  on
    9th April 2013 he upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   His
    analysis is set out at paragraphs 6 to  13  of  the  determination  and
    whilst he found that Judge Ross had misdirected  himself  in  law  when
    referring to the decision of AQ (as cited) but that in the light of the
    decision of Khatel and Others [2013] UKUT 0044 the judge was  wrong  to
    proceed on the basis  that  the  claimant  had  to  have  obtained  his
    eligible award prior to the date when he lodged  his  application  with
    the  UKBA.   Therefore  he  considered  that  provided  the  Respondent
    obtained his degree before  the  date  of  decision  and  had  provided
    evidence of this before the date of decision, the award could have been
    taken into account.  In this respect the findings  made  by  the  judge
    relating to issues of fairness namely that the letter of 18th May  2012
    requesting  the  Respondent  not  to  send  any  further  documentation
    prevented Mr Azam from sending the eligible award that was made in  May
    and therefore prior to the date of decision and  because  of  that  and
    delay emanating from the University of Wales, a  matter  for  which  he
    found the Secretary of State could not be  responsible)  he  found  the
    letter of 18th May 2012, relied upon by Judge Ross, was  sufficient  to
    establish unfairness.  As the Deputy Judge said at paragraph 12 "It was
    unfair of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  the  application  because
    essential evidence was missing, when the caseworker had expressly  told
    the claimant not to send any additional documents unless  requested  to
    do so."  He therefore found there was no error  of  law  in  the  judge
    finding that the refusal to  vary  the  claimant's  leave  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 7.   It was also recorded at paragraph 13 that the judge was right to find
    that Section 47 removal was unlawful but he was  wrong  to  direct  the
    question of removal should be remitted to the Secretary of State.  Thus
    he upheld the determination save for the remittal on  the  question  of
    removal which was set aside.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against the determination of the Upper Tribunal.   At  the  time
    she did so, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    granted by the Upper Tribunal in respect of the decision in Khatel  and
    Others.  The Secretary of State's grounds of application reiterated the
    critique of Khatel contained in the grounds  of  application  that  had
    been submitted to the Court of Appeal.


 9. As set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  Others
    (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC) at paragraphs  3-
    5, 200 applications for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    were made by the Secretary of State  in respect  of  determinations  of
    the Upper Tribunal, allowing  appeals (or dismissing  the  Respondent's
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the Secretary of State  against  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, applying Khatel.

10. Since it was known that permission to appeal in Khatel had been granted
    (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the hearing
    in  that  court),  it  was  considered  appropriate  to  consider   the
    Respondent's permission applications once the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal became known.

11. On 25th June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of State's
    appeal against the Upper Tribunal's determinations in  Khatel  and  the
    cases of three other immigrants: Raju and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    754.

12. As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the Respondent had applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to Rule 45(1)(b) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to  appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision  in  accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-




                             ...


                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a  material  effect  on  the
                      decision."

13. The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and re-make the decisions in the appeals by dismissing them.
     The directions made plain that the Appellants would be (or continue to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

14. Further directions were sent out by the Upper Tribunal as  follows:  On
    21st January 2014, the Tribunal  issued  directions  in  the  following
    terms:


    1.   Any directions previously given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  these
         proceedings are hereby revoked.


    2.   The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing in the Upper
         Tribunal on the basis that the issues  to  be  considered  at  that
         hearing will be as follows:


         (a)  whether the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  made  by
             reference to the determination in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;
             effect of continuing application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),
             should be set aside in light of the judgment of the  Court  of
             Appeal in Raju and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 (as to  which,  see  Nasim  and
             Others (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]  UKUT  00610
             (IAC));


         (b)  if so, whether there is an error of law in  the  determination
             of the First-tier Tribunal, such that the determination should
             be set aside; and


         (c)  if so, how the decision in the appeal against the  immigration
             decisions should be re-made (see Nasim and Others).


    3.   The party who was the Appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         directed to serve on the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent,  no
         later than seven days before the forthcoming hearing,  all  written
         submissions and written evidence (including witness statements)  on
         the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, upon which they  will  seek  to
         rely at that hearing (where necessary, complying with  Rule  15(2A)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

15. In compliance with those  directions  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    further evidence and submissions  were  received  by  the  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Respondent.

16. Thus the appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Azam appeared
    in person and had with him the papers that had been provided before the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State was
    represented by Mr Saunders, Senior  Presenting  Officer.   Mr  Saunders
    submitted that the decision of the Upper Tribunal should be  set  aside
    relying on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Raju and  Others  (as
    cited).  Contrary to the submissions made in the written documents, the
    Upper Tribunal was wrong in law by relying on the decision  in  Khatel.
    The point raised about unfairness  did  not  arise  because  the  judge
    considered it in the context of  Khatel  which  has  subsequently  been
    overturned by the decision in Raju.  In those circumstances it did  not
    matter when Mr Azam had sent the information (whether it was in May  or
    later) because at the date of the application there had been no  award.
    He further submitted that the Section 47 decision was unlawful  and  in
    those circumstances the decision of the Upper Tribunal was correct.

17. Mr Azam made his oral submissions to the Tribunal.  He  submitted  that
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal did not solely rely on Khatel and in
    those circumstances the decision of Raju should not affect the outcome.
     He submitted that there was no error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and  that  it  relied  upon  the  general  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to act fairly.  There was unfairness in this case as
    demonstrated by the facts.  He stated that he had submitted evidence of
    other students in a similar situation whose appeals  were  allowed  and
    others  who  were  refused  and  that  this  demonstrated  inconsistent
    decision-making.  In this respect he relied upon a letter in his bundle
    at C4 dated 3rd September 2012; a letter relating to another  Appellant
    and not Mr Azam from an account manager employed by the UKBA and also a
    letter from the Right Honourable Stephen Timms  MP  dated  6th  October
    2012.  Such evidence he submitted demonstrated  inconsistent  decision-
    making.  He further relied upon a policy guidance document at  A2  that
    was headed "Alvi Guidance".  He stated that he  met  the  criteria  and
    therefore should have been awarded the points.   He  submitted  further
    that there was a systemic failure and that it was not a  "one-off"  and
    that it should be taken into account.

18. He further made the point relying on  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in ML (Nigeria) that a series of  material  factual  errors  can
    constitute an error of law and that should be resolved in favour of the
    Appellant.  He stated that this was relevant because in respect of  the
    decision letter he had  provided  documents  from  the  institution  of
    studies for which he should have received 20 points but  that  had  not
    been set out in the decision letter.  He therefore invited the Tribunal
    to remit the decision to the Secretary of State and that  even  if  the
    decision was wrong in law the decision because it  was  an  unfair  one
    should be sent back to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

19. As to Article 8, he said that he had been in the United  Kingdom  since
    2004 as a student and he was now 33 years of age and therefore  at  the
    date of this hearing had been in the UK nearly ten years.  He said that
    he had studied for two qualifications including his MBA, he  had  never
    committed any crime and was not a threat to society and  had  supported
    himself without relying on public funding.  He said he had no family in
    the United Kingdom but he knows more people in the UK than he  does  in
    his home country of Bangladesh.  He stated that he intended  to  settle
    in the UK.

20. Mr Saunders by way of reply submitted  that  the  letter  from  the  MP
    setting out the names of people who had been allowed and those who  had
    been refused did not give details of their particular cases  and  there
    was no way of establishing the basis upon which  those  applicants  had
    been allowed or refused therefore it  was  not  of  any  assistance  in
    demonstrating inconsistent decision-making.  Also the  document  at  C1
    had no reply with it and therefore had no evidential value.  In respect
    of Article 8, the Appellant had not raised this before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  there  had  been  no  compliance  with  the  directions.
    Nonetheless in the Upper Tribunal decision of Nasim and the decision in
    Patel applying those decisions, the Appellant could not  succeed  under
    Article 8 and it would not be a disproportionate removal on  the  facts
    of his appeal.

21. Mr Azam sought to address the Tribunal again.  He  submitted  that  the
    letter had been sent to the Home Office and that if there had been  any
    issue arising out of that, they would have  been  in  the  position  to
    clarify it.

22. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

23. I have carefully considered  the  competing  submissions  made  by  the
    parties and the documentation relied upon.  The first  ground  advanced
    by Mr Azam is that this Tribunal should not set aside the  decision  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson because the decision  of  Raju  does
    not affect the decision properly reached by him.  He submits  that  the
    judge allowed the appeal not  on  Khatel  grounds  but  on  grounds  of
    fairness.  To consider that submission it is necessary to consider what
    the Upper Tribunal said at paragraphs 6 to 12.  The Tribunal said this:-



         "6.Although the  Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission  to
         appeal, the rationale of Judge Fisher's grant of permission favours
         the claimant, rather than the Secretary of State. For  the  logical
         outcome of Judge Fisher's reasoning is that  Judge  Ross  ought  to
         have allowed the claimant's appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
         rather than simply finding that the refusal  decision  was  not  in
         accordance with  the  law,  and  that  a  lawful  decision  on  the
         application remained outstanding.

         7. In the light of Khatel and Others [2013] UKUT 0044 the judge was
         wrong to proceed on  the  basis  that  the  claimant  had  to  have
         obtained his eligible award prior to the date when  he  lodged  his
         application with UKBA.  As AQ indicated, and as Khatel confirms, an
         application under  the  points-based  system  is  deemed  to  be  a
         continuing one  until  the  date  of  decision.   So  provided  the
         claimant (a) obtained his degree before the date of  decision,  and
         (b) provided evidence of this to the Secretary of State before  the
         date of decision, the award should be taken into account.

         8. While Judge Ross misdirected himself on the ramifications of AQ,
         he correctly  identified  a  fatal  deficiency  in  the  claimant's
         application, which was that he  failed  to  notify  the  UK  Border
         Agency of the fact that he had passed  his  dissertation,  and  had
         thereby obtained his degree, before the decision was made.  So  the
         decision in Khatel does not salvage the claimant's  position  under
         the Immigration Rules.

         9. The Secretary of State attacks the judge's finding  on  fairness
         on the ground that the judge erred in speculating that  UKBA  would
         be aware of delays on the part of the University of Wales.   Delays
         emanating from the University of Wales were not a matter for  which
         the Secretary of State was  responsible.   In  the  Tribunal  cases
         cited in judge's determination, the issue of fairness  arose  as  a
         result of the Secretary of State's actions  placing  applicants  in
         positions where they were materially disadvantaged through no fault
         of their own.

         10.  If  this  had  been  the  judge's  only  reason  for   finding
         unfairness, the challenge would have some  merit.   But  the  judge
         also places weight on a letter from the UK Border Agency  dated  18
         May 2012 which  was  sent  to  the  claimant  in  response  to  his
         application.  The letter thanks him for his recent application, and
         continues as follows:

         Please do not send any additional documents to us unless  requested
         to do so by a caseworker.

         11. The claimant gave evidence that  the  reason  why  he  did  not
         submit to UKBA the results of his dissertation, or evidence of  the
         degree certificate that had been awarded to him consequential  upon
         the successful completion of his dissertation, was because  of  the
         terms of this letter.  He had been told not to send any  additional
         documents unless requested to do so by a caseworker, and he  obeyed
         this instruction.  No caseworker had  approached  him  between  the
         time of his application and the date  of  decision  asking  him  to
         provide the evidence which was said to be lacking  in  the  refusal
         decision.

         12. Even without the extra dimension of there being a problem  with
         delays on the part of the University of  Wales  in  issuing  degree
         certificates, the express instruction to the claimant in the letter
         of 18 May 2012 is  sufficient  to  establish  unfairness.   It  was
         unfair of the Secretary of State to refuse the application  because
         essential evidence was missing, when the caseworker  had  expressly
         told the claimant not  to  send  any  additional  documents  unless
         requested to do so.  So there was no error  of  law  in  the  judge
         finding that the refusal to vary the claimant's leave  was  not  in
         accordance with the law.

         13. The judge was also right to find that the  Section  47  removal
         decision was unlawful.  In the light of Adamally and Jaferi, he was
         wrong to direct that the question of removal should be remitted  to
         the Secretary of State for further consideration. This is the  only
         respect in which his decision  requires  adjustment.  The  Tribunal
         held at paragraph 25 as follows:

             At the end of the day, the result should be that the  Tribunal
             determines in substance the appeal brought against the  lawful
             decision,  and  declares  the  other  decision  unlawful.  The
             Secretary of State ought not to have made the s  47  decision,
             but, with the benefit of the Tribunal's decision on the merits
             of the refusal to vary, can decide whether that person  should
             be subject to a removal decision. As to that, it appears to us
             that the Tribunal should not express any view. To  dispose  of
             the appeal in such a way as to suggest  to  the  Secretary  of
             State that a new removal direction ought to be made is, in our
             judgment, quite wrong. For that reason if no other, use of the
             word "remit" is not appropriate. "

24. In my judgment it is plain that the judge did  apply  the  decision  of
    Khatel by stating that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had been wrong  to
    proceed on the basis that he had to have obtained  the  eligible  award
    prior to the date that he lodged his application on 5th April 2012  and
    that provided the Appellant had obtained the degree before the date  of
    decision in  September  and  had  provided  evidence  of  this  to  the
    Secretary of State before the date of  decision,  the  award  could  be
    taken into account.  However the judge further noted that this did  not
    assist Mr Azam because he had failed to notify UKBA that he had  passed
    his dissertation and obtained the degree before the decision  was  made
    in September 2012.  Contrary to the submission  made  by  Mr  Azam,  it
    seems to me that the issue of fairness is directly linked to the  point
    relied on by the judge  in  Khatel  namely  that  the  reason  why  the
    Respondent did not send the  information  concerning  the  dissertation
    prior to the decision was because he had sent a letter on 18th May 2012
    asking him not to send such information.  However in the light  of  the
    decision of Raju that does not assist this Respondent.  The decision in
    Raju makes it plain that Khatel was wrong in law.  The point in  Khatel
    was that it was thought that making an  application  was  a  continuing
    process and as long as the necessary  documents  were  put  before  the
    Secretary of State before she made her decision the requirement of  the
    Rules were met.  However as Raju confirmed and confirmed in  the  later
    decision of the Tribunal in Nasim and Others at paragraphs  20  to  21,
    the  Immigration  Rules  require  the  applicant  to  have   made   the
    application for leave to remain "within twelve months of obtaining  the
    relevant qualification" (Appendix A, Table  10,  fourth  section);  and
    that paragraph 34G of the Rules when read with the  fourth  section  at
    Table 10 created a substantive requirement with which the Appellants in
    Khatel could not comply and that fact that they had  adduced  evidence,
    prior to the date of decision that they  had  been  notified  of  their
    awards,  was  of  no  avail.   The  date  of  "obtaining  the  relevant
    qualification" for the purposes of  Table  10  of  Appendix  A  to  the
    Immigration Rules as in force immediately before 6th April 2012 is  the
    date on which the  university  or  other  institution  responsible  for
    conferring  the  award  (not  the  institution  where   the   applicant
    physically studied if different) actually conferred that award, whether
    in person or in absentia.

25. The fact that he had not sent  the  documents  prior  to  the  date  of
    decision in September due to the Respondent's letter of 18th  May  does
    not  change  the  position  that  he  was  not  awarded  the   eligible
    qualification in the twelve months preceding the  application  made  on
    5th April 2012.  Thus the issue of fairness that arises from the letter
    sent by the Secretary of State simply does not arise.

26. Furthermore the fairness point relating to delays on  the  university's
    part was not given weight by the Upper Tribunal (see  paragraph  10  of
    their decision) and it was the letter of 18th May 2012 which the  judge
    considered was the matter upon which weight should be placed as set out
    at paragraph 12 where it was recorded "It was unfair of  the  Secretary
    of State to refuse  the  application  because  essential  evidence  was
    missing when the caseworker had expressly told the claimant not to send
    any additional documents unless requested to do so."

27. The letter from the MP appears to be stating that there had been delays
    in awarding degrees and that they were due to  be  awarded  before  the
    deadline of 5th April but were awarded in May.  There is no information
    or further evidence filed by either party to support such a contention.
     Indeed in relation to the circumstances of this particular Respondent,
    the evidence contained in two letters of 20th March and 30th March make
    it clear that he had not received  his  dissertation  results  by  30th
    March it being in the process of being  marked.   The  letter  of  20th
    March 2012 made it clear that the dissertation had been  submitted  but
    was "currently being in the process of being marked"  (see  E1  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  The letter of 30th March  2012  similarly  stated
    that Mr Azam was awaiting the dissertation result.  Thus there  was  no
    evidence that he was to be awarded his qualification within the  twelve
    month period before 5th April 2012 as required by the Rules.

28. In respect of the fairness point raised by Mr  Azam,  the  Tribunal  in
    Nasim dealt with this issue.  They said this:-
"(d) Fairness

38.  The  issue  of  fairness  is  closely  allied  to  that  of  legitimate
    expectation and proportionality.  The argument was advanced before  the
    Court of Appeal in Raju, that there was no rationale for,  on  the  one
    hand, awarding someone 20 points in  respect  of  their  qualification,
    whilst refusing to award that person 15 points because the date of  the
    award was after 5 April 2012.  This argument did not find  favour  with
    Moses LJ:-

         "[12]    Whilst I acknowledge  that  to  allow  applications  which
             anticipate the award of the necessary qualification  does  not
             undermine the purpose of the policy, the wording of the fourth
             section [of Table 10 in Appendix A] seems to  me  plain.   The
             fact that an Applicant will achieve a score of 60  points,  by
             obtaining a recognised  degree  at  a  qualifying  institution
             during a lawful stay, achieves nothing.  Only a  score  of  75
             points attracts the right  to  be  granted  leave  to  remain.
             There is no room in the points-based scheme for a  near  miss.
             Viewed as a  whole,  qualification  under  Table  10  requires
             strict compliance with the requirement to make the application
             within the period of one to twelve months from the  time  when
             the qualification was obtained.


         [13] Read in that way, the  Rules  are  analogous  to  those  which
             require an applicant to satisfy a requirement at the  date  of
             his application, such as to require him to  have  a  specified
             minimum level of personal savings at least three months  prior
             to the date of the application (para 245AA) and to  the  Rules
             as to level of funds under the applicant's control on the date
             of the application under App C  -  maintenance  (para  1A(g)).
             ..."

29. For those reasons I have reached the conclusion that the  Tribunal  was
    wrong in law by upholding the First-tier Tribunal's decision on grounds
    of fairness and that the decision discloses an error  of  approach  and
    that  as  the  law  has  now  been  clarified  in  Raju,  that  further
    demonstrates the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules for the
    reasons set out.

30. Any argument concerning evidential flexibility was similarly considered
    in the decision of Nasim and Others at paragraphs 38  to  41  and  were
    rejected.  As to evidential flexibility, the Tribunal for sound reasons
    rejected arguments concerning this at paragraphs  50  to  52  of  their
    decision in Nasim and Others.  As stated  in  Raju  (at  paragraph  24)
    "These applicants could not score 75 points because they had made their
    applications before they had obtained their qualifications."  Therefore
    no application of the evidential flexibility policy could have assisted
    the Respondent on the facts of the appeal; a point that had been relied
    upon by the First-tier Tribunal.

31. The second argument advanced by  Mr  Azam  relates  to  what  has  been
    described  as  "inconsistent  decision-making"  on  the  part  of   the
    Secretary of State.  To this end he relies upon the letter of the Right
    Honourable Stephen Timms MP in which he sets out that named members  of
    the group "whose circumstances were all apparently identical had  their
    visas awarded" and gave the names of seven people who had been  refused
    and a number who had been allowed.   Mr  Azam  further  relied  upon  a
    letter exhibited at C4 dated 3rd September  2012  sent  by  an  account
    manager in respect of another person (not this Respondent) in which  it
    was said that the late issuing would not affect his application.

32. The Tribunal in Nasim (2) dealt with the issue of inconsistent decision-
    making.  As noted at paragraph 32, the  Tribunal  considered  that  the
    Appellants had  not  begun  to  make  out  their  case  in  respect  of
    inconsistent  decision-making  and  at  paragraph  34  found  that  the
    evidence did not  demonstrate  a  systemic  inconsistency  in  relevant
    decision-making by the Secretary of State.   Whilst  that  was  in  the
    context of Article 8, the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nasim
    applies in my judgment to the argument advanced by Mr Azam.   As  noted
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross at paragraph 10 in respect of the
    same letter, "I do not know the circumstances of these  people  but  it
    may be they submitted their degree certificates to the UKBA before  the
    decision was made."  I would echo and adopt that point.  There  are  no
    details given of the particular circumstances of any of the  Appellants
    listed in that letter.  There are no details as to why  they  succeeded
    and why others did not and it is not sufficient to say as Mr  Azam  has
    submitted that it was open to the Secretary of State  to  provide  this
    information.  As their circumstances are unknown and the  documentation
    that was relevant to their particular circumstances has not  been  made
    available, I cannot find that  the  evidence  demonstrates  a  systemic
    failure on the part of the Secretary of State as submitted by Mr  Azam.
    In any event on the evidence in respect of this particular  Respondent,
    and in particular the letter of 30th March  makes  it  plain  that  the
    dissertation had still not been marked and  therefore  it  cannot  have
    been said that he would have been awarded  his  eligible  qualification
    before the date of the application made on 5th April.

33. Insofar as Mr Azam relied upon ML (Nigeria) on the basis  that  factual
    errors can constitute an  error  of  law,  whilst  that  is  a  correct
    statement of law, I do not find that has any bearing on  the  facts  of
    this appeal.  Even if he could demonstrate documentary compliance  with
    other parts of the relevant Rule, it is plain that he  could  not  have
    been awarded the 15 points necessary to meet the overall figure  of  75
    points required by the  Rules  because  he  had  not  demonstrated  the
    eligible award as noted by the Secretary of State.  As to his  argument
    relating to policy guidance, I do not find that this avails him either.
     The point made in Raju was that  it  was  not  the  guidance  but  the
    Immigration Rules themselves that the Appellants could  not  meet.   On
    the facts  of  the  present  appeal  Mr  Azam  has  not  been  able  to
    demonstrate that he could  have  met  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    reasons set out in the preceding paragraphs.

34. In those circumstances and for the reasons set out I am satisfied  that
    upon reviewing the decision of the Upper Tribunal it was flawed in  law
    and therefore should be set aside.

35. I am now required to consider the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is plain from the preceding paragraphs  that  the  decision  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  in  effect  upheld  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It therefore follows from my analysis set out above that for
    the same reasons the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  and  that  the
    judge should not have allowed the appeal either outright (as the  Upper
    Tribunal contended it should have been) or remitting  the  decision  to
    the Secretary of State.  There were no grounds to remit the decision as
    being not in accordance with the law on the grounds that it was not  in
    accordance with the law based on arguments of  fairness.   On  applying
    the law as it is now known in Raju and in the Upper Tribunal's decision
    in Nasim, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of
    law in its approach to the Immigration Rules and therefore I set  aside
    that decision.

36. In remaking that decision I have had regard to the grounds  now  raised
    by Mr Azam under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In his Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Tribunal originally following the refusal  of  his  application  he
    stated, "The decision is unlawful as it is incompatible with the rights
    under the ECHR."  No other information or evidence was  given  in  this
    respect in the Grounds of Appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  deal  with
    Article 8.  It is further right to record that despite  the  directions
    issued by the Upper Tribunal concerning evidence relied  upon  relating
    to Article 8 grounds, no evidence was sent by the Respondent to  comply
    with those directions.  Nor in the written submissions made by Mr  Azam
    does he set out any claim made under Article  8.   Nonetheless  I  have
    taken into account the oral submissions made that he has  been  present
    in the UK since 2004 as a student and  that  he  has  studied  for  two
    qualifications during this period of time, he  has  not  committed  any
    criminal offences and has supported himself without recourse to  public
    funds.  He confirmed he had no family in the United Kingdom but that he
    wished to settle in the UK.

37. Insofar as the Article 8 claim is now advanced, I would accept that  he
    has established a private life having been in the UK since  2004.   The
    nature of that private life has not been evidenced  save  that  he  has
    been studying in the United Kingdom, which is demonstrated by the facts
    of this appeal.  The Upper Tribunal in Nasim (2) dealt with  the  issue
    of Article 8 matters.  At paragraph 15 the Tribunal cites the  decision
    of CDS (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 305.  It was noted at paragraph 40 of Nasim
    that  CDS  has  no  material  bearing  as  that   case   involved   the
    interpretation of Immigration Rules rather than the effect  of  changes
    in such Rules.  Furthermore, the Appellant in  CDS  was  faced  with  a
    hypothetical removal, which would have prevented  her  from  completing
    the course of study for which she had been granted leave.  In the  case
    of this Respondent, he has finished the course for which he was granted
    leave to remain and seeks to undertake two years' post-study work.   In
    those circumstances he can be distinguished from the Appellant  in  CDS
    (Brazil).  Furthermore the Tribunal did expressly acknowledge  that  it
    was unlikely that a person would be able to show an Article 8 right  by
    coming to the United Kingdom for temporary purposes, for example  as  a
    student as this  Respondent  has.   Such  a  submission  is  diminished
    further in light of the judgment in Patel and Others (see paragraph  41
    of Nasim and  Others).   The  fact  that  he  had  been  granted  entry
    clearance  for  temporary  purposes  does  not  provide  any  basis  or
    legitimate expectation to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Therefore
    whilst Article 8 is  engaged,  I  would  not  find  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that such removal would be disproportionate but  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate end, namely the operation of a coherent
    and fair system of immigration control.  Accordingly, for those reasons
    I do not find that there is any disproportionate interference with  his
    Article 8 rights  adopting  the  reasoning  in  Nasim  and  Others  and
    therefore the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Decision

38. The decision of the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Judge Monson) is set aside.

39. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ross) involves  the
    making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.   I  remake  the
    appeal against the immigration decision  of  28th  September  2012  and
    dismiss it on all grounds save that the appeal against the  Section  47
    decision under the 2006 Act is allowed as it is not in accordance  with
    the law.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


