
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22667/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 8 May 2015                        |On 14 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs NIRMALADEVY RAJAGOPALAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms F Allen, Counsel (instructed by S Satha & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes  on  19  February  2015
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge S  J  Clarke
         who had  allowed  (to  the  limited  extent  of  finding  that  the
         Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law)
         the Respondent's appeal  against  refusal  of  her  application  to
         remain in the United  Kingdom  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  in  a
         decision and reasons promulgated on 29 December 2014.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Sri  Lanka,  born  on  15  April
         1950.  Her immigration history is set out at [2] and [3]  of  Judge
         Clarke's decision.  She had last entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
         visitor on 1 September 2013, and  had  claimed  that  she  was  too
         unwell to look after herself if she returned.  Judge  Clarke  found
         (see [24] of his decision and reasons) that the Secretary of  State
         had not followed her own Guidance on Human Rights Cases on  Medical
         Grounds.  The Respondent's representatives  had  not  assisted  but
         there had been  a  failure  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek
         clarification about the state of the Respondent's health which  was
         a defect in procedure.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge had erred in law over  the  question
         of whether the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to  have  awaited  the
         submission of a medical report which did not  in  fact  arrive  for
         nine months after the application for  leave  to  remain  had  been
         submitted, i.e., that the  Secretary  of  State  had  followed  her
         guidance in the absence of the report.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error of  law
         were found.

    5.     Notice under rule 24 was served  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
         contesting the  onwards  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  judge's
         findings were correct and that the Secretary of State was on notice
         that the medical evidence was incomplete.

    Submissions - error of law

    6.     Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of
         onwards of appeal and the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   She
         submitted that there had been no diagnosis of Post-traumatic Stress
         Disorder as at the date of the Secretary of State's decision.   The
         Respondent's representatives had not complied with  the  procedures
         required.  The policy guidance had been followed as the judge ought
         to have found.  The judge should have gone on to dismiss the appeal
         outright.

    7.     Ms Allen for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   The
         decision the judge had reached was open to him.   There  was  ample
         material to justify his conclusion  that  the  Secretary  of  State
         ought to have awaited the further medical  report  which  had  been
         promised and ought to have made  enquiries  in  its  absence.   The
         guidance stated that clarification ought to be sought.

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no material error of  law  in  Judge  Clarke's  decision  and
         reserved its determination which now follows.




    No material error of law finding

    9.     The judge rightly noted that  the  Respondent's  representatives
         had not assisted the Secretary of State but at [19] of his decision
         and reasons he  found  that  a  further  medical  report  had  been
         promised, and that it was obvious that the Respondent  had  medical
         problems.   The  report  stating  that  the  Respondent  had  Post-
         traumatic Stress Disorder was not produced until the  hearing,  but
         despite some worrying  features,  the  judge  considered  that  the
         report warranted proper consideration by the Secretary of State  in
         accordance with the guidance.  The judge had in mind the section of
         the relevant guidance headed "Requesting confirmation", where it is
         stated that  clarification  must  [Upper  Tribunal's  emphasis]  be
         sought if it was unclear what  basis  the  applicant  was  applying
         under.

    10.    As the discretion embodied in the relevant guidance is not  part
         of the Immigration Rules, it was not a discretion reviewable by the
         First-tier Tribunal,  still  less  exercisable  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  Nevertheless, there was (as the judge rightly found)  an
         obligation on the Secretary of State to apply her own procedures as
         set out in the guidance before reaching  an  immigration  decision.
         The reasons the judge gave for finding that the  guidance  had  not
         been followed were open to him.  The decision he reached was also a
         practical and sensible one: see [24].

    11.    The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
         of law in the decision and  reasons  and  there  is  no  basis  for
         interfering with the judge's decision.  The Secretary of State must
         accordingly make a fresh immigration decision which follows her own
         guidance.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 8 May 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


