
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA226312015
                                                                 ia226342015
                                                                 ia226402015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2017                                 |On 30 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                     Esther Uche Oare (first appellant)
                          [E O] (second appellant)
                           [V o] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Evans, Legal Representative, Templeton Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant is the
    mother of the  second  and  third  appellants,  who  are  minors.   The
    appellants brought appeals against decisions of the Secretary of  State
    for the Home  Department  to  refuse  to  issue  them  residence  cards
    acknowledging a permanent right  of  residence  in  the  UK  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The first appellant argued she is the family member of an EEA  national
    and that she had resided in the UK in accordance with  the  Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years so as to qualify under Regulation
    15(1)(b).  However, her application was treated as one as  having  been
    made under Regulation  15(1)(f)  by  reference  to  Regulation  10  and
    considered as to whether she had a retained right  of  residence.   The
    reasons for refusal letter which accompanied  the  decisions  explained
    that the appellants had not provided any evidence to show how the first
    appellant's former spouse exercised his Treaty rights at  the  date  of
    divorce.  Nor had the first appellant provided evidence that she was  a
    worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-sufficient  person  for  the
    period 1 November 2010 until 1 November 2013.

 3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

 4. The appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  at  the  Hatton  Cross
    Hearing Centre on 10 October 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal  identified
    the issues in the following way:

         "19. The [first] appellant's appeal can succeed either if  she  can
             show that she has retained rights following the termination of
             her marriage of if she can show that she is the family  member
             of an EEA national who has been exercising Treaty  rights  for
             more than five years."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found there was no evidence to show  the  first
    appellant was divorced, a finding which she agrees with, and  therefore
    proceeded on the basis that she  was  still  a  family  member  of  her
    husband.  The First-tier Tribunal found the evidence given by the first
    appellant regarding her employment between  2010  and  2013  was  "very
    tentative".  The First-tier Tribunal also rejected the claim  that  the
    first appellant had been a victim of domestic violence.  Save  for  the
    oral evidence of the first appellant  the  judge  found  there  was  no
    evidence she was subjected to domestic violence in 2008 or at any other
    time.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the first  appellant  had
    failed to  provide  sufficient  evidence  that  her  husband  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights for at least five years and the appeal  failed
    under Regulation 15(1)(b).

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued in summary:

      1) That the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by inferring that the
         reason the first appellant's application for leave to remain on the
         basis of domestic violence had failed in 2009 was  that  there  had
         been insufficient evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  have
         sight of the reasons for refusal or the notice of decision;

      2) The First-tier Tribunal applied too high a  standard  of  proof  in
         relation to the finding on domestic violence; and

      3) The First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to decide whether removing
         the appellants  would  breach  their  human  rights  with  specific
         reference to Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the
         European Union.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because  it
    appeared to the Judge that the decision and reasons was  silent  as  to
    the standard of  proof  which  had  been  employed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in making its findings.  This was considered an arguable error
    of law. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

 8. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

 9. At the beginning of the hearing, I heard an application from  Mr  Evans
    seeking to widen the grounds.  He sought to include  an  argument  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to  determine  one  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal before it, namely whether the two minor appellants were entitled
    to Austrian citizenship so as to engage Regulation  15(a)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  I refused the application and gave oral  reasons  for  my
    decision.  In essence, whilst this had been raised  in  the  notice  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and Mr Evans informed me he had asked
    the Judge to consider  the  point,  it  had  not  been  raised  in  the
    application to the Home Office and there was insufficient  evidence  to
    enable the Judge  to  make  an  informed  decision  on  the  point.  No
    explanation was provided as to why the point had not been  included  in
    the application for permission to appeal. It appeared to be  an  after-
    thought. If the second and third appellants can show they are  Austrian
    citizens they  can  re-apply  on  that  basis.  Having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it was not in the interests of justice  to  allow
    the appellants to expand their grounds.

10. I then heard oral submissions as to whether the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal was vitiated by a material error of law.

11. Mr Evans argued the case somewhat differently to how it is set  out  in
    the grounds.  His first point was that the judge should  have  remitted
    the case to the Home Office to apply its "pragmatic  approach"  to  the
    evidence of domestic violence.  The pragmatic approach is  a  reference
    to the document issued by the Home Office's European Operational Policy
    Team dated 4 August 2011 issue number 10/2011 (revised).

12. Mr Evans argued it was an error for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    have rejected the available evidence  of  domestic  violence  including
    unchallenged oral evidence from the first appellant and the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge must have applied too high a standard of proof.

13. Secondly he argued that the point  about  human  rights  was  that  the
    Charter of Fundamental Rights should have been applied.   He relied  on
    the case of the Queen on the Application of AB v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] EWHC 3453 (Admin).  He referred  me  to  the
    judgment by Mr Mostyn J, particularly paragraph 14.  He argued that  it
    did not matter there were no removal directions because there had  been
    a change in the statutory landscape since the Upper Tribunal had  ruled
    that Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention could not be raised in an
    appeal brought under the European Regulations.

14. Mr Kandola argued  that  the  Judge's  decision  did  not  contain  any
    material error of law.

15. Having considered the respective submissions of the  representatives  I
    have concluded that the appellants' appeal must  be  dismissed  because
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

16. The point that the judge should have remitted  the  case  to  the  Home
    Office is not in the grounds seeking permission to appeal  and  is  not
    therefore before the Upper Tribunal now.  In any event, I find there is
    nothing in the decision to suggest that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    applied anything other than the balance of probabilities.  In Piglowska
    v Piglowski [1999] UKHL 27 Lord Hoffman, allowing an  appeal  from  the
    Court of Appeal, and restoring the decision of the lower courts  stated
    that:

         "These reasons should be read on the assumption that, unless he has
         demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform his
         functions and which matters he should take into account.   This  is
         particularly true when the matters in question are so well-known...
         .  An appellate court should resist the temptation to  subvert  the
         principle that they should not substitute their own discretion  for
         that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which  enables  them
         to claim that he misdirected himself."

17. By parity of reasoning I regard it as hopeless to  pursue  an  argument
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not direct itself correctly as to  the
    standard of proof simply because it  is  not  stated  anywhere  in  the
    decision.  Nothing in the decision  indicates  a  higher  standard  was
    employed.  The Judge was entitled to infer that the  domestic  violence
    application previously made had failed due to lack  of  evidence  given
    the inability of the appellants to provide more cogent evidence to him.



18. Even if the argument had merit that the Judge  should  have  considered
    other evidence falling short of that described in the bullet points  in
    paragraph 8 of the internal instruction, any error would be  immaterial
    because the Judge noted  at  paragraph  26  of  his  decision  that  it
    appeared  from  the  refusal  letter  that  the  respondent  had   made
    allowances for the difficulties which the first  appellant  might  have
    had in providing information and as she  had  not  provided  sufficient
    details to enable the Home Office to make their enquiries.

19. With regard to the point about human rights, I consider the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct not to consider the ground for the reasons  given.
    As the First-tier Tribunal noted, no removal directions  had  been  set
    and there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  appellants  from  making  an
    application on Article 8 grounds.

20. I see no material distinction in cases where the Charter is  raised  in
    the alternative.

21. In sum, the First-tier Tribunal was correct to  apply  Amirteymour  and
    others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC).  The  Court
    of Appeal subsequently made it clear in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA  Civ
    1233 that where no removal directions have been made Article  8  cannot
    be raised.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a material error of  law
and shall stand.

No anonymity direction has been made.





Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

