
[pic]
IAC-FH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22964/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                          Miss Abimbola Aderehinwo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  15th  May  1982.   Her
    appeal against the refusal of leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore in a decision promulgated on 14th July 2015.

2.   The Appellant appealed on three grounds:

         (i)  the judge wrongly found the Appellant's case to be implausible
             on the basis of his own views and background;

         (ii) the judge erred in failing to give reasons; and

         (iii)    the judge erred in failing to consider the correct issue.

3.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker on 28th October 2015 on the following grounds:

         "It is arguable that the judge did not  take  account  of  cultural
         factors when making findings; failed adequately  to  give  reasons;
         and premised findings on the wrong factual matrix given  the  error
         in the year of entry to the UK at paragraph 25.   All  grounds  are
         arguable."

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal
    on the basis that the judge's reference to 2008  in  paragraph  25  was
    clearly a typographical error because the judge accepted  in  the  same
    paragraph that the Appellant had been in the UK at least from  2003  if
    not before. The judge had carefully considered  the  Appellant's  claim
    and noted several elements which he found to be  implausible  including
    her chance meeting with a friend in 2003 at paragraph 29.  The  judge's
    findings were neither irrational nor  inadequately  reasoned  and  were
    open to him on the evidence. Further, there was no  material  error  in
    the decision given that the Appellant had not claimed  asylum  and  she
    had failed to provide sufficient reasons why she could  not  return  to
    Nigeria.

Submissions

5.   Ms Reid relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  that  given  the
    error in relation to the date at [25] and the lack of reasons there had
    been a lack of care and a lack of scrutiny in the judge's consideration
    of the Appellant's claim.

6.   In relation to ground 1 the Appellant challenges  the  judge's  finding
    at [24] where he states: "I find it  odd,  if  not  unusual,  that  the
    mother of this Appellant opposed the forced marriage to  a  politician,
    but nevertheless allowed it to happen because this was the wish of  the
    Appellant's father."  It was submitted that this finding failed to take
    into account the cultural  context  in  which  the  Appellant's  forced
    marriage took place, in particular the significance of the male as  the
    head of the household which would prevent the Appellant's  mother  from
    being able to stop the marriage.

7.   Ms Reid  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    account was implausible had affected  the  Judge's  assessment  of  her
    credibility. This ground was material because it was  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's family ties in Nigeria and her ability to return.

8.   The judge accepted that the Appellant had used an agent  to  enter  the
    UK, but he did not accept that she had done so  because  she  had  been
    forced into marriage. There was  no  analysis  of  why  the  judge  had
    accepted the use of the agent, but not the forced marriage.  This  lack
    of reasoning rendered the finding at [24] unsafe, not only  because  it
    ignored the cultural context  but  also  because  it  was  inadequately
    reasoned.

9.   In relation to the claimed date of entry the judge had given no  reason
    as to why he did not believe that the Appellant  had  been  here  since
    1998 when he accepted she was here before 2003. This again was material
    because the length of residence was relevant to the Appellant's ability
    to return to Nigeria.

10.  In [29] the judge's reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account  that
    her parents were dead  was  lacking  in  reasons.  The  judge  did  not
    consider the relationship with the Appellant's father  given  that  she
    had been forced into marriage and her mother had been unable to prevent
    it. There was no analysis in [29] as to why the  Appellant  would  have
    support from her family on return.  In summary, the judge  had  reached
    conclusions which were not reasoned and had made  distinctions  without
    an analysis of why he accepted part of the  Appellant's  case  but  not
    others.

11.  Ms Sreeraman relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    finding at [24] was not material to the overall  decision.   The  judge
    had found that the Appellant was not a reliable witness and  had  given
    adequate reasons for his conclusions.  He had set down clearly what  he
    accepted and what he rejected, namely that the Appellant's  mother  had
    helped her leave Nigeria and that she had used an  agent  and  a  false
    passport.  This was consistent with the fact that there was  no  record
    of entry into the UK.

12.  There were adequate reasons in the decision and no  material  error  in
    the judge's assessment of the evidence. The  lack  of  family  ties  in
    itself was not sufficient  for  the  Appellant  to  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The  Appellant's  own  evidence  was  that  she  had
    relatives in Nigeria, aunts and uncles.  It was clear from reading  the
    decision as a whole that the judge's findings were open to him  on  the
    evidence and the errors identified in the  grounds  were  not  material
    even if taken cumulatively.

13.  Ms Reid submitted that the judge had made no mention  of  the  lack  of
    record of the Appellant's entry into the UK and this was not his reason
    for accepting that she had used an agent.   The  judge  had  not  given
    reasons why he accepted the use of the agent but  rejected  the  forced
    marriage and the rejection of the forced marriage was material  to  the
    decision under paragraph 276ADE because it was relevant to the  quality
    of family ties in Nigeria.

Discussion and Conclusions

Ground 1: the judge's finding  that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
subjected to a forced marriage was implausible

14.  I find that the judge's conclusions at [24] were not  material  to  his
    decision under paragraph 276ADE because the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was afraid to return to Nigeria, but not the reason  for  it.
    The Appellant had not made an asylum claim and  therefore  the  reasons
    for not wanting to return to Nigeria were irrelevant.

15.  It has been submitted that  the  findings  at  [24]  were  relevant  to
    family ties in Nigeria.  However, the judge's  findings  at  [29]  deal
    adequately with this issue and, for the reasons  given  below,  I  find
    that the judge has set out adequate reasons why the Appellant still has
    family ties in Nigeria.

Ground 2: the failure to give reasons

16.  I am of the view that the judge has given adequate reasons for  why  he
    does not accept that  the  Appellant's  parents  are  deceased.   Those
    reasons, set out in [29], are that there was no evidence to support the
    Appellant's claim that her parents were dead.  She claimed to have  had
    a chance meeting with a friend in 2003, but there was no evidence  from
    the friend.  She claimed that she had  lost  contact  with  her  mother
    since 2003, but yet she was still unable to give details of how or when
    her mother had died. There was no  evidence  or  death  certificate  to
    support the claim that both parents were  dead  and,  at  the  date  of
    hearing, the Appellant was still unaware of the  claimed  circumstances
    of her parents' death. I find that the judge has given adequate reasons
    for rejecting the Appellant's claim that her parents are deceased.  The
    Appellant had failed to produce evidence which she ought to  have  been
    able to produce if her account were true.

Ground 3: the error in relation to dates or the failure to  give  the  claim
anxious scrutiny

17.  Notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant was  unable  to  show  that
    she entered the UK in 1998, the judge accepted that she had been in the
    UK prior to 2003.  There may well be  a  typographical  error  in  [25]
    which refers to 2008, but it is clear that the judge has  assessed  the
    Appellant's length of residence in the UK on the basis that she entered
    in 2003 or before. This is evident from [30]  where  the  judge  states
    that the Appellant spent the first 16 years of her life, if not longer,
    in Nigeria. The judge accepted that the Appellant may not  have  worked
    in Nigeria, but she attended school there and spent most of her teenage
    life in that country.

18.  Further at [33] the judge states:

         "There is in my view no cultural barriers to such a return  on  the
         part of this  Appellant,  though  I  accept  that  there  would  be
         disruption and some distress having to return to  a  country  where
         this Appellant had not  lived  for  somewhere  between  12  and  16
         years."

19.  The judge clearly assessed the Appellant's length of residence  in  the
    UK at its highest. In  any  event,  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to  length  of
    residence.  It is clear from [34] to [37] that the judge  assessed  the
    Appellant's claimed length of residence of 16 years and he gave anxious
    scrutiny to the situation of her two children.   There  was  indeed  no
    challenge to the judge's findings at [34] onwards.

20.  Accordingly, I find that the Appellant  failed  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence to satisfy paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    judge's findings were open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  There  was  no
    arguable error of law in the decision even if the grounds of appeal are
    taken cumulatively. On the facts asserted, the Appellant  could  return
    to Nigeria and was unable to satisfy the Immigration Rules. The judge's
    reasons at [24] onwards were adequate to support his findings.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 28th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 28th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
