
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th December 2015                 |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                     Chaudhary Muhammad Kashif Siddique
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Chaudhary Muhammad Kashif Siddique, a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born 15th December 1982.  He appeals against the determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio issued on 25th June 2015 setting  out
    his finding that he had no jurisdiction  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 18th June 2014 to
    refuse to grant him asylum.  There were two issues -  the  first  being
    whether or not the form IS151A relied upon by  the  Respondent  had  in
    fact been served and the  second  whether  the  Appellant  had  an  in-
    country right of appeal.  A Judge of the First -tier Tribunal had dealt
    with the second issue as a preliminary  matter  and  had  decided  that
    there was an in-country right of appeal.

 2.  On  18th  September  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox   granted
    permission to appeal.  He said that  having  carefully  considered  the
    decision in relation to the grounds,  he  did  not  find  arguable  the
    ground which suggests that the Judge lacked jurisdiction to "re-decide"
    the issue of  validity  when  another  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    earlier accepted as a preliminary issue that there  was  an  in-country
    right of appeal.  He said it is evident from paragraph 6  that  Counsel
    for the Appellant accepted that the issue of validity  was  still  live
    and needed to be dealt with.  He went on  to  say  that  there  may  be
    arguable merit in the other two contentions in the  grounds.   Firstly,
    there is an issue of fairness arising from  the  Presidential  stay  on
    TOEIC cases and  secondly,  it  may  be  arguable  that  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 13 relied on a finding as to the Respondent's intention as to
    service of an IS151A notice rather than tackling the issue  of  whether
    or when it was actually served.

 3. Briefly the history of this case is that the Appellant had leave  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Migrant valid until 29th July 2013 and  before  expiry
    of this leave he submitted an application for further leave to  remain.
    On 19th May 2014 the  Respondent  served  on  the  Appellant  a  letter
    confirming  refusal  of  his  application  for  further   leave.    The
    Respondent alleges that the decision was  accompanied  by  form  IS151A
    parts 1 and 2.  The Appellant claims he did not receive this.  On  21st
    May 2014 the Appellant lodged an in-country appeal.  On 29th  May  2014
    he made a claim for asylum which was refused with a right of appeal but
    as his appeal against variation of  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  was
    already listed, a second appeal against refusal of asylum could not  be
    lodged.  On 19th August 2014 a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  held  that
    there was an in-country right of appeal and listed the  appeal  for  an
    oral hearing on 16th December 2014.  At that oral  hearing,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio gave directions  to  the  Respondent  to  submit  a
    witness statement from the Immigration Officer who served  the  IS151A.
    He adjourned the hearing and it was relisted for  an  oral  hearing  on
    11th June 2015.  At that hearing a witness statement was  produced  but
    it plainly stated that the  Immigration  Officer  was  not  sure  about
    service of the IS151A.  He simply stated that normal practice would  be
    for it to be  served.   Counsel  for  the  Appellant  in  the  skeleton
    argument and in oral submissions said that the  issue  of  a  right  of
    appeal had already been decided and it  could  not  be  revisited.   Mr
    Avery did not press the matter to any great extent.

Findings on error of law.

 4. With regard to the service of the IS151A there is no evidence that this
    has been served. It seems that Judge Adio accepted that normal practice
    would be for it to be served.   What he said was that it is clear  that
    the Respondent intended to serve it, the implication  being  that  this
    was sufficient. He appears not to have considered that it was  for  the
    Respondent to prove that they  had  been  served  but  they  could  not
    confirm the date they thought it was served or the actual service.

 5. I accept that Judge Adio did attempt to give reasons for going  against
    the previous finding of a First-tier Tribunal Judge that there  was  an
    in-country right of appeal.  He did say that  both  parties  considered
    the matter still to be open but this is surprising.

 6. At paragraph 13 Judge Adio said:

         "In view of the statement of the Immigration Officer that he  would
         normally serve the IS151A and part 2 first and the fact  that  both
         the refusal letter and the IS151A and part 2 are all  connected  to
         each other towards making  a  decision  under  Section  10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 I find that the intention all along
         was to serve the Appellant with a  Section  10  decision  and  that
         entitles him only to an out of country right of appeal."

 7. I cannot agree with that.   It is imperative that the IS151A is  served
    on the Appellant. I cannot find otherwise than that the way this appeal
    has been  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  resulted  in
    unfairness to the Appellant.  Not only did he have a  decision  in  his
    favour i.e. that he had a in-country right of  appeal  which  was  then
    taken from him but the finding was made that it is sufficient  for  the
    Respondent to have a practice in force and to have intended to serve an
    IS151A for the Appellant to have been found to have been aware that  he
    was to leave the country and had  only  an  out  of  country  right  of
    appeal.  This cannot be so.

 8. In all the circumstances I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing de novo before a Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

