
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22189/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                      Mrs Michelle Vanessa Orlean Davis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe, Counsel instructed by Apex
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Jamaica,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7th October
    2013 to refuse her application for leave to remain on the basis of  her
    private and family life  in  the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  CM
    Phillips  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  Appellant  now   appeals   with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  put  forward  two  main
    grounds on which it is contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law.  It is contended in the first ground that the  judge  did
    not properly assess documentary evidence put forward in relation to the
    Appellant's spouse's employment to  support  the  contention  that  the
    Appellant was  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15A of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  (hereinafter
    the EEA Regulations).

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Anifowoshe accepted that this ground  could
    not succeed as, even if the Appellant could demonstrate  that  her  EEA
    national spouse (who has been in  France  since  2011)  had  previously
    resided in the UK as a worker, it could not  be  established  that  the
    child was in education in the UK at a time when the EEA national parent
    was in the  United  Kingdom  as  required  by  Regulation  15A(3).   Ms
    Anifowoshe properly conceded this issue as the Appellant cannot succeed
    under Regulation 15A and this Ground of Appeal has no substance.

 4. The second Ground of Appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in her assessment of Article 8 of the ECHR.  It is contended  that  the
    judge's approach was too narrow in her assessment of  the  family  life
    between the Appellant and her adult daughter and did not  take  account
    of the circumstances  of  the  family  which  are  that,  although  the
    Appellant's daughter is an adult, she lives with her mother  and  half-
    sibling.   It  is  further  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    application  of  the  case  of  Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT   000282   in
    considering the previous decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Coutts
    relating to this Appellant. Judge Coutts had allowed the appeal of  the
    Appellant's daughter outright  and  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under Article  8  but  allowed  it  to  the  extent  that  the  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 were not in accordance with the law.

 5. Before me Ms Anifowoshe contended that the judge erred in  relation  to
    the assessment of the family life with her adult daughter.   The  judge
    dealt with this issue at paragraph 78 of the decision.   Ms  Anifowoshe
    contended that the judge's finding at paragraphs 78  and  79  conflicts
    with the findings made by Judge Coutts.  She referred to  paragraph  31
    of the decision of Judge Coutts where the judge said:

         "I accept  that  my  decision  places  the  first  Appellant  in  a
         different  situation  from  that  of  her  daughter,   the   second
         Appellant.  However, the second Appellant is now of majority and is
         not dependent upon the first Appellant; their family life  is  able
         to continue at a distance when the first Appellant leaves here; the
         same  applies  in  respect  of  contact  with  her  brother,  Enzo.
         Alternatively, the  second  Appellant  is  able  to  make  her  own
         informed decision as to what is best for  her;  she  may  therefore
         decide to leave the United Kingdom with  her  mother  and  brother,
         returning to Jamaica or relocating to France; however,  that  is  a
         matter for her."

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips said at paragraph 78:

         "The Appellant's daughter is older than she was at the time of  the
         previous determination when it was found that there was no  Article
         8  family  life  with  the  Appellant  and  the  EEA  child.    The
         Appellant's daughter is working, has a partner,  a  father  in  the
         United Kingdom with whom she is in contact and she is  expecting  a
         child.  Although she said that she lives  with  the  Appellant  she
         also said that she has a partner and the Appellant is close so that
         she sees them every day.  I find that there is no  Kugathas  [2003]
         EWCA  Civ  31  dependency  making  the  relationships  between  the
         Appellant and her daughter and the EEA child and  his  half-sibling
         more than that normally enjoyed and which do not amount to  Article
         8 family life."

 7. Judge Phillips went on to  find  at  paragraph  79:  "I  find,  as  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal Judge did that the Appellant and  her  EEA
    child  do  not  share  Article  8  family  life  with  the  Appellant's
    daughter."  Ms Anifowoshe contended that  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Phillips at paragraphs 78 and 79 contradict  those  made
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts at paragraph 31.

 8. I do not accept that submission.  It  is  clear  from  reading  all  of
    paragraph 31 that although Judge Coutts referred to "their family life"
    he did not accept that the relationship between the Appellant  and  her
    daughter amounts to a relationship  that  comes  within  the  terms  of
    Kugathas being one that is over and above the normal dependency between
    a parent and their adult child.   There  is  no  conflict  between  the
    findings made by Judge Phillips and those made by Judge Coutts.

 9. Judge Phillips properly applied Devaseelan,  taking  into  account  the
    findings of the first judge and going on to make  further  findings  in
    relation to  the  up-to-date  position  since  that  first  hearing  at
    paragraphs 71 to 78 in relation to family life and at paragraphs 80  to
    100 in relation to private life.

10. Ms Anifowoshe further contended that the judge failed to properly  take
    account of the relationship between the Appellant  and  her  son.   She
    submitted that the judge failed to take into account the fact that  the
    Appellant's son, who is a French national, does not need to satisfy the
    Immigration Rules. She submitted that the judge refers at paragraph  76
    to the family reuniting in France but failed to take into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant is a Jamaican national and cannot enter  France
    from the UK. I asked Ms Anifowoshe if this matter had been  put  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and she accepted that it had  not.   The  judge
    had no evidence on which to make any finding that the  Appellant  could
    not enter France in order to be reunited with her husband  there.   The
    judge could not have made a finding to that effect in  the  absence  of
    evidence.  Despite her assertion Ms  Anifowoshe  did  not  produce  any
    evidence to the effect that the  Appellant  is  unable  to  obtain  the
    necessary permission to enter France and I do not accept that this is a
    relevant consideration in the absence of evidence to that effect before
    the judge.

11. I have considered the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  a
    whole and I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  made  clearly  sustainable
    findings which were properly reached.  It was open to the judge to find
    that there was no family life  between  the  Appellant  and  her  adult
    daughter.  The judge considered all of the circumstances of  the  child
    and the family and reached sustainable conclusions and I  am  satisfied
    that no error of law has been identified in the decision.

12. Ms Anifowoshe finally submitted that as the child is  an  EEA  national
    the Appellant has a right to remain in the UK in  accordance  with  the
    decision in Case c-200/02 Chen [2004] ECR I-9925.  However, I indicated
    that this issue had not been put to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and
    that in any event that issue was not before me.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
