


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22033/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 11 November 2014                          |On: 12 November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               muhammad rehan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Justmount & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on  12  March  1987,  has  been
   given permission to appeal against the determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
   refuse to issue him with a residence card under the Immigration (European
   Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

2. The appellant is considered by the respondent to have entered the  United
   Kingdom on a two year spouse visa issued in Islamabad and valid  from  18
   October 2005 until 18 October 2007. On 22 October  2007  he  applied  for
   leave to remain outside the immigration rules on  compassionate  grounds,
   but his application was refused on 7 December 2007. On 17  December  2007
   he made an application for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his  human
   rights, but that application was refused on  15  December  2008.  He  was
   served with an IS.151A notice. On 5 April  2012  he  claimed  asylum  but
   subsequently  withdrew  his  claim  in  April  2014,  after   making   an
   application on 28 April 2014 for a residence card as the extended  family
   member of his uncle, a Belgian national.

3. The appellant's application was refused on 14 May  2014  on  the  grounds
   that there was no evidence of financial  dependency  upon,  or  residence
   with, the EEA national sponsor either prior to or subsequent to his entry
   to the United Kingdom. It was also considered that there was no  evidence
   that his uncle was exercising treaty rights as a  qualified  person.  The
   respondent went on to consider Article 8 but concluded that  removal  was
   proportionate. The appellant, having come to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
   spouse, had provided no evidence to support his claim to  have  been  the
   victim of domestic violence from  his  spouse  and  no  evidence  of  his
   relationship with his uncle and his claimed dependency upon his uncle.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on
   7 August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins.  The  judge  was  not
   satisfied that the appellant's relationship to his EEA sponsor  had  been
   established or that the EEA national was exercising treaty rights in  the
   United  Kingdom.  Neither  was  she  satisfied  that  prior  and  present
   dependency upon the EEA sponsor had  been  demonstrated.  She  considered
   that the appellant had manipulated the 2006 EEA regulations in  order  to
   remain in the United Kingdom and concluded that the respondent's decision
   was in accordance with the law and the immigration rules.  She  dismissed
   the appeal.

5. Permission to appeal that decision was sought on  the  grounds  that  the
   judge had failed to take into account the fact that the appellant had had
   no entitlement to work and had therefore been dependent  upon  his  uncle
   and had failed to make findings on Article 8.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 29  September  2014  on  the  grounds
   that the judge had arguably erred  by  not  determining  the  appellant's
   Article 8 claim.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. At the hearing I heard submissions on the error of law.

8. Mr Ahmed submitted that there was sufficient evidence  before  the  judge
   to demonstrate the relationship between the appellant and his uncle.  The
   fact that the appellant was not working was sufficient evidence in itself
   to demonstrate that he was financially  dependent  upon  his  uncle.  The
   question of whether the EEA national was exercising treaty rights was not
   in issue. The judge's reasons for finding that the  appellant  could  not
   meet the requirements of the EEA regulations were inadequate. With regard
   to Article 8, the judge erred by  failing  to  consider  the  appellant's
   claim in that respect. Mr Ahmed accepted that  the  appellant  could  not
   meet the requirements of the private and family  life  immigration  rules
   but submitted that there were compelling reasons for leave to be  granted
   outside the rules, namely his length of time in the United  Kingdom,  his
   relationship with his uncle and the EU element of his case.

9. Ms Kenny submitted that the judge had given full reasons  for  concluding
   that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the   EEA
   regulations.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  was  not  working  was  an
   insufficient basis to conclude that the burden of proving dependency  had
   been established. With regard to Article 8, there was no  material  error
   of law as the appellant had not established a private or family  life  in
   the United Kingdom and there was no basis upon which the claim could have
   succeeded on the evidence produced.

10. Mr Ahmed informed me that the appellant's uncle was present  and  wished
   to give oral evidence as he had not had an opportunity to  do  so  before
   the First-tier Tribunal. However I considered that the error of law could
   be dealt with without oral evidence and pointed out to Mr Ahmed that  the
   judge's refusal to adjourn the proceedings because the appellant's  uncle
   had  had  to  leave  early  before  giving  any  evidence  had  not  been
   challenged.

11. I advised the parties that, in my view, there was no  error  of  law  in
   the judge's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

12. Mr Ahmed asserted in his submissions  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
   adequate reasons for finding that the requirements of the EEA regulations
   had not been met. However that is clearly not the case.

13. At paragraphs 39 and 40 of her determination Judge Martins,  having  set
   out in detail the evidence before her, gave clear and cogent reasons  why
   she found the  appellant  to  be  lacking  in  credibility  and  why  she
   considered there to be insufficient evidence to demonstrate  the  claimed
   relationship between himself and his EEA national. She was entitled,  for
   the reasons given, to conclude that the family tree relied  upon  by  the
   appellant did not adequately demonstrate  the  claimed  relationship  and
   noted  the  absence  of  further  supporting  evidence  such   as   birth
   certificates.

14. At paragraph 41 the judge gave clear and cogent reasons  for  concluding
   that the appellant had failed to show that his sponsor  was  a  qualified
   person under the EEA regulations. Mr Ahmed submitted that that was not an
   issue before the judge, but it is clear  from  the  respondent's  refusal
   letter that the sponsor's  status  under  the  regulations,  as  a  self-
   employed person, was not accepted, albeit that that was addressed in  the
   section relevant to Article 8 of the  ECHR.  The  judge  was  accordingly
   perfectly entitled to make the findings that she did in that respect.

15. At paragraph 42 of her determination the judge  went  on  to  find,  for
   reasons clearly and cogently given, that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
   demonstrate the required dependency upon his uncle  either  prior  to  or
   since coming to the United  Kingdom.  I  find  no  merit  in  Mr  Ahmed's
   submission that the fact that the appellant was not working was in itself
   sufficient to demonstrate dependency upon his uncle. There was plainly  a
   lack of satisfactory evidence before the judge  to  meet  the  burden  of
   proof upon the appellant and she was entitled to reject his claim for the
   reasons given.

16. In the circumstances it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  was  perfectly
   entitled to reach the conclusions that she did  on  the  evidence  before
   her. Her finding, that the appellant was an entirely  unreliable  witness
   and had been dishonest in his manipulation of the  EEA  regulations,  was
   one that was open to her on the evidence and was supported by  clear  and
   cogent reasons.

17. With regard to Article 8, the judge was plainly  aware  of  the  grounds
   relating to that claim, as specifically referred to at  paragraph  15  of
   her determination. Whilst she did not make any specific findings in  that
   regard, it is  plain  from  her  conclusion  at  paragraph  45  that  the
   respondent's decision was in accordance with the law and the  immigration
   rules, that she found the claim not to have been made out. In  any  event
   there was no basis upon which the appellant could have succeeded in  such
   a claim on the evidence before the judge. The judge did not  accept  that
   the appellant was related to the EEA national  and  in  any  event  found
   there to be no dependency. There was accordingly no evidence  before  her
   of family life established in  the  United  Kingdom.  Mr  Ahmed  properly
   accepted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the family
   and private life immigration rules. There  was  nothing  further  in  the
   evidence before the judge to consider in the context of Article 8 outside
   the  rules  and  certainly  nothing  demonstrating  any  exceptional   or
   compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave.

18. With regard to Mr Ahmed's submission that the EEA national ought  to  be
   given an opportunity to give evidence  to  demonstrate  a  basis  for  an
   Article 8 claim, it is clear that he had such an opportunity  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal but chose instead to leave the hearing  early.  There
   has been no  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  not  to  adjourn  the
   proceedings to enable him to give evidence on another occasion and indeed
   such a decision was properly made.

19. For all of these  reasons  I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  was  a
   detailed and careful one, including a full assessment of all the evidence
   and cogently reasons findings that were  properly  open  to  her  on  the
   evidence before her and that it contains no errors of law.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 11 November
2014
