
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22498/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2015                           |On 25th March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Festus Kulne Akinwolemiwa
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms W Bremang, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Akinwolemiwa is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is recorded
    as 7th August 1970.  He entered the United Kingdom on 10th October 2009
    as a visitor.  On 25th  September  2012,  on  the  basis  of  marriage,
    application was made on his behalf for a residence card as confirmation
    of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.  On 6th May 2014 a decision
    was made to refuse the application and so Mr Akinwolemiwa appealed.  On
    27th October 2014 his appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Ferguson, who in a statement of  reasons  allowed  the  appeal
    without qualification.

 2. By notice  dated  20th  November  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  made
    application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  one
    ground, namely  that  in  reliance  on  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 and having regard to  the  guidance  in  the  case  of
    Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 it was not  open  to
    the judge to allow the appeal.  That  was  because  the  discretion  in
    circumstances such as this  lies  only  with  the  Secretary  of  State
    consistent with Directive 2004/38/EC.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shimmin on 12th January 2015.
     There is no issue in this case.  There was an error of law.  The judge
    ought to have remitted the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    better course would have been for a decision to say that the appeal  is
    allowed to the limited extent that it is remitted to the  Secretary  of
    State to exercise her discretion.  In the circumstances I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake it such that the  matter
    is to be remitted to the Secretary of State for  consideration  in  the
    light of the finding made by the judge.  I observe, if it  assists  the
    Secretary of State in making  her  decision  in  the  exercise  of  her
    discretion, that the only ground upon  which  the  matter  was  brought
    before the Upper Tribunal was in respect of  the  discretion  and  that
    none of the findings of fact were challenged.

Notice of Decision

There was a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed.   The  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade  such  that  the  matter  is
remitted to the Secretary of State.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

