
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22030/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |                           |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 17th April 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     mT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Pipe of Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of Judge P
    J M Hollingworth made following a hearing  at  Stoke-on-Trent  on  17th
    December 2013.





Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  He arrived in the  UK  on  30th
    August 2008 on a student visa  valid  to  31st  October  2010  and  was
    subsequently issued with further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student
    until 28th February 2013.

 3. He made an in time application to vary his leave on the  basis  of  his
    marriage to K K who was present and settled in the UK, having come here
    as the dependant of a refugee. K K had a child, S,  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  She has no contact with her biological father and  the  judge
    found that S is not aware that the claimant is not her natural father.

 4. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  couple  intended  to
    live permanently in the UK together because the claimant  worked  part-
    time in the south of England.  She also refused  him  with  respect  to
    paragraph EX.1(a) and (b)  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The judge found that the  couple  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and there is no challenge to that aspect of  his  decision
    by the Secretary of State.

 6. The judge said that he had  carefully  considered  the  application  of
    Section 55 in the light of the evidence  which  he  had  accepted.   It
    would not be reasonable to expect S to leave  the  UK.   He  stated  as
    follows:-

         "I have  already  found  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his wife who is in  the  UK.   I  find
         that there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  the
         Appellant's wife continuing outside the UK.  The  Appellant's  wife
         must remain in the UK to care for us for the reasons I have  given.
         I find the requirements  of  the  Rules  are  met.   The  necessary
         elements are  fulfilled.   I  accept  the  submissions  of  Learned
         Counsel.

         I find that in any  event  the  Appellant's  wife  is  in  tertiary
         education having come to the UK as the dependant of a  refugee.   I
         do not find on a further  and  separate  basis  that  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.  I find on  this  further
         and separate basis that this establishes an insurmountable obstacle
         to family life being led with the Appellant outside the UK.

         In case I am in error as to the  findings  set  out  above  and  in
         relation to the Rules I have proceeded to  consider  whether  there
         would be a breach of Article 8."

 7. The judge then set out the relevant law and stated that he attached due
    weight to the applicability of the Rules.  He then wrote:

         "It would not be reasonable to expect S as  a  British  citizen  to
         relocate.  S requires her mother to remain with her in  the  UK  to
         care for her in the light of her age.  The Appellant  has  been  in
         the UK since 2008.  I accept that he has a good immigration history
         and has always had leave to remain.  I find  that  the  Appellant's
         wife is pursuing her  education  with  a  view  to  practising  the
         profession which she wishes to join when she qualifies.   I  accept
         that the Appellant's wife came to the UK under the Refugee  Reunion
         provisions as her parents had passed away.  The Appellant's wife is
         undertaking a degree course.

         I find that the Appellant and his wife are committed to each  other
         and intend to live permanently with each other.  I  have  given  my
         reasons for this finding above.  I find  there  are  insurmountable
         obstacles to the Appellant's  life  with  his  wife  continuing  in
         Zimbabwe for the reasons I have given.  The expert  report  of  Mrs
         Pearce demonstrates the evidential  basis  for  and  justifies  the
         conclusions set out in that report as to the best interests  of  S.
         I find that it would be disproportionate for the  Appellant  to  be
         removed.  I find there would be a breach of the Article 8 rights of
         the Appellant's wife and of the Article 8 rights of S to  a  family
         life.  I find for the same reasons that there would be a breach  of
         the Article 8 rights of the Appellant to a family life."

 8. On that basis he allowed the appeal  under  the  Rules  and  Article  8
    principles generally.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had given inadequate reasons for  his  decision.   The  judge
    finds that the claimant's wife is in tertiary education having come  to
    the UK as  the  dependant  of  a  refugee.   Contrary  to  the  judge's
    assertion, this  does  not  establish  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles.  There is  no  provision  under  Article  8  in  respect  of
    education and it would be open to the wife to seek comparable education
    in Zimbabwe if she so wishes.  Her status as the dependant of a refugee
    does not automatically imply that she could  not  travel  to  Zimbabwe.
    The judge makes no findings on any real risks that she may  be  exposed
    to nor makes any  findings  on  whether  these  risks  are  of  present
    relevance to the instant appeal.  Furthermore, the  best  interests  of
    the child are realised by remaining with her mother and this  would  be
    possible in Zimbabwe.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Pinkerton  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 19th February 2014.

The Hearing

11. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge had given
    inadequate reasons for his decision.

12. Mr Pipe submitted that the Secretary of State's grounds were  simply  a
    reasons challenge.  He relied on the decision in  Shahzad  (sufficiency
    of reasons: satisfy) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  where  the  President
    stated:

         "We would emphasise that although there is a legal duty to  give  a
         brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on  which
         the appeal is determined, such reasons need not be extensive if the
         decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
         accepted by the judge.  Although a decision may contain an error of
         law where the requirements to give adequate reasons  are  not  met,
         this Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the fact-
         finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  country
         guidance is taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  that  the
         judge draws from the primary data before him  were  not  reasonably
         open to him."

13. Mr Pipe also relied on the decision in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 where the Master of the Rolls said:

         "In view of the concession made before the UT the question  of  the
         meaning of insurmountable obstacles does not arise.  We did however
         hear  argument  on  the  point.    We   would   observe   that   if
         insurmountable  obstacles  are  literally  obstacles  which  it  is
         impossible to surmount their scope  is  very  limited  indeed.   We
         shall confine ourselves to saying that we incline to the view that,
         for the reasons stated in detail by the UT in Izuazu at  paragraphs
         53 to 59, such a stringent approach would be  contrary  to  Article
         8."

14. Mr Pipe submitted that the judge had  made  comprehensive  findings  of
    fact on the basis both of the oral evidence and on the social  worker's
    report.  It was clearly in the interests of the British  citizen  child
    to remain in the UK. In the First-tier, reliance had been made  on  the
    case of Sanade and Others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2011]
    UKUT 48 that it could not be argued by the Secretary of State  that  it
    would be reasonable for the child to live in Zimbabwe.

15. He submitted that the Secretary of State had  failed  to  identify  any
    factor which had not properly been taken into account and that taken as
    a whole the judge had reached a decision open to him supported by clear
    sustainable and logical reasons.

Findings and Conclusions

16. Under paragraph EX.1, this paragraph applies if -

    (a)(i)    The  applicant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child who -

         (aa) is under the age of 18 years;

         (bb) is in the UK;

         (cc) is a British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for
             at least the seven years immediately  preceding  the  date  of
             application; and

       (ii)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK; or

    (b)  The applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian  protection  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

17. It seems that the author of the grounds directs his  challenge  to  the
    consideration of the position of the wife and, had the sole  basis  for
    this decision been paragraph 32 of the determination, namely  the  fact
    that she is in  tertiary  education  having  come  to  the  UK  as  the
    dependant of a refugee, it may well be arguable that the reasoning  was
    not adequate.

18. However, it is clear that the primary reason  for  this  appeal  having
    been allowed was the position of S. It was plainly open to the judge to
    find that it would not be reasonable to expect S to  leave  the  UK  as
    conceded in the  case  of  Sanade.   Therefore,  even  if  the  judge's
    reasoning in respect of EX.1(b) was lacking since he  was  entitled  to
    allow the appeal with respect to EX.1(a) any error is immaterial.

19. In any event the  grounds  do  not  appear  to  challenge  the  judge's
    reasoning with respect to Article 8 outside the Rules  and  Mr  Diwnycz
    made no submission that the judge's findings were not open to him.

20. There is no misdirection  in  law  and  no  reason  to  set  aside  the
    decision.

Decision

21. The judge's decision stands.  The Secretary of State's challenge  fails
    and the claimant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

