
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22919/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          jabir gulam ibrahim akku
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Ms A B Faryl, instructed by M A Consultants
    (Blackburn)
    For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Jabir Gulam Ibrahim Akku, was born on 8 April  1979  and
    is a male citizen of India.  By a  decision  dated  10  May  2014,  the
    respondent   refused   the   appellant's   application   for    further
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his
    relationship with his children (J and Z).  A decision was also made  to
    remove the appellant by way of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  appellant  had
    entered the United Kingdom in November 2000 with leave to remain  as  a
    visitor.  He had remained in the United Kingdom for eight years  beyond
    the expiry of that visit visa without making any attempt to  regularise
    his immigration status.  He left the United Kingdom in April  2008  but
    returned again in October 2008 with leave to remain (until 26  December
    2010) as the spouse of a British citizen.   On  5  February  2011,  the
    appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain  until  4  February
    2014 as the parent of British children subject to conditions in respect
    of employment and recourse to public  funds.   Whilst  that  leave  was
    extant, the appellant applied for further leave to remain on the  basis
    of his parental relationship.  It is  that  application  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 2. The refusal letter of 10 May 2014 records that "the Home Office Policy"
    (more specifically IDI: Transitional Provisions (Chapter 8 -  paragraph
    3.3)) provides that;

         "... applicants who were  granted  leave  under  the  Discretionary
         Leave Policy before 9 July 2012  will  continue  to  be  considered
         under the Discretionary Leave Policy through to settlement provided
         they continue to qualify for leave and their circumstances have not
         changed."

    The letter went on to state:

         "... you were previously granted DL [Discretionary  Leave]  on  the
         basis of your parental relationship with your children and that you
         had a contact order in place allowing you access  rights  to  them.
         However, you have now provided a contact  order  dated  12  January
         2012 stating that you are to have indirect contact only, by way  of
         telephone calls and letters.  You therefore no longer  have  direct
         access rights to your children, so the  circumstances  under  which
         you were granted DL no longer subsist.   Your  application  for  an
         extension of Discretionary Leave is therefore refused."

    The letter proceeded to consider  Appendix  FM.   Paragraph  R-LTRPT1.1
    provides:

         R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited or indefinite
         leave to remain as a parent or partner are-
            (a)   the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
            (b)   the applicant must have made a valid application for
            limited or indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner;
            and either
            (c)   (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
            S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and
                (ii)   the applicant meets all of the requirements of
                Section ELTRPT: Eligibility for leave to remain as a parent,
                or
            (d)   (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under S-LTR:
            Suitability leave to remain; and
                (ii)   the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E- LTRPT.3.1.; and
                (iii)  paragraph EX.1. applies.


         E-LTRPT.2.4.
            (a)   The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-


                (i)    sole parental responsibility for the child, or that
                the child normally lives with them; or
                (ii)   access rights to the child; and
            (b)   The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
            and intend to continue to, take an active role in the child's
            upbringing.

    The refusal letter asserted that the appellant had;

         "... not shown that you have access rights to  your  children  only
         indirect contact.  As a result of this you are unable  to  take  an
         active role in their upbringing.  Your telephone calls and  letters
         can continue unchanged from overseas as can your child  maintenance
         payments and any contact you have with the children's  school.   As
         such, you fail to meet the requirements of E-LTRPT 2.4."

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge McGinty) which, in a determination promulgated on  11  September
    2014, dismissed the appeal.  The arguments  contained  in  the  refusal
    letter found favour with Judge McGinty.  He noted the  contents  of  an
    order made in the Bolton County Court by District Judge Swindley  dated
    12 January 2012 which provided at [2]:

         "2.  The mother do permit the children  to  have  indirect  contact
             with their father Jabir Gulam Ibrahim Akku

             (i)  by telephone each Wednesday at 7.45pm;

             (ii)  by  occasional  letters  and  gifts  at  the  children's
                  birthdays, religious festivals etc."

    Judge McGinty considered that the contact referred to in the order  was
    "indirect contact" and went on to state:

         "... contact may be maintained by means of gifts, letters and phone
         calls irrespective of  where  the  appellant  himself  is  located,
         whether this be in the United Kingdom or  in  India  and  it  seems
         clear that the purpose behind the Rule in requiring  access  rights
         to the child or simply contact with the child  as  it  is  only  in
         circumstances where the father has access rights to the  child  and
         is actually therefore  physically  seeing  the  children  that  his
         presence in the United Kingdom is thereby necessary and required in
         order for him to be able to physically have access to the  children
         and to be able  to  enjoy  his  access  rights.   However,  as  the
         appellant does not have access rights to the children  but  only  a
         right to indirect contact, he sadly does not meet the  requirements
         of paragraph E-LTRPT2.4."

 4. Mr McVeety, for the respondent, submitted that the judge's construction
    of the  Rule  was  correct.  Finally,  Ms  Faryl  referred  me  to  the
    provisions of the previous Rule, paragraph 248A which  provided,  inter
    alia, for a successful applicant to provide evidence that;

         "... he has access rights to the child in the form of  a  Residence
         Order or a contact order granted by a court in the  United  Kingdom
         or  a  certificate  issued  by  a  District  Judge  confirming  the
         applicant's intention to make contact with the child."

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. Mr McVeety told me that, if the judge's  treatment  of  "indirect"  and
    "direct" contact and the construction of "access rights" in Appendix FM
    were to be found to be incorrect then, on the particular facts of  this
    appeal, the appellant should be entitled to a grant of further leave to
    remain.  He  accepted  that  this  appeal  turned   upon   the   proper
    construction of the words "access rights to the child"; if  the  latest
    "indirect" contact order was  found  to  be  sufficient  proof  of  the
    appellant having "access rights" to his children  then  the  respondent
    was prepared to accept that the appellant was "taking,  and  intend  to
    continue to, take an active role in the child's upbringing." I am aware
    that Mr McVeety's observations were limited to the facts in the instant
    case and were not intended to be a concession of general application.

 7. So far as the respondent's policy  is  concerned,  I  accept  that  the
    change in the nature of the  appellant's  contact  with  his  child  as
    evidenced in the latest court order arguably does represent a change in
    his circumstances thereby ending the appellant's entitlement to rely on
    the policy. I have proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  must
    satisfy the current provisions of Appendix FM if he is  to  succeed  in
    this appeal.

 8. In family law, prior to 1989, "access" referred to the right of a child
    to maintain a relationship with a parent or other relative with whom he
    or she did not live.  The Children Act  1989  (Section  8)  effected  a
    change of nomenclature by introducing "contact orders", defined as  "an
    order requiring the person with whom the child lives or is to live,  to
    allow the child a visit or stay with the person named in the  order  or
    for that person of the  child  otherwise  to  have  contact  with  each
    other." "Contact orders" have, in turn, now  been  replaced,  since  22
    April 2014, by the provisions of the Children and  Families  Act  2014.
    Section 12 of that Act provides for the making of a "child arrangements
    order" (CAO) defined as an order which "regulates arrangements relating
    to any of the following: (a) with whom a child is to live,  spend  time
    or otherwise have contact; and (b) where a child is to live, spend time
    or otherwise have contact with any  person".  The  word  "contact"  is,
    therefore, now only used in reference to "indirect"(as opposed to  face
    to face) communication between a parent and child; many  family  judges
    and practitioners have begun to refer to "live with"  orders  (formerly
    residence) and "spend time with" orders (that  is,  "direct"  contact).
    The word "access" no longer appears  in  family  legislation.  However,
    because it appears in the current  E-LTRPT.2.4, I shall from this point
    in my decision use "access" rather than "contact" or "spend  time  with
    or otherwise have contact with"

 9. There is no reason why the Immigration Rules should  necessarily  adopt
    the same legal principles and terminology used in family  law  although
    it is apparent that the Rules  have,  albeit  belatedly,  attempted  to
    reflect changes in family legislation (e.g. the change from "access" to
    "contact" although, oddly, that change has been reversed  in  the  most
    recent changes to the  Immigration  Rules.).  In  some  instances,  the
    Children Act provides the only source for interpreting the  Rules;  for
    example, neither Appendix FM nor paragraph 6 (Interpretation) of HC 395
    provide a definition of the expression "parental responsibility" so  it
    must follow that it has the meaning given to it by  section  3  of  the
    Children Act 1989 ("parental  responsibility"  means  all  the  rights,
    duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which by law a parent of
    a child has in relation to the child and his property"). Moreover,  the
    former paragraph 284 clearly sought to take account of section 1(5)  of
    the Children Act 1989 which provides that:

         "Where a court is considering whether or not to make  one  or  more
         orders under this Act with respect to a child, it  shall  not  make
         the order or any of the orders unless it considers  that  doing  so
         would be better for the child than making no order at all."

    Where arrangements are made by agreement between  parents,  there  will
    often be no  court  order  so  paragraph  284  made  provision  for  an
    applicant for leave to remain to  apply  to  a  district  judge  for  a
    certificate confirming an applicant's "intention to have contact with a
    child." The fact the Immigration Rules have sought to reflect and adopt
    changes in primary family legislation indicates that  that  legislation
    may  assist  in  the  construction  of  those  Rules  which  deal  with
    applications by those seeking leave to enter or remain on the basis  of
    their relationship with children living in the United Kingdom.

10. In this appeal, Judge McGinty concluded that the  Bolton  County  Court
    order did not constitute "evidence  that  [the  appellant]  has  access
    rights to" his children.  There is, however, nothing in the wording  of
    the Rule to justify such a construction.  As  I  have  noted  above,  a
    "contact order" under the 1989 Act covered both visiting  and  "staying
    contact" but also circumstances where "the person and the child [might]
    otherwise have contact with each other".  Likewise, Section 12  of  the
    Children and Families Act 2014 refers to  a  child,  "living,  spending
    time or otherwise having contact with any person"  [my  emphasis].   No
    distinction is made between  "direct"  and  "indirect"  access  in  the
    primary  family  legislation  nor  is  any  plainly  indicated  in  the
    expression "access  rights."   If  it  had  been  intended  to  make  a
    qualitative distinction between face  to  face  access  and  "indirect"
    access by telephone calls and letters, then such  a  distinction  could
    have been included, expressed in unambiguous language,  in  the  Rules.
    Furthermore, in the context of family law, it is often the case that an
    "indirect" access order  may  be  intended  as  a  preliminary  to  the
    development (often guided by the courts and CAFCASS) of more  extensive
    access over time. "Indirect"  access  orders  may  be  made  when,  for
    example, a young child has not seen a parent for a long time and  needs
    to re-establish a relationship before moving on to spending  time  (and
    staying) with that parent. Such a process would be brought to an end if
    the parent is removed from the United Kingdom. On  the  other  hand,  a
    court may deny a parent "direct" access because, for example, there has
    been a history of domestic abuse which has had a detrimental impact  on
    the child's welfare. It is important, therefore, that, where the Family
    Court has ordered "indirect" access only, it may be necessary  for  the
    Tribunal (in order to determine whether an appellant  can  satisfy  the
    "active role" provision) to examine the reasons why it has done so.

11. Mr McVeety submitted that it made no sense  for  an  individual  to  be
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom solely  in  order  to  be
    able to send letters and cards to child, a form of access  which  might
    be continued from outside the United Kingdom. That may be  so,  but  it
    does not justify imposing a construction on the Rule which its  current
    wording cannot support. Accordingly, I hold that the expression "access
    rights" in E-LTRPT.2.4 is capable of referring to both  "indirect"  and
    "direct" access.

12. I accept that a parent who has "access rights" because he or she has  a
    court order may not necessarily  be  taking  "an  active  role  in  the
    child's upbringing" but whether or not that is the case will depend  on
    the evidence. It is not uncommon for a parent with a "spend time  with"
    order to lose touch with a child  entirely  whilst  a  parent  with  an
    "otherwise spend time with" (i.e. "indirect" access) order may  use  it
    to take an  active  role  in  the  child's  life;  indeed,  Immigration
    Tribunals have for years accepted the principle that a parent separated
    by  thousands  of  miles  from  a  child  might  yet   exercise   "sole
    responsibility" for the child's upbringing. In the present case, it was
    not correct for the respondent and the judge  simply  to  conclude,  by
    reference only to the nature of the access court order, that  a  parent
    who is not actually having face to face access with his  child  cannot,
    by definition, be taking an active role in a child's life.

13. Further support for the argument that  "taking  an  active  role  in  a
    child's upbringing" need not depend upon a parent and  a  child  having
    regular fact to face  access  is  provided  by  the  Immigration  Rules
    themselves. The provisions which I have set  out  above  concern  those
    seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom; very  similar  provision
    is made at E-ECPT 2.4  for  applicants  seeking  entry  clearance  from
    abroad as a parent. The fact that, in entry clearance  cases,  "direct"
    access is likely to be, at best, sporadic whilst parent and child  live
    in different countries and "indirect" contact likely  to  be  the  norm
    does not in itself appear exclude the possibility of the absent  parent
    taking "an active role in the child's upbringing"; if it did,  then  E-
    ECPT 2.4 would be a pointless provision.

14.  Having  said  that,  a  person  (including  a  parent  with   parental
    responsibility) who has only "indirect" access rights to  a  child  and
    who is not involved in either the day to day care of the  child  or  in
    making important decisions regarding  the  child's  life  may  find  it
    difficult to prove that he/she is "taking an active role in the child's
    upbringing.".  I stress that  the  ability  of  the  appellant  in  the
    present appeal to satisfy E-LTRPT.2.4 (a) (ii)  was  not  disputed  but
    that may not be the case in other appeals.

15. As I have noted above, the previous paragraph 284A provided  for  those
    parents who might find themselves without proof in the form of a  court
    order of contact with a child on account of the operation  of  the  "no
    order" principle of section 1(5) of the  Children  Act  1989.  The  new
    provision in the  Immigration  Rules  (which  refers  only  to  "access
    rights") makes no such  provision.  It  would  be  unfortunate  if  the
    respondent and Tribunals were to consider that a parent without a court
    order as having no "access rights." The word "rights" would suggest the
    ability to enforce access if it were to be  denied,  an  ability  which
    does not exist where there is no  court  order  but  only  an  informal
    arrangement. I consider that E-LTRPT.2.4 applies not only those parents
    who have obtained court orders for access but  also  to  those  parents
    whose "rights" to have access with their child are  granted  informally
    by, for example, agreement with the parent with whom the child lives.

16. I find that Judge McGinty was wrong in law to dismiss  the  appeal  for
    the reasons he has given.  The judge  should  have  accepted  that  the
    contact order of Bolton County Court was evidence  that  the  appellant
    had "access rights" to his children and that the appellant satisfied E-
    LTRPT.2.4 (a)(i). Given the respondent's concession on  the  particular
    facts of this appeal, I accept that the appellant is taking and intends
    to continue to take an active role  in  his  children's  upbringing.  I
    therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination and  remake
    the decision.  The appeal against the respondent's  decision  dated  10
    May 2014 is allowed.


Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  11
September 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  appellant's
appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 10 May 2014 is  allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


