
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22885/ 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              mrs hardeep kaur
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McNicholas (instructed by M-R Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Page)  by  which,  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 23rd December 2013, he dismissed her appeal against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue her with  a  residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national.

 2. It was the Appellant's case that she, an Indian citizen, is married  to
    and in a relationship with a Czech national, Roman Pospisil.

 3. The Respondent, upon receipt of  the  application  made  enquiries  and
    found a visit visa application submitted in India in November 2005 by a
    person with the Appellant's name and date of birth and  containing  her
    photograph along with her  husband,  Mr  Dalvinder  Singh  as  a  joint
    applicant. That application was refused because the Sponsor declaration
    was found to be false after checks were made.

 4. The Secretary of State also caused immigration officers  to  visit  the
    Appellant's address in  the  UK.  The  person  who  answered  the  door
    confirmed that the Appellant resided there although she was out at  the
    time. He confirmed that she lived with an Indian male called  Dalvinder
    Singh, and that no European male lived there. A second occupant at  the
    premises also gave the same information to  the  immigration  officers.
    The person that those two people named as  the  person  with  whom  the
    Appellant lived had the same name as appeared on the  visa  application
    form from 2005.

 5. The Judge  heard oral evidence from the Appellant, her Czech  "husband"
    and witnesses said to be persons living at her address and one of  whom
    who said that he was the one who answered the door to  the  immigration
    officers.

 6. The evidence put forward by the Secretary of State and that put forward
    by the Appellant was  in  total  conflict.  The  Judge  considered  the
    evidence and concluded he preferred the evidence of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 7. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal it is  suggested  that  the
    Judge placed too much weight  on  the  Respondent's  evidence  and  too
    little on that of the Appellant. Weight is a matter for the judge.  The
    Judge explained why he found the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be  wholly
    unreliable. That was a finding he was entitled to make.

 8. The grounds also suggest that the  Judge  made  contradictory  findings
    because he found at paragraph 23 that the  Appellant  was  in  a  valid
    marriage with an EEA national husband. That is mis-stating the  Judge's
    findings. The Judge did not find that the  Appellant  was  in  a  valid
    marriage with an EEA national.  He  found  that  she  had  undergone  a
    ceremony of marriage but it was not valid because she was not  free  to
    marry.

 9. The Judge made no error of law in the determination and indeed  on  the
    basis of the evidence that the Judge had before him it would have  been
    surprising if he had reached any other conclusion.

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 18th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
