
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22394/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2014                           |On 11 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

           Mr dhammika prasanna gunasekara ekanayake mudiyanselage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background and Procedural Matters

1.   On 27 September 2012, the Secretary of State decided to refuse to  vary
    the appellant's leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  also
    decided, on the same occasion, to remove him by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  ("the
    section 47 removal decision").

2.   Earlier that year, on 2 April 2012, during the currency of his  student
    leave, the appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant under the points-based system.   In  refusing  that
    application, and in making the two adverse immigration  decisions,  the
    Secretary of State found that  the  date  of  the  academic  award  the
    appellant relied upon as showing that the  requirements  of  the  rules
    were met was 2 May 2012, a month after his  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  She concluded that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  the
    points he claimed under Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    rules") as his  application  was  not  made  within  twelve  months  of
    obtaining the  qualification  and  so  it  fell  to  be  refused  under
    paragraph 245FD of the rules.

3.   The appellant's appeal against the  decisions  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doran ("the  judge")  on  7  January  2013.   The  judge
    allowed the appeal against the section  47  removal  decision,  finding
    that it was not in accordance with the law, in the  light  of  Adamally
    and Jaferi [2012] UKUT 00414.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave.  So far as Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention is concerned, the judge noted  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal did not advance a case on this basis and the appellant's Counsel
    acknowledged  that  there  was  no  real  reliance  placed   upon   the
    appellant's human rights.

4.   An application was made on the appellant's  behalf  for  permission  to
    appeal.  It was contended that the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave.  As at the date of his application he
    had successfully completed his degree course and provided a letter from
    his course provider showing his results.  It was contended that on this
    basis he met the requirements of the rules.  Alternatively, the date of
    application continued up until the date of decision and  the  appellant
    had obtained the qualification by then.  There was no challenge in  the
    application to the judge's observation that Article 8  was  not  relied
    upon.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted in the light  of  Khatel  [2013]  UKUT
    00044.  In a brief rule 24 response from the Secretary  of  State,  the
    appeal was opposed on the basis that the judge correctly identified the
    date  of  application  as  the  relevant  date  of  assessment.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 10 April 2013, the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that the judge was correct to find that the section 47 removal decision
    was unlawful.  However, the judge made an  error  in  relation  to  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave.  That decision was set  aside  and  a
    fresh decision, allowing the appeal under the rules, was made, again in
    the light of Khatel.

6.   On 18 July 2013, the Upper Tribunal  gave  directions  to  the  parties
    following the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Raju [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    754.  The Upper Tribunal, acting  pursuant  to  rule  45(1)(b)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 proposed:

    (a)  to set aside the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
         present case; and


    (b)  to substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
         against the variation decision but allow  the  appeal  against  the
         section 47 removal decision; and


    (c)  to do so without an oral hearing.


    The parties were advised that if they wished to object to any  part  of
    the proposal, they were required to do so, setting out reasons.

7.   The appellant's solicitors (not those who had acted for him before  the
    First-tier Tribunal) made written submissions in response, objecting to
    the proposal.  The requirements of the rules, contained in table 10  of
    Appendix A, fourth section, produced an unjust  result  and  the  rules
    should be applied flexibly in the  appellant's  case.   Raju  could  be
    distinguished as the letter he provided from his course provider  dated
    29 March 2013, with his application, showed that he  had  obtained  the
    necessary qualification  because  he  had  completed  his  modules  and
    obtained pass marks and results.  This letter should  be  construed  as
    satisfying the requirements of the rules.

8.   It was also contended in the written  submissions  that  the  appellant
    had remained in the United Kingdom with  leave  throughout,  wished  to
    deploy freshly acquired skills but needed leave  to  do  so,  that  the
    United Kingdom would benefit from the appellant's skills and the  taxes
    he would pay and that it was in the public interest to allow his  leave
    to be varied.

Submissions Made by the Parties on 26th February 2014  in  Response  to  the
Directions Given by the Upper Tribunal

9.    Mr  Lingajothy  said  that  Raju  could  be  distinguished  from   the
    appellant's case and the Upper Tribunal should  depart  from  it.   The
    appellant in Raju made his application on 4 April 2012 without evidence
    of his qualification.  He managed to obtain  it  before  the  decision.
    The appellant, on the other hand, made his application on 2 April  2012
    but was notified by his college on 29  March  2012  that  he  had  been
    successful.  His college was  not  the  awarding  body.   The  document
    appeared at page 24 of the appellant's bundle (made  available  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal).  The City of London College confirmed on 29 March
    2012 that the appellant had been successful  and  now  awaited  "formal
    recording" at the university within the next few days.

10.  Mr Lingajothy said that he  might  accept  that  that  letter  did  not
    formally meet the requirements of the rules but the law should  not  be
    applied in too stringent a fashion as there would be a  miscarriage  of
    justice.  The appellant was a student with an impeccable record who had
    invested money in his studies.   He  was  told  that  the  award  would
    arrive.  He had lost the opportunity to obtain  post-study  work  leave
    and was now in limbo.   This  was  unfair.   He  wished  to  adopt  the
    submissions made in earlier cases heard on 26 February 2014.  There had
    been an injustice and the appellant had a legitimate  expectation  that
    he would be given leave.

11.  Mr Lingajothy called  the  appellant  to  give  evidence  briefly.   He
    adopted the witness statement which appeared in  his  bundle,  made  in
    readiness for the First-tier Tribunal on 14  December  2012.   In  that
    statement, the appellant referred to completion of his MBA studies,  as
    confirmed by his college on 29 March 2012.  A degree was awarded to him
    on 2 May 2012 and he sent the certificate, which he received in June or
    July that year, to the Secretary of  State  in  August  2012.   In  his
    statement, the appellant made clear that he wished to  complete  higher
    studies and work experience before commencing a career  in  Sri  Lanka.
    He wished to remain in the United Kingdom as a  post-study  worker  for
    two years.

12.  There was no cross-examination.

13.  Mr Lingajothy went on to make submissions regarding Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  The  appellant's  private  life  included  an
    employment and education  aspect.   There  was  a  right  to  education
    enshrined in the Geneva Protocol.  He wished to enhance his profile and
    had spent thousands of  pounds  on  his  studies.   The  appellant  had
    private life ties here but no family life.  He also  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that he would be  able  to  remain  in  the  light  of  his
    calibre.

14.  Mr Duffy responded to Mr Lingajothy's submissions in  relation  to  the
    variation decision and Article 8.  He relied upon the judgment in Raju,
    the decisions in Nasim, [2013] UKUT 610 and [2014] UKUT  00025  and  on
    the judgment of the Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72.   Any  right
    to education the appellant had did not require expression in the  Human
    Rights Convention.  If the appellant wished to study further, he had an
    opportunity to make a Tier 4 application.  His case was  on  all  fours
    with those of the  appellants  in  Nasim.   In  a  brief  response,  Mr
    Lingajothy said that the appellant had friends who had been given post-
    study work leave, in similar circumstances.  Reliance was  placed  upon
    this factor in addition.

Findings and Conclusions

15.  Having heard from  the  representatives,  I  conclude  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal should, in the exercise of its powers under rule  45(1)(b)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  set  aside  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in the present case and  substitute
    a fresh decision.  That this is the proper course is  readily  apparent
    from the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Raju,  overturning  the
    determination in Khatel.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  against  the  section
    47 removal decision and there has been no challenge  to  that  finding.
    There is no need to disturb it.  The Secretary of State had no power to
    make the section 47 removal  decision  on  the  same  occasion  as  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave, in September 2012.

17.  So far as the appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave  is
    concerned, the decision to be substituted is one  which  dismisses  the
    appellant's appeal.  Mr Lingajothy submitted that the appellant's  case
    could be distinguished from  that  of  the  appellant  in  Raju.   With
    respect to him, I find that this is simply  not  so.   The  letter  the
    appellant relied upon from his course provider, dated  29  March  2012,
    confirmed successful completion of modules and a dissertation  but,  in
    terms, showed that the  appellant  still  awaited  the  degree  itself,
    described  as "formal recording" from the awarding body.   That  letter
    makes it perfectly clear that, as at 29 March 2012, the  appellant  did
    not have his qualification.  Nor did he have it when he  applied  on  2
    April 2012.  There is no reason to doubt what appeared in  his  witness
    statement.  It appears that the degree was awarded on 2  May  2012  and
    then sent to him in June or July (the appellant  was  not  clear  which
    month) before he sent it on to the Secretary of State, in August  2012.
    His case is not to be distinguished from Raju.

18.  Mr Lingajothy adopted submissions made  by  other  Counsel  in  similar
    cases which came before me on  26th  February  2014.   In  those  other
    submissions, it was suggested that the guidance given in  Raju  and  in
    the two upper Tribunal decisions in Nasim should not be followed.  I do
    not accept that the guidance should not be followed.   The  fundamental
    difficulty  the  appellant  faces  is  that  he  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the rules, contained in the fourth section of table  10
    in Appendix A.  When he made his application, he could not show that he
    had an eligible qualification obtained within a period of twelve months
    prior to that application.  As  explained  in  the  first  decision  in
    Nasim,  neither  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  on  the  scheme
    published in July 2010  and,  subsequently,  in  April  2012,  nor  the
    casework instruction of 23 May 2012 makes any  substantial  difference.
    In Raju, Moses LJ held that there is no ambiguity or  lack  of  clarity
    regarding the "temporal" requirement in the fourth section of table 10.
     That clear requirement was not met by the appellant.  Nor do arguments
    based on evidential flexibility advance the appellant's  case.   Again,
    as explained in the first decision in Nasim, the Secretary of State did
    consider the evidence of the qualification obtained by  the  appellant,
    as is clear from the letter  containing  the  adverse  decisions.   She
    found that it did not meet the requirements of the rules.  There was no
    missing information or minor  error  in  the  documentation,  requiring
    correction by means  of  the  application  of  evidential  flexibility,
    whether expressly in a policy or in  the  rules,  in  paragraph  245AA.
    There is no room for the application of any de minimis principle in the
    appellant's case and no room for a "near miss", as has been made  clear
    by the Court of Appeal in Raju.

19.  Arguments based on fairness and legitimate expectation were  considered
    by the Upper Tribunal in the two decisions in Nasim.   Those  arguments
    have no merit in the present appeal,  to  the  extent  that  they  were
    adopted by Mr Lingajothy.  The appellant is not in a position  akin  to
    those  within  the  category  of  highly  skilled  migrants,  who  were
    encouraged  to  come  to  the  United   Kingdom   on   the   basis   of
    representations contained in  the  rules  and  elsewhere.   He  had  no
    legitimate expectation that he would be given leave notwithstanding his
    failure to meet the requirements of the rules.   It  may  well  be  the
    case, as Mr Lingajothy mentioned at the very end  of  his  submissions,
    that the appellant knows others who have  been  given  post-study  work
    leave.  There is, however, no evidence  before  me  remotely  close  to
    showing any systemic inconsistency in decision making by the  Secretary
    of State.  There was no evidence setting out  details  of  those  other
    successful cases.  It is readily apparent that the Secretary of State's
    decision to refuse to vary the appellant's  leave  was  accompanied  by
    cogent reasons which related to the requirements  of  the  rules.   The
    fact  that  applications  made  by  others  may  have  succeeded,  some
    following an initial refusal or indeed an unsuccessful appeal,  has  no
    substantial impact on the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  made  in  the
    appellant's own case.

20.  So far as the decision to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is  concerned,  the
    decision to be substituted is dismissal of the appellant's  appeal,  as
    he has not shown that the requirements of the rules have been met.

21.  So far as the Human Rights Convention is concerned,  as  noted  earlier
    in this determination, no substantial reliance was placed upon  Article
    8 at all when the appellant's case was  argued  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there was no attempt to challenge the judge's  observation
    that the appellant did not rely upon this ground in the application for
    permission to appeal.  The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    make no mention of Article 8.  In these  circumstances,  it  is  by  no
    means clear that the appellant, through Mr Lingajothy, is now  entitled
    to raise Article 8 in the light of Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ  195  as  the
    procedural history in this case strongly suggests that he has abandoned
    or not pursued any Article 8 claim.  Even if that  is  not  so,  it  is
    readily apparent that the evidence shows that the  appellant  has  only
    the most modest private life ties here.  There is very little to put in
    the balance against the strong public interest in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.

22.  He was given leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student on 22  July
    2010.  He made his Tier 1 application on 2 April 2012.   The  appellant
    has been present here for only a short period  of  time.   His  witness
    statement contains no detail at all of any  particular  friendships  or
    associations he may have made.  Mr Lingajothy mentioned employment  and
    education as aspects of his private life and said  that  the  appellant
    wanted to enhance his profile.  He had a legitimate expectation that he
    would be able to take up employment after completing his studies.

23.  Of importance in this context is the decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  As made clear in  that  judgment,  opportunities
    for promising students to complete courses or to gain work  experience,
    are not in themselves rights protected under Article 8.  Clear guidance
    was given here in  the  second  decision  in  Nasim,  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal agreed with submissions  made  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    behalf that Patel is a significant exhortation from the  Supreme  Court
    to refocus attention on the nature and purpose of  Article  8  and,  in
    particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where one
    has moved  along  the  continuum,  from  the  Article's  core  area  of
    operation (meaning here family life in particular) towards  what  might
    be described as its "fuzzy penumbra".  Even  taking  into  account  the
    funds invested by the  appellant  in  his  education  and  his  desire,
    expressed in his witness statement, to remain here  for  two  years  in
    post-study employment, a  rational  assessment  is  that  the  evidence
    discloses only modest private life ties.  The desire to pursue  further
    opportunities in education and employment adds little.   On  the  other
    hand, there are no particular reasons to reduce the  clear  and  strong
    public interest in enforcing immigration control, in the  interests  of
    the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom.  Again, the appellant has
    been here for a short period of time, with limited leave throughout and
    he has been unable to meet the requirements of  the  rules.   There  is
    nothing to show that any  ties  or  friendships  made  here  cannot  be
    maintained from abroad, following his removal.

24.  It has not been suggested by either party that the appellant  can  meet
    the requirements of the rules in Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE.   In
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, the Upper Tribunal held that only  if  there
    are arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    rules is it necessary for an  Article  8  assessment  to  be  made,  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the rules.  The appellant's ties here  are  so  modest
    that it might reasonably be said that there are  no  good  grounds  for
    making such an assessment.  In any event, if an assessment is made, the
    answer is clear in the light of the findings set out above.   Accepting
    that Article 8 is engaged in the private life context (as the threshold
    of engagement is not particularly high), the decision to refuse to vary
    leave was made  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in  pursuit  of  a
    legitimate aim.  Weighing the competing interests, I conclude that  the
    adverse decision and the appellant's removal in consequence amount to a
    proportionate response.  The appellant has not made out  an  Article  8
    case.

DECISION

25.  The determination of the Upper Tribunal in the present  appeal  is  set
    aside.  A fresh decision is substituted as follows:

    (i)  The appeal against the section 47 removal decision was allowed  by
         the First-tier Tribunal and that decision shall stand.


    (ii) The appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is
         dismissed.


    (iii)    The decision to refuse  to  vary  leave  and  the  appellant's
         removal in consequence amount to a proportionate  response  and  do
         not breach his rights (or those of any other person) under  Article
         8 of the Human Rights Convention.

    There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



FEE AWARD

I have considered  whether  a  fee  award  should  be  made.   Although  the
appellant succeeded in relation to the  section  47  removal  decision,  his
appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave has been  dismissed  and
he  has  not  succeeded  in  relation  to  his  human  rights.    In   these
circumstances, I make no fee award.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing       |Mr R C Campbell                       |
|approval:                          |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Mr Dhammika Prasanna Gunasekara       |
|                                   |Ekanayake Mudiyanselage               |
|Case Number:                       |IA/22394/2012                         |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


