
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23562/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 March 2015                             |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MARCELINO EDWARDO LEWIS
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cresswell promulgated on 16 December 2014 allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Marcelino Edwardo Lewis against the decision of Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department dated 16 May 2014 to refuse to vary leave to remain
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to Section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Lewis  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall refer to Mr Lewis as
    the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


Background

3.   The Appellant is a national of St Vincent and the Grenadines,  born  on
    20 November 1980.  He entered the United Kingdom on  7  September  2013
    with six months leave as a visitor running to 7 March 2014.  He came to
    the United Kingdom in the company of Ms Siema Yasmin Stinson, a British
    citizen, date of birth 27 March 1983. The Appellant and Ms Stinson were
    subsequently married on 24 January 2014.


4.   Towards the end of the period of his leave as a visitor  the  Appellant
    attempted to make an application for variation of leave to remain,  but
    this was initially rejected on  the  basis  that  the  application  was
    invalid.  The  Appellant  thereafter  made  a  valid  application   for
    variation of leave to remain which is recorded as having been  made  on
    28 March 2014 - some three weeks after the expiry of his leave.


5.   The application for leave to remain was essentially made on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's  partner  had  experienced  a  number  of  medical
    difficulties and was remaining in the United Kingdom for health care  -
    and indeed the couple in due course  determined  that  they  wanted  to
    remain in the United Kingdom for an indefinite period.


6.   The application was refused by the Secretary of State for  reasons  set
    out in a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 16 May 2014 with reference in
    particular to Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1)  of
    the Immigration Rules.


7.   Between the date of the Secretary of State's decision  and  the  appeal
    hearing before Judge Creswell on  11  December  2014,  Ms  Stinson  was
    delivered of a child on 14 September 2014.


8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  Appellant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules but went on to  consider  the
    case by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR outside the express  wording
    of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  with  particular  reference  to  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's child found that  the  proportionality
    balance favoured the Appellant.


9.   The Secretary of State has raised a challenge  to  that  decision  with
    permission being granted on 4  February  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers.


Consideration

10.  At the hearing today I raised a preliminary point  with  Ms  Holmes  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules.  At the  date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision it was of course the case that the Appellant  had  not
    yet become a father.  In the circumstances the Secretary of  State  had
    given consideration to paragraph EX1 but had  found  that  it  was  not
    engaged.


11.   Judge  Cresswell  also  gave  consideration  to  the  case  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in respect of the  partner  route  says  this  at
    paragraph 13: "The Appellant was in the UK as a visitor and was so  not
    eligible for leave as a partner whilst in the UK."  That is a reference
    to paragraph E-LTRP.2.1  of  Appendix  FM  where  it  states  that  the
    applicant must not be in the UK (a) as a visitor.


12.  However for the reasons already given in  considering  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, by the time the Appellant made a valid application
    for variation of leave to remain he was in fact no longer a visitor but
    an overstayer and was thereby not excluded from the  partner  route  by
    virtue of E-LTRP.2.1(a).


13.  In the circumstances it is not possible to discern on  what  basis  the
    Appellant would not have met the requirements of the Rules and  indeed,
    having looked at all of the circumstances  of  this  case  against  the
    criteria of Section R-LTRP with particular reference to the  LTRP.1.1D,
    it would appear that the Appellant meets the  suitability  criteria  as
    well as the eligibility criteria and therefore the focus would fall  on
    EX1.


14.  In  this  regard,  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  not
    considering EX1, he made very clear findings as to  the  reasonableness
    or otherwise of expecting the Appellant's  young  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom either in the company of his mother or in the company of
    his father alone.  Those findings  are  entirely  consistent  with  the
    approach taken by the Secretary of State in the case of Sanade,  giving
    effect to the decision in Zambrano.   Having  discussed  these  matters
    with Ms Holmes this afternoon, she does not seek  to  suggest  or  urge
    upon me any approach inconsistent with  the  position  adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State in Sanade and in the circumstances does not seek  to
    amplify the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal as they stand.


15.  In my judgement the Respondent's grounds of appeal very largely  amount
    to a mere disagreement with the outcome of the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal and do not identify any  particular  error  of  law.   If
    there is an error of law  in  this  case  it  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not recognise that the Appellant in  fact  qualified
    under the Rules and need not have resorted to Article  8  in  order  to
    succeed in his appeal.


16.  In all of the circumstances it seems to me that the  appropriate  thing
    to do here is to find no material  error  of  law  in  respect  of  the
    decision under Article 8 and to leave the appeal decision to stand.


17.  It may be that succeeding under Article 8 rather than under  the  Rules
    will have some significance in terms of  the  period  of  leave  to  be
    granted or the particular route to settlement.  That is  not  a  matter
    that I have heard any argument on and is a matter that I leave  to  the
    Secretary of  State  with  or  without  any  representations  that  the
    Appellant might want to make as to the most  appropriate  form  of  the
    grant of leave.  But for the moment I am satisfied that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal should stand.


Notice of Decision

18.  The Secretary of State's challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands.
    Mr Lewis's appeal remains allowed.


19.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
on 24 March  2015.



Signed:                                 Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

