
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23005/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th August 2017                   |On 5th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                           Muminur Raja Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 15th December 1980,  and  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Migrant
    (Student) on 28th January 2010 and was granted further leave to  remain
    in the same category until 30th April, 2012.

3.   He was granted further leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant until 1st August 2014, and then granted further leave to remain
    as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant until 15th September 2014.

4.   The appellant was issued with a notice of  intention  to  removal  from
    the United Kingdom on  29th  October  2014  and  made  application  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life  on
    16th January 2015.  This was refused on 12th March 2015, and  following
    further submissions, the respondent reconsidered  the  application  and
    maintained her decision in a notice dated 3rd June 2015.  The appellant
    appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  on  17th  November  2016  at
    Harmondsworth.

5.   Dissatisfied with the judge's decision, the appellant  sought  and  was
    granted leave to appeal.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Page believed that the grounds were  arguable
    in complaining that the determination "lacks appropriate  and  adequate
    reasoning".  He suggested that the judge's decision at paragraphs 17 to
    22 show a paucity of reasoning.

7.   The matter was listed for hearing before  me  at  10.00  a.m.  on  16th
    August 2016.  By letter sent by  facsimile  on  7th  August  2016,  the
    appellant's solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  indicating  that  the
    appellant had informed them that he wishes the  Tribunal  to,  "conduct
    his appeal hearing on paper.  The hearing is scheduled to take place at
    Field House, EC4A 1DZ, on Wednesday 16th August 2017 at 10 am."

8.   At 10.40  a.m.  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  It seemed clear to me that the appellant had  no  intention
    of attending the hearing, given what his solicitors had said  in  their
    letter.

9.   The appellant was given notice that the  matter  had  been  listed  for
    oral hearing and I am satisfied that he had  been  served  with  notice
    giving him the date, time and  place  fixed  for  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal. I proceeded with that hearing.

10.  Ms Isherwood told me that she relied on  the  respondent's  Section  24
    notice and urged me to find that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I reserved my decision.

11.  I have very carefully read the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox and the lengthy grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds  suggested  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  note  the
    respondent's consideration of the appellant's circumstances outside the
    Immigration Rules  were  made  "on  wrongful/mistaken  legal  premise".
    There is no merit in this challenge.  The judge considered  the  matter
    himself outside the Immigration Rules and was satisfied that there  was
    no evidence of circumstances which would justify the Secretary of State
    granting the appellant leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

12.  Next it was suggested in the grounds that the judge failed to  identify
    that the respondent's  decision  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    circumstances against the  mandatory  provisions  of  Section  117A(2).
    With very great respect, the judge was considering the  matter  himself
    and at paragraph 14 of his determination he makes  it  perfectly  clear
    that he considered Section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act.

13.  Next it was suggested that the judge failed,  "to  appropriately  apply
    the  principles  Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to   proportionality
    assessment of the appellant's case".  I am not entirely clear  what  is
    meant by that, but it is abundantly clear from the  determination  that
    the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and he therefore  considered  the
    matter outside the Rules.  The judge makes it  clear  at  paragraph  24
    that he was satisfied that there were no circumstances  such  as  would
    justify the granting of leave by the Secretary of State on the basis of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights outside the Immigration Rules.

14.  The grounds then suggest that the judge was wrong in his assessment  of
    the appellant's mother's dependency upon him, which goes beyond  normal
    emotional ties.  With very great respect the judge noted  at  paragraph
    20 that the appellant's mother had provided a  letter  of  support,  in
    which she states  that  the  appellant  visits  her  home.   The  judge
    concludes from that the appellant  lives  independently  and  that  any
    alleged dependency is incidental to her daily care needs.  As the judge
    points out at paragraph 21, the remaining letters of support  submitted
    on behalf of the appellant demonstrate that the appellant's mother  has
    other family members who can undertake  the  grocery  shopping  on  her
    behalf.

15.  The grounds are nothing more than expressions of disagreement with  the
    judge's decision.  It is not relevant that the Secretary of State found
    that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  because  the   judge
    considered the matter outside the Rules.  The grounds do  not  identify
    how a consideration of Section 117 factors would favour the  appellant,
    but it is quite clear from paragraph 14 of the determination  that  the
    judge considered that provision of the 2002 Act.   It  is  quite  clear
    that the judge found that there was no dependency  by  the  appellant's
    mother on the appellant beyond normal emotional ties.

Notice of Decision

16.  I am satisfied that the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    not involve the making of an error of law and his decision is upheld.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have upheld the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  and  therefore
there is no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
