

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/23089/2015

                                                        IA/23091/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd of March 2018                      | On 29th of March 2018         |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                  MR ABUL KHAIR SALEH UDDIN - 1st Appellant
                     MRS SHIRIN SULTANA - 2nd Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr Z Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

   1. The Appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh and are married to each
      other. The first Appellant who I shall refer to as the  Appellant  was
      born on 10th of October 1979. His wife, the 2nd Appellant, was born on
      25th of March 1988. They appeal against decisions  of  the  Respondent
      dated 2nd of June 2015 to  refuse  their  applications  for  leave  to
      remain. The Appellant applied on 17th of November 2012  for  leave  to
      remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur with his wife as his dependent.  Their
      appeals were allowed by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Borsada
      sitting at Birmingham on 22nd of July 2016.


   2.  On appeal Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup sitting at  Field  House
      on 30th of March 2017 allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  and  set  the
      decision of the First-Tier Tribunal aside. He adjourned  the  remaking
      of the decision making certain consequential directions.  On  23rd  of
      May 2017 the matter came back before Judge Pickup but he was unable to
      re-determine the matter because of an incomplete document verification
      report (DVR).  He gave further directions to do  with  the  filing  of
      evidence with an indication that there was no need for a further  oral
      hearing although either party could request such. In  the  absence  of
      any request the Upper Tribunal would determine the appeal on the basis
      of the evidence then before it.


   3. Before that could happen,  the  case  was  transferred  to  me  to  be
      determined. For the reasons which I gave in my decision dated 29th  of
      January 2018 I did not consider it  appropriate  to  re-determine  the
      matter on the papers but indicated that the matter should be  relisted
      for a further oral hearing. There is now annexed to this determination
      a copy of my decision dated 29th of January 2018 which  indicates  the
      reasons for the finding of a material error of law and  sets  out  the
      background to this case.


The Appellant's Case


   4.  Prior to coming to the United Kingdom, the Appellant had undertaken a
      BA (Hons) in English in August 2005 followed by an MA in  English.  He
      then decided to go to the  United  Kingdom  to  undertake  a  business
      degree. He took a compulsory English language test and scored 6.5. The
      Appellant arrived in 2009 and was given valid leave  to  remain  as  a
      student which was subsequently renewed until 18th of November 2012.  A
      day before that  leave  was  due  to  expire  the  Appellant  made  an
      application for leave  to  remain  (with  the  2nd  Appellant  as  his
      dependent) under the Tier 1 entrepreneur route. It was the refusal  of
      that application by the Respondent which  gave  rise  to  the  present
      proceedings.


   5. The Appellant studied in the United Kingdom first  for  a  certificate
      and diploma in travel and tourism  in  2011  followed  by  an  MSc  in
      marketing. It was at this  stage,  he  told  Judge  Borsada,  that  he
      decided to apply to remain in the United Kingdom as  an  entrepreneur.
      Amongst the documents he submitted to the Respondent in support of his
      application under Tier 1 was a letter from the AB bank,  Kawran  Bazar
      branch of Bangladesh dated 4th of November 2012. This  certified  that
      Mr K Alam of an address in Dhaka was one of the bank's valued  clients
      and maintained an FDR account with the bank. Mr  Alam  himself  stated
      that he would make �200,000 available for  investment  in  the  United
      Kingdom that sum being on deposit with the AB bank. The Appellant also
      submitted his TOEIC English language certificates.


The Reasons for Refusal

   6. The Respondent took two objections to the Appellant's application. The
      first was that the Appellant was said  to  have  used  a  fraudulently
      obtained English language  test  certificate.  Having  heard  evidence
      Judge Bosada rejected that ground for refusal and there  has  been  no
      onward appeal against his decision on that point.  The  2nd  objection
      was that the certificates from the AB Bank Ltd had been  found  to  be
      false following checks carried out on the documents by the Respondent.
      The  account  number  did  not  exist  and  the  bank  statements  and
      certificates had not  been  issued  by  the  Kawran  Bazar  Branch  as
      claimed.


   7. On appeal the case turned on whether the Respondent could substantiate
      the allegation that the documentation said to have been issued by  the
      bank was false. The evidence relied upon by the  Respondent  as  proof
      that the Appellant had attempted to use fake  documentation  from  the
      bank was a redacted email from an  employee  of  the  bank.  At  first
      instance the Appellant produced more evidence from the bank  (on  page
      14 of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  which  the  Respondent  was  not  in
      possession of at the time of the decision. That  evidence  dealt  with
      the concerns that the bank's certificate and statement were said to be
      false. There was a further bank letter, the original of which  was  on
      the court file, dated 14th of  July  2016  which  confirmed  that  the
      letter dated 4th of November 2012 issued for Mr Alam was genuine.


   8. The July 2016 letter continued: "in  this  regard  we  would  like  to
      confirm that we have not received any written or  over  the  telephone
      request from any authority for the verification of the  aforementioned
      letter and bank statement or else we would have been able  to  confirm
      the authenticity of the above documents issued by us  and  undersigned
      by the branch manager".  The 4th of November 2012 letter and the  bank
      statements issued were genuine and Mr Alam was financially  sound  and
      solvent.


   9. On appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Judge Pickup  found  that  the  email
      correspondence relied upon by the Respondent showed that  the  enquiry
      made of the bank [by the Respondent] and the response  from  the  bank
      was short but quite clear. The account number no longer  existed.  The
      only redaction was as to the name of the bank employee  answering  the
      query and was done for good reason to protect  his  or  her  identity.
      However, if the letter of 14th of July 2016 was  itself  genuine  then
      the Respondent's case would fall away.


  10. The Respondent's bundle submitted for  the  hearing  at  1st  instance
      exhibited three emails. The first was a request by the High Commission
      in Dhaka asking for verification of the AB  account.  The  2nd  was  a
      reply dated 4th of March 2015 stating that the  account  number  given
      did not now exist and that the bank certificates and statement had not
      been issued by that branch of the bank. The 3rd email was sent by  the
      fraud team of the Respondent on 20th  of  March  2015  to  an  unknown
      recipient (which had been redacted). Subsequently there was a  further
      DVR referring to emails which had also apparently been redacted.
  11. These emails were not seen by Judge Pickup in the Upper  Tribunal  but
      the information in the e-mails was that Mr Alam had maintained an  FDR
      with the bank but it was now closed. His address  and  account  number
      matched the bank's  records.  There  was  a  balance  as  at  16th  of
      September 2012 in the stated amount (92, 124, 755.94 (Taka) but  there
      was no such employee by the name of M.K.  Hossain  at  the  bank.  The
      letter of 14th of July 2016 was signed by MK Hossain who was described
      as the Senior Assistant Vice President of the Karwan Bazar branch. The
      bank had no record of the issue of the letter of 4th of November  2012
      confirming details of the account.


  12. As will be seen from my decision annexed  to  this  determination  the
      case turned on whether the evidence in the DVR was correct or  whether
      the correspondence exhibited  by  the  Appellant  was  correct.  Judge
      Pickup had been  concerned  that  the  Appellant's  case  appeared  to
      suggest that  the  Respondent  had  been  guilty  of  producing  false
      documents by way of a DVR. In  order  to  clear  this  matter  up  and
      resolve the dispute I directed that this case should be  heard  before
      me to finally determine the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  could
      satisfy the Tier 1 requirements and genuinely had had  access  to  the
      appropriate funds at the relevant time.


 The Hearing Before Me


  13. For the hearing the Appellant produced a statement from his sponsor Mr
      Alam dated 7th of March 2018 in which  Mr  Alam  stated  that  he  had
      provided evidence of his account with the AB  bank.  The  account  was
      subsequently closed but was open between 1st of March 2012  until  3rd
      of February 2015. After the Respondent  had  refused  the  Appellant's
      application Mr Alam contacted the bank. This was with some  difficulty
      due to the fact that the account was now closed and he was  no  longer
      an existing customer and was not therefore an urgent  concern  of  the
      bank. He did manage to get the letter dated  14th  of  July  2016.  He
      wondered whether an enquiry may have been made by the Respondent to  a
      different branch which would not have had  the  information  that  his
      branch would have.


  14. He then became aware of the further verification report (which I  have
      referred to above, see [11]) challenging the authenticity of the  July
      2016 letter and indeed the existence of Mr Hossain. Mr Alam  tried  to
      contact the head office to discuss  this  issue.  Mr  Hossain  was  no
      longer working for the branch and that may have been the reason why it
      was confirmed he was not employed by the bank.  Nevertheless  the  2nd
      verification report appeared to confirm that the bank account  existed
      and that the funds were in the account for the relevant time  but  did
      not confirm that Mr Hossain had never ( my emphasis)  worked  for  the
      bank. As far as Mr Alam was concerned there was no record of any check
      at the particular branch of the bank.


  15.  Any further letter he obtained from the branch would  face  the  same
      criticism that the previous correspondence had received. There was  no
      point in him producing false bank statements and letters  to  evidence
      that his account existed and had funds at the relevant time where that
      was not what was being questioned. There was no reason  why  he  would
      rely on false documents to evidence  something  he  could  do  through
      genuine bank  documents.  The  responses  from  the  bank  had  caused
      misunderstandings but the Appellant should not be penalised for that.


  16. In oral submissions the Appellant's solicitor emphasised that Mr  Alam
      felt the bank were not being helpful. The DVR had confirmed  that  the
      account had existed at the relevant time namely February 2015 and that
      there was the correct balance and address of the  account  holder.  It
      was important to consider the point made by Mr Alam that there was  no
      reason why he would produce a false certificate  when  he  could  more
      easily produce a real one. The Presenting  Officer  indicated  he  had
      nothing to add as it  appeared  that  the  bank  account  had  existed
      between 2012 and 2015.




Findings


  17. The Appellant submitted his application for leave to remain as a  Tier
      1 entrepreneur on 17th of November 2012. The issue was whether at that
      time the Appellant had access to sufficient  funds  to  bring  himself
      within the Tier 1 regulations.  The  position  now  is  that  such  an
      application does not carry a right of appeal but the decision in  this
      case was dated 2nd of June 2015 and therefore the  Appellant  had  the
      right of appeal against the Respondent's decision. The  Appellant  had
      to score 75 points for access to funds, which had  to  be  held  in  a
      regulated financial  institution  and  be  disposable  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


  18. The Appellant was awarded 0 points because of the Respondent's concern
      that the DVR appeared to show that documents issued  by  the  AB  bank
      were false. A subsequent DVR showed that Mr Alam had indeed maintained
      an  account  in  September  2012  when  the  Appellant  submitted  his
      application but by the  time  the  Respondent  came  to  consider  the
      Appellant's application that  account  had  been  closed.  As  I  have
      indicated this was a short point of dispute in this case.  Either  the
      Appellant had access to the funds when he submitted his application or
      he did not.


  19.   The  Respondent  appeared  to  proceed  on  the   basis   that   the
      documentation was false implying that Mr Alam had never had an account
      with the AB bank. That position is untenable in the light of  the  2nd
      DVR which I referred to in my previous decision and at [11] above. The
      2nd DVR shows that at the relevant time Mr Alam did  have  an  account
      with access to the necessary funds. Mr Allen says that  he  still  has
      access to those funds and they are still available to  the  Appellant.
      Mr Alam being in Bangladesh cannot be cross examined  on  the  witness
      statement he has made but I see no reason why  that  statement  should
      not be accepted as it is now confirmed that he is a  credible  witness
      and is correct in saying he had a  bank  account  at  the  appropriate
      time.


  20. Whatever the reason for the mix-up at the bank and their reluctance to
      confirm that someone who was a customer did have an account with them,
      the important point is whether the Appellant could demonstrate at  the
      relevant time that he had access to the funds. The evidence before  me
      now indicates that on the balance of probabilities he did  have  that.
      The issue of whether  the  emails  should  or  should  not  have  been
      redacted is not in the circumstances particularly relevant  now  since
      the redaction only went to the identity  of  the  persons  making  the
      emails not the information they were supplying.


  21. The information that was supplied shows that the  Appellant  did  have
      access to funds at the relevant time. Whoever it was at the  bank  who
      was confirming that is of secondary importance. I have  some  sympathy
      for the position that  both  Judge  Borsada  and  Judge  Pickup  found
      themselves in because they did not have the  benefit  of  the  further
      information which has been given to me. On the basis of  that  further
      evidence which is not disputed by the Respondent since it is in effect
      the Respondent's own evidence, I find that the Appellant can meet  the
      requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  appeal  should  be
      allowed. The 2nd Appellant's appeal is dependent  on  the  Appellant's
      appeal and falls to be allowed in line with that appeal. As this is  a
      valid appeal under the Rules I do not need to go on to consider issues
      of article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law and has been set aside. I remake the decision in this  case  by
allowing the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  to
refuse to grant leave to remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur.

Appellant's appeal allowed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing


Signed this 26th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award in this case. Further evidence has had  to  be  supplied
by the Appellant which was  not  before  the  Respondent  when  the  initial
decision was made in 2015.


Signed this 26th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/23089/2015
                                                               IA/23091/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Prepared on the papers                       |                              |
|On 19th of January 2018                      |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                  MR ABUL KHAIR SALEH UDDIN - 1st Appellant
                     MRS SHIRIN SULTANA - 2nd Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

The matter was determined on the papers.

                         ADJOURNMENT AND DIRECTIONS

The Proceedings

  22. The Appellants are both citizens of Bangladesh and are married to each
      other. The first Appellant who I shall refer to as the  Appellant  was
      born on 10th of October 1979. His wife, the 2nd Appellant, was born on
      25th of March 1988. They appeal against decisions  of  the  Respondent
      dated 2nd of June 2015 to  refuse  their  applications  for  leave  to
      remain. Their appeals were allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Borsada sitting at Birmingham on 22nd of  July  2016.  The  Respondent
      appealed against that decision and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Pickup
      sitting at Field House on 30th of March 2017 allowed the  Respondent's
      appeal and set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.


  23. Following a resumed hearing on  23rd  of  May  2017  he  made  certain
      directions which related to the supply of further evidence:


           i) The Respondent was to use  her  best  endeavours  to  obtain,
              lodge with the Tribunal and serve on the Appellant two emails
              referred to in a recent document  verification  report  (DVR)
              within 14 days of the date of the directions that is  to  say
              by 20th of June 2017.
          ii) Within 7 days from the date of service of either  the  emails
              or the Respondent's  reasons  for  not  disclosing  them  the
              Appellant was at liberty to lodge with the Upper Tribunal and
              serve on the Respondent any further written submissions.
         iii) Either party could make a written request for a further  oral
              hearing.
          iv) In the absence of a request for a further  oral  hearing  the
              Upper Tribunal would determine the appeal on the basis of the
              evidence then before it.


  24.  There  appears  to  have  been  no  response  to  these   directions.
      Accordingly, on 16th of November 2017 the Upper Tribunal  sent  out  a
      direction on form IA 121 stating: "There having been no  request  made
      pursuant to paragraph 4 of the directions of 6th of June  this  matter
      will be determined on the papers".


  25. On 7th of December 2017 the Principal Resident Judge made  a  transfer
      order pursuant to the practice statements of the Senior  President  of
      Tribunals. These practice statements provide that  where  the  chamber
      president decides that it is not practicable for the original Tribunal
      to complete the hearing or give its determination without undue  delay
      the chamber president may direct the appeal to be heard by differently
      constituted Tribunal. Accordingly, an order was made transferring  the
      appeal to be heard by a differently constituted Tribunal and thus  the
      matter came before me on the papers on 20th of December 2017.


The Background to the Appeal


  26. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2009 and was  given  valid
      leave to remain as a student which was subsequently renewed until 18th
      of November 2012. A day before  that  leave  was  due  to  expire  the
      Appellant made an application  for  leave  to  remain  (with  the  2nd
      Appellant as his dependent) under the Tier 1  entrepreneur  route.  It
      was the refusal of that application by the Respondent which gave  rise
      to the present proceedings.


  27. The Respondent took two objections to the Appellant's application. The
      first was that the Appellant was said  to  have  used  a  fraudulently
      obtained English language  test  certificate.  Having  heard  evidence
      Judge Bosada rejected that ground for refusal and there  has  been  no
      onward appeal against his decision on that point.  The  2nd  objection
      was that the Appellant had included certificates from the AB Bank  Ltd
      which the Respondent said had been found to be false following  checks
      carried out on the documents. The account number did not exist and the
      bank statements and certificates had not been  issued  by  the  Kawran
      Bazar Branch as claimed.


The Decision at First Instance


  28. The evidence relied upon by the Respondent as proof that the Appellant
      had attempted to use fake documentation from the bank was  a  redacted
      email  from  an  unknown  employee  of  the  bank.  At  [9]   of   his
      determination Judge Borsada  did  not  consider  that  was  sufficient
      evidence that a fraud had been committed in circumstances in which he,
      the Judge, had every reason to consider  that  the  Appellant  was  an
      honest individual who had never  previously  sought  to  carry  out  a
      deception.


  29. Further the Appellant had produced at the hearing more  evidence  from
      the bank (on page 14 of the Appellant's bundle) which  the  Respondent
      was not in possession of at the time of the  decision.  That  evidence
      dealt directly with the  concerns  that  the  bank's  certificate  and
      statement were said to be false. The Judge accepted  the  veracity  of
      that evidence particularly given that he had seen the original of  the
      further bank letter (I note that it is in the court file).  There  was
      nothing to indicate that this document was not genuine, he found.  The
      Judge stated that he had considered this documentary evidence  in  the
      round alongside all the other evidence that had been provided  by  the
      Appellant and in doing so remain satisfied  that  the  further  letter
      from the bank was indeed an item of evidence that  reliance  could  be
      placed upon and which sufficiently addressed the original concerns  of
      the Respondent. The appeal was allowed.


The Onward Appeal


  30. The Respondent appealed arguing that it was not clear why the Tribunal
      had speculated in  the  Appellant's  favour.  Nor  was  it  adequately
      explained why the Respondent's email should be  accorded  less  weight
      than the Appellant's letter simply because the name had been  redacted
      on it. It was  inadequately  explained  why  the  Respondent's  email,
      revealing that the bank documents supplied by the Appellant  were  not
      documents  issued  by  the  relevant  branch,  was  insufficient.  The
      Respondent had had no opportunity to carry out a verification check on
      the July 2016 letter from the bank manager  which  the  Appellant  had
      produced at the hearing at first instance.


  31. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Gillespie on 1st of December 2016 but on renewal Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal  on  the  9th  of  February
      2017. He found it reasonably arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      should not have discarded as readily  as  it  did  evidence  that  the
      Appellant had  relied  on  a  false  bank  statement.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal arguably gave unlawful weight to a document  relied  upon  by
      the Appellant but not disclosed in time for  the  Respondent  to  have
      made proper checks. That said, the Respondent must be able  to  assist
      the Tribunal by  explaining  how  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
      Respondent proved that the bank  declaimed  the  authenticity  of  the
      document relied upon by  the  Appellant.  Based  on  a  quick  reading
      appropriate for a permission application it was  not  clear  to  Judge
      Perkins upon precisely what the bank was asked to comment.


The Error of Law Stage


  32. On 23rd of May 2017 following the grant of permission by Judge Perkins
      the appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup to determine
      whether there was a material  error  of  law  in  the  first  instance
      decisions such that it should be set aside. Judge  Pickup  found  that
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada had failed to provide cogent reasons
      for dismissing the Respondent's document verification evidence  whilst
      accepting an unverified letter from the same bank dated 14th  of  July
      2016 purporting to say that the account was genuine and no request for
      verification had been made.


  33. I pause to note here that the letter from the AB bank  dated  14th  of
      July 2016 stated: "in this regard we would like  to  confirm  that  we
      have not received any written or over the telephone request  from  any
      authority for the verification of the aforementioned letter  and  bank
      statement or else we would have been able to confirm the  authenticity
      of the above documents issued by us  and  undersigned  by  the  branch
      manager".


  34. There was no adequate reason given, Judge Pickup held, to dismiss  the
      Respondent's  evidence  or  to  accept  at  face  value   the   letter
      purportedly from the bank which could easily have been a  further  and
      brazen attempt to deceive. The email correspondence showed the enquiry
      made of the bank [by the respondent] and the response  from  the  bank
      which was short but quite clear was that the account number no  longer
      existed. The only redaction was as to the name of  the  bank  employee
      answering the query and was done for good reason to protect his or her
      identity. It was not clear why the Judge had dismissed  one  piece  of
      evidence but relied unquestioningly on the other. The decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal was flawed for  want  of  adequate  reasoning  and
      could not stand.


  35. He therefore ordered that the appeal was to be reheard  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal at  Field  House  reserved  to  himself.  If  the  Respondent
      obtained clarification that the bank letter was genuine and  therefore
      the bank account was genuine the Tribunal had to be notified that  the
      Respondent's appeal was pursued no further. No fee award was made.


  36.  Judge Pickup continued: "in adjourning the remaking of  the  decision
      it was  anticipated  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  take  the
      opportunity not previously available to seek  to  verify  the  14/7/16
      bank letter. I directed that if it  was  found  that  the  letter  was
      genuine, the Tribunal  must  be  notified  that  the  appeal  [by  the
      Respondent] was not pursued. At the 23rd of May 2017 hearing before me
      I was informed that a DVR had indeed  been  obtained  which  had  been
      emailed to the Tribunal suggesting that this further bank  letter  was
      also fraudulent. During submissions [counsel for the  Appellant]  made
      the point that the  recent  DVR  referred  to  emails  one  requesting
      verification and another with the answer from  the  bank.  Neither  of
      these emails was attached to the DVR. [Counsel] made submissions  that
      it could not be clear on  this  limited  evidence  what  document  was
      actually examined and what the outcome was. It was  pointed  out  that
      the emails relevant to the previous  DVR  had  been  produced  in  the
      Respondent's bundle."


  37. The Judge stood the case down at  this  point  asking  the  Presenting
      Officer to obtain the emails referred to in this most recent DVR.  The
      Presenting  Officer  returned  to  inform  the  Judge  that  he,   the
      Presenting Officer, had not been able to obtain the emails. The  Judge
      continued at [11] "recognising that [counsel] was  entitled  to  raise
      criticism of the incomplete information, when it should reasonably  be
      possible to provide it, even if in a redacted format,  I  agreed  that
      the appropriate course before remaking the decision was  to  give  the
      Secretary of State time to produce the emails in question."  Both  the
      Presenting Officer and counsel agreed that there was likely to  be  no
      need for a further oral hearing and  the  Judge  made  the  directions
      which I have referred to above at paragraph 2.


 The Hearing Before Me


  38. When the matter came on the papers before me on 20th of December  2017
      following the transfer order I noted that it did not appear  from  the
      court file that there had been any response by the Respondent  to  the
      directions of Judge Pickup and thus  there  was  no  trigger  for  any
      response from the Appellant. Upon further investigation I received the
      following from the Respondent: "The SSHD also  (my  emphasis)  applied
      under Section 108 of the 2002 Act for the above attachment NOT  to  be
      disclosed to the other side and for the documents to be considered  by
      the court in private.  The emails are all un-redacted and contain  the
      personal details  of  staff  at  the  Home  Office  and  the  bank  in
      question.  As such the SSHD contends it is not in the public  interest
      to disclose the contents to the other side."

  39. Section 108(1) (a)of the 2002  act  relates  to  allegations  where  a
      document is said to be a forgery. Subsection  (1)  (b)  provides  that
      disclosure to a party of information  relating  to  the  detection  of
      forgery may be withheld where that would be  contrary  to  the  public
      interest. In this case the Respondent's concern as with  the  previous
      DVR is the disclosure of the identity of individuals rather  than  the
      information itself. The disclosure of the information contained in the
      emails as opposed to the identity of the makers of the emails does not
      in my view adversely affect  the  detection  of  forgery.  I  make  no
      decision at this stage on the issue of the disclosure of the  identity
      of the makers of the e-mails.


  40. What I can state at this stage is that the information in the  e-mails
      is that the individual mentioned in the letter of 11th  of  July  2016
      did maintain an FDR with the bank but it is now  closed.  The  address
      and account number matched the bank's records. There was a balance  as
      at 16th of September 2012 in the stated amount (92, 124, 755.94 (Taka)
      but there was no such employee by the name  of  M.K.  Hossain  at  the
      bank. They had no record of the issue of the letter of 4th of November
      2012 confirming details of the account.


  41. The communication from the Respondent and the use of the  word  "also"
      appeared to suggest that even if no submission had been made to  Judge
      Pickup under section 108 the Respondent had  previously  attempted  to
      make a written  communication  to  the  Tribunal  in  accordance  with
      direction 1 of the directions order of 6th of June  2017.  Either  way
      the Respondent's communication raised a serious  issue  on  which  the
      Appellant was entitled to reply at  the  very  least  in  writing  but
      preferably at a resumed oral hearing.

Findings


  42. The Tribunal needs to receive arguments from both parties  on  whether
      it is appropriate for an order under section 108 of the 2002  Act  (in
      the light of paragraph 19 above) and generally on the  merits  of  the
      case. The decision of Judge Pickup dated 11th of April 2017 was to set
      aside the decision of Judge Borsada and  direct  that  the  appeal  be
      decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved. Whilst I  deprecate
      the delay which has  happened  in  this  case,  in  the  interests  of
      fairness I do not think it right that this appeal should be determined
      by me de novo without the opportunity being given to the Appellant  to
      make further representations on the allegations made  against  him  by
      the Respondent in the most recent DVR and its enclosures.  I  bear  in
      mind Judge  Borsada's  description  of  the  Appellant  which  I  have
      summarised at paragraph 7 above. I remind myself  that  Judge  Borsada
      had the benefit of hearing the Appellant give evidence and  the  Upper
      Tribunal has not thus far.


  43. As Judge Pickup pointed out at [13] of  his  decision  dated  11th  of
      April 2017 if the bank's letter is genuine and they had  not  received
      any request for verification of  the  account  then  the  Respondent's
      email correspondence (including the most recent  DVR)  would  have  to
      have been fabricated, a very  serious  allegation  to  make  as  Judge
      Pickup put it. The Respondent's case is  that  he  does  not  wish  to
      disclose the e-mails pursuant to section 108, although that view, as I
      understand it, relates to disclosure of the identity  of  the  persons
      writing emails not  the  information  itself.  The  previous  position
      before Judge Pickup appears to  have  been  that  the  Respondent  was
      unable to obtain the emails. Since this is a significant difference  I
      consider it is in the interests of justice that the  Appellant  should
      be given an opportunity to  answer  the  points  raised  including  if
      necessary evidence which confirms or otherwise the employment of Mr M.
      K. Hossain.


44. I therefore further adjourn this matter to  the  first  available  date
    before me. I appreciate the inconvenience that a  further  hearing  may
    cause to the parties. Nevertheless,  I  bear  in  mind  the  overriding
    objective contained at Rule 2 of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
    that the Tribunal must deal with the case fairly and  justly  with  the
    need to ensure as far as practicable  that  the  parties  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings. In the light of that it would not
    be appropriate for me to decide this matter de novo without giving  the
    Appellant a further opportunity to  make  oral  submissions  if  he  so
    wishes alternatively, written submissions on  the  issue  of  the  bank
    documentation. The issue of the  English  language  certificate  is  no
    longer in dispute since Judge Borsada's decision on that point was  not
    appealed.

Notice of Decision

(i) I direct that the hearing of this appeal be adjourned to the first  open
    date to be listed before me, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft,
    with a time estimate of one hour 30 minutes.

(ii) The Appellant do make further representations in  writing  and/or  file
    further evidence, if so advised, to be filed at the Tribunal and served
    on the Respondent at least 21 days before the adjourned hearing.

(iii) I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason  for  so
    doing.


Signed this 29th of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of a fee award remains outstanding to be decided  at  the  resumed
hearing.


Signed this 29th of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

