
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23965/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 April 2016                 |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    M N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim, Counsel for Pioneer Solicitors, London
For  the  Respondent:     Miss  Willocks-Briscoe,  Home  Office   Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1986.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 23 May 2014 curtailing his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph 323(i) and giving
    directions for his removal under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 as amended.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Flynn  on  26  June  2015.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed and the decision promulgated on 31 July 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Grimmett  on  1  February
    2016.  Permission to appeal was lodged  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum  on  23  February
    2016.  The grounds contend that the Appellant's representatives faxed a
    30 page bundle to the First-tier Tribunal and to the Respondent  on  19
    June 2015 but this bundle was not considered by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge at the hearing on 26 June 2015.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not have this bundle before her.  The permission states that it  is
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge through no fault of her own
    failed to take account of relevant evidence and committed an  error  of
    law.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated 9 March 2016.   The  response  states
    that even if the bundle had arrived on time there was no statement from
    Ms Vivien Ronto, the Hungarian  national  the  Appellant  had  intended
    marrying, confirming the allegations made  in  the  witness  statement.
    Also the Appellant did not attend the hearing  to  address  the  issues
    raised in the refusal letter.  The response states that  based  on  the
    evidence, no Tribunal properly directing itself, could have  reached  a
    different conclusion.  The response states that there  is  no  material
    error of law in the decision.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer handed to me the case of Steven  Richard  Forman
    [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC).

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that this claim was decided on  the
    papers by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant's  bundle  was  not
    before the Tribunal.  He submitted that it is clear from the file  that
    this bundle was sent on time to the Respondent and to the Tribunal.

 6. Counsel submitted that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2011
    with leave to remain until October 2013  which  was  extended  until  6
    August 2015.  In April 2014 his Sponsor lost its  sponsorship  licence.
    He submitted that no 60 day letter was sent to  the  Appellant  by  the
    Respondent.

 7. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's leave was curtailed as at 23 May
    2014 and he submitted that the burden was on the  Respondent  to  prove
    her case in these circumstances.   He  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge used the wrong burden of proof at  paragraph  9  of  the
    decision  as  the  burden  had  shifted  from  the  Appellant  to   the
    Respondent.  Also at paragraph 10 of the decision the judge states that
    both parties failed to submit any evidence apart from  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and attached documents but the Appellant had actually  submitted
    a 30 page bundle.

 8. I was referred to Rule 13 of the Procedure Rules and  the  case  of  MH
    Pakistan [2010]  UKUT  168  (IAC).   Counsel  submitted  that  Rule  13
    requires an unpublished documents to be supplied if it is to be  relied
    on and he submitted that in this case the document mentioned  were  not
    supplied although the Respondent had an obligation to supply them.   He
    submitted that the  refusal  letter  merely  made  assertions.   I  was
    referred to page 2, which contains questions 5  to  9  of  the  refusal
    letter.  These  are  quotes  from  the  Appellant's  and  his   bride`s
    interviews.  The Appellant stated that they met  on  Facebook  and  his
    bride stated that they met in London.  When the Appellant was asked how
    long he and his bride had been living together he said two  months  but
    his bride  said  six  months.   Counsel  submitted  that  there  is  no
    transcript of the interviews and these questions cannot be taken out of
    context.  He submitted that no weight should be given to these answers.
     I was referred to question 7 on page 2 of the refusal  letter:  "Where
    were you both living at this time?" The Appellant's bride answered that
    she had been living in Hungary and the Appellant  had  been  living  in
    London and the Appellant's answer was that  his  bride  was  living  in
    Hungary and he was living in Ilford, Essex.

 9. Counsel submitted that the Respondent has not  said  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  He submitted  that  when  the  Appellant  was
    apprehended he thought he still had  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom until August 2015.  He was unaware  that  his  leave  had  been
    curtailed on 23 May 2014.  Counsel submitted that the Appellant went to
    Belfast on 20 May 2014 but at that time  he  still  had  leave  as  the
    curtailment of his leave was not issued until 23 May 2014.

10. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's evidence is that the pressure on
    his Hungarian partner was unfair and that is why she did not answer the
    questions properly.

11. Counsel submitted that it is true that the Appellant did not appear for
    the hearing of the First-tier appeal  but  even  if  he  had  appeared,
    because there was no Appellant's bundle, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    could not have come to a fair decision.

12. Counsel submitted that had the bundle been before the judge  she  would
    have known that the Appellant was a genuine  student.   In  the  bundle
    there is evidence of his qualifications.  He submitted that there is no
    evidence from the EEA national in the bundle but this is not an  appeal
    against a decision accusing the Appellant of entering into  a  marriage
    of convenience.  This is an  appeal  against  the  curtailment  of  the
    Appellant's leave.

13. Counsel submitted that there is a material error in law in the  judge's
    decision because he did not consider the Appellant's bundle.

14. I was asked to find that because of this  material  error  of  law  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge`s decision should be set aside and the  claim
    remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing.   He
    submitted that that would be fair on both  the  Appellant  and  on  the
    Respondent  who  can  then  provide  the  further  evidence  which   is
    necessary.

15. Counsel submitted that Article 8 is not relevant in  this  context  but
    there has been procedural unfairness and the  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

16. He submitted that the Appellant tried to contact the Respondent when he
    found the college's licence had been revoked and he was  told  to  wait
    until he got the 60 day letter which he never got.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that there has been  no  challenge  to
    the refusal letter and there has been no evidence from the  Appellant's
    partner.  The Presenting Officer referred me to  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision which refers to there being no evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to confirm that the Appellant is a  genuine  student  or
    has undertaken any studies  in  the  UK.   She  submitted  that  it  is
    arguable that the Tribunal judge would have seen that the Appellant had
    studied in the United Kingdom had the Appellant's  bundle  been  before
    her but this does  not  mean  that  the  judge  would  have  found  the
    Appellant to be a genuine student  when  his  history  was  considered,
    along with all the circumstances of the claim.

18. I was referred to paragraph 11 of the said case of Forman which  refers
    to the Article 8 jurisprudence evolving and states that  Article  8  is
    not a general dispensing power.  She submitted  that  this  Appellant's
    private life is limited and she submitted that she is  relying  on  the
    Rule 24 response.

Decision and Reasons

19. The file makes it clear that a 30 page bundle was sent by the Appellant
    to the First-tier Tribunal and the Respondent on 19 June 2015.   It  is
    clear from the decision that this bundle  was  not  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It was not before her.

20. Because of this the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take account of
    relevant evidence.

21. The burden of proof transferred to the Respondent,  but  this  was  not
    taken into account by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge.  Although  the
    refusal letter refers to the interviews with the Appellant and with his
    bride the actual interview records are not on file.  The refusal letter
    states that the Hungarian bride admitted that this was a sham  marriage
    and she has now left the United Kingdom.

22. The Upper  Tribunal's  permission  to  appeal  states  that  there  are
    concerns about the materiality of the arguable error as the Appellant's
    partner no longer appears to be in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  Tier  4
    (General) Student leave was revoked and the Appellant's  statement  was
    brief but permission to appeal was still granted.

23. The bundle referred to, contains evidence of  the  Appellant's  studies
    which should have been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

24. No reason has been given by the Appellant for not  turning  up  at  his
    First-tier hearing but he did not do so. Based on the facts and on what
    is before me I find that there is a material error of law in the First-
    tier Judge's decision as relevant evidence was not considered by her.

25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision, promulgated on 31  July  2015
    should be set aside and in the interest of fairness to both parties the
    Appellant's appeal should be heard before the First-tier Tribunal.

26. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Flynn.

27. Anonymity has been directed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

