

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/23147/2014
      IA/23148/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16th October 2014                         |On: 17th October 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               Kanchana Rajapakse Rajapakse Pathiranna Helage
                    Niranjan Thalath De Silva Siriwardane
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Hassan, Corbin and Hassan
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are both  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka.  They  appeal  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Cox)[1]  to
    dismiss their linked  appeals  against  the  Respondent'  decisions  to
    refuse to vary their leave to remain and to remove them from the United
    Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006[2].


 2. The First Appellant was in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant
    and the Second Appellant, her husband, was here as her dependent.  They
    applied to vary that leave so as to extend  it.   The  First  Appellant
    wanted to study for an MBA, having completed her bachelor's degree.

 3. It is accepted that the case turns  of  the  First  Appellant;  if  she
    succeeds so too does her husband.

 4. There was only one reason why the application  was  refused:  paragraph
    245zx (ha) the Immigration Rules. That reads as follows:

         "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a student,  studying  courses  at  degree  level  or
         above.."


    The Respondent's records showed that the First Appellant had previously
    been granted leave to remain for a total of 4 years  and  2  months  to
    study at degree level or above, and that if she  were  to  be  given  a
    further year to take her MBA that would take her to over five years.


 5. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal set out the  Appellants'  immigration
    history. It is recorded that they landed in March 2008  with  leave  as
    Tier 4 Migrants and that this leave was thereafter extended on a number
    of occasions.  All of the grants of leave were to study at degree level
    or above. The Appellants' case was however that the First Appellant had
    only in fact studied at degree level for a  period  of  three  years  2
    months and 22 days. That is because soon after she entered the  UK  she
    switched courses and colleges. Instead of studying at degree  level  at
    EThames Graduate School she in fact went to study  for  a  below-degree
    level diploma at  LTC  College  in  London.  The  Respondent  had  been
    informed about this switch in Tier 4 Sponsor by both the Appellant  and
    LTC college.   Having  recorded  these  submissions  the  determination
    reads:

         "21. I note that there is  a  gap  in  the  Appellant's  chronology
         between  May  2009  and  April  2011  and  that   the   Appellant's
         [subsequent] course at LSBF was at level 7. The Appellant  has  not
         provided any evidence as to what she was doing  during  the  period
         from the end of her years studying  at  the  LTC  college  and  the
         commencement of her course at  the  LSBF  in  April  2011.  In  the
         absence of this  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  reasonable
         inference to draw is that she was studying at level  6.  Especially
         as I believe the Appellant would not have been  able  to  study  at
         level 7 in April 2011, unless she had successfully studied a course
         at level 6 (ie degree level)".


    The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellants  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof and dismissed the appeals.




 6. The Appellants now appeal on the grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make findings of fact on material issues, namely whether  the
    First Appellant was correct in saying that she had in fact only studied
    at degree level for two months after she arrived, having transferred to
    a below-degree  level  course  at  LTC  in  May  2008.    The  "gap  in
    chronology" mentioned at paragraph 21 of the determination was actually
    filled by below-degree level study  and  there  was  evidence  of  this
    before the Tribunal which is not mentioned in the  determination.   Had
    the First-tier Tribunal directed itself to consider  that  evidence  it
    would have been apparent that the First Appellant has not been studying
    at degree level or above for any longer than the three years, 2  months
    and 22 days that she contended to be the  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 7. The Rule 24 response indicates that the Respondent was not able to give
    any indication as to her position prior to the hearing since she  could
    not locate the file. Before me Ms Pal had an opportunity to discuss the
    grounds of appeal with Mr Hassan and review the evidence that had  been
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Having done so she opposed the appeal.
    It was her submission that paragraph 245ZX (ha) should be read in  line
    with other provisions in the Immigration Rules which specify that it is
    the purpose for which leave was  granted  that  counts,  not  what  the
    applicant has actually been doing with her time. On that basis it would
    be irrelevant that the Appellant has actually studied for some  of  the
    time she has been in the UK  at  below  degree  level,  since  she  was
    granted leave to enter on the basis that she would be taking  a  degree
    level course.


    Error of Law

 8. I find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an
    error of law such that it must be set aside. Even  though  this  matter
    was determined on the papers it is evident from paragraph 17  that  the
    Tribunal understood the Appellant's case. That was that from  May  2008
    she was not studying at degree level of above, until  April  2011  when
    she started her ACCA course. She had provided documentary  evidence  to
    that effect, and that is mentioned at paragraph 19.  The  determination
    does not make  adequate  findings  of  fact  on  that  contention.  The
    determination makes no findings about  what  the  Appellant  was  doing
    between May 2008 and May 2009 and the inference drawn at paragraph  21,
    that she must have been  studying  at  level  6  immediately  prior  to
    commencing her  ACCA  course  is  irrelevant  and  unsupported  by  the
    evidence.




    The Re-Made Decision


 9. I make the following findings of fact.  The Appellant arrived in  March
    2008 and studied at degree level for  two  months  at  EThames  college
    between 15th March 2008 and 18th May 2008. She then switched  to  study
    below degree level at LTC (Certificate  in  Human  Resource  Management
    followed by a ABE Diploma in Human Resources Management  Course),  then
    Union College (Edexcel Higher National Diploma  in  Business  Studies).
    This is evidenced by her enrollment letter from LTC dated 19th May 2008
    (page 6 bundle), the letter to the Respondent informing them  that  she
    had switched course (page 7) her enrolment certificate dated 15th  June
    2009 from LTC (page 8) and the letter from  Union  College  dated  10th
    March 2011 (page 9).   She did not start study at degree level of above
    until April 2011 when she started to study for the ACCA  exams  at  the
    London School of Business and Finance: see letter from the  same  dated
    8th March 2011 (at 11). On the 17th April 2014 she started her  MBA  at
    the London School of Marketing.  This means  that  she  has  spent  the
    following periods studying at degree level or above since  she  arrived
    in March 2008:


    15th March 2008 - 18th May 2008    2 months 4 days (EThames)
    11th April 2011 - present     3 years, 6 months and 5  days  (LSBF  and
                                  LSM)


10. That is a total of 3 years, 8 months and 5 days, presuming that she has
    been studying continually and has had no break. Her MBA will finish  in
    May 2015. That is seven months away. It follows that when  that  course
    ends she will not have spent in excess of five  years  studying  at  or
    above degree level.


11. The Respondent's case is that these facts are not what  matters.  I  am
    asked to read the rule as being directed at the grant of  leave  rather
    than the actual study undertaken. So if the Appellant has now had  five
    years of Tier 4 leave in order to study at degree level,  her  time  is
    up. The plain wording of the rule suggests otherwise. It is focused  on
    the actual study undertaken, not the terms of  the  student's  original
    application, nor the grant of leave. It is to be contrasted with  other
    rules within the 'Points Based System' which specify  that  it  is  the
    grant of leave  that  counts.  See  for  instance  paragraph  120A  (as
    amended)  which  is  concerned  with   academic   progress:   paragraph
    120A(b)(i) provides:
         (b) For a course to represent academic progress from previous
         study, the course must:
           (i)   be above the level of the previous course for which the
                 applicant was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student
                 or as a Student, or
12. I therefore allow the appeal.



Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


14. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeals.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  16th
                                October 2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Appeal heard on the 22nd July 2014, determination promulgated 5th
August 2014.
[2] 14th May 2014

