
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23406/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7th September 2015                |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD JAWAD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Britain Solicitors,
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, appeals  against  the  decision
    of the First tier Tribunal (Judge Symes) dated 23.3.15,  in  which  the
    Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision of 23.5.14 refusing to issue the Appellant  with  a  Residence
    Card under Regulation 17(1) of The Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ('the EEA Regs').  The  Appellant  had  on  or  around
    4.12.13 made an application on form EEA2 for such a card on  the  basis
    that he was a  family  member  (spouse)  of  Ms  Agne  Kadisaite  ('the
    Sponsor'), a 'qualified person' under the EEA Regs, being a  Lithuanian
    national working in the United Kingdom. The Appellant and  Sponsor  had
    married at the Wood Green Registry Office on 10.10.13.

2     On 15.5.14 the Respondent had conducted a marriage interview with  the
    Appellant and Sponsor.

3     In a decision letter dated 23.5.14, the Respondent refused to issue  a
    residence card to the Appellant, on the grounds that the Respondent was
    of the view that the Appellant's marriage was one of  convenience,  and
    that the Appellant did not meet the definition of 'spouse' under Reg  2
    of the EEA Regs. In her decision letter, the Respondent  asserted  that
    there had been 'a number of inconsistent and conflicting answers given'
    during the marriage interview, as follows (as  summarised,  accurately,
    in my view, by the Judge at [5]):

    (a)    the order of events on their first date;

    (b)    whether they had gone to Nandos or not on their second  date  or
         simply remained at the park near Woolwich Arsenal;

    (c)    the timing of their first intimacy (the  Appellant  saying  six-
         seven months after the first date, the Sponsor saying that  it  was
         just two to three weeks afterwards);

    (d)    the Sponsor's living arrangements from 2011-2013 when she  lived
         with her friend Lina as to which the Appellant only knew  that  she
         lived in Stratford;

    (e)    whether the Sponsor had walked all the way  home  following  his
         proposal to her;

    (f)     whether  they  had  moved  their  belongings  in  together   or
         separately;

    (g)    their lack of  recollection  of  the  name  of  the  Appellant's
         witness at the marriage which he eventually recalled  was  Mudhasir
         and she did not recall, and whether or not there was a wedding cake
         or alcohol at the subsequent celebration;

    (h)    the date of the Sponsor's conversion to Islam (January or  April
         2014 according to her and him respectively) and their  mutual  lack
         of knowledge of dates of Ramadan or the Islamic new year;

    (i)    the  timing  and  duration  of  the  Sponsor's  last  return  to
         Lithuania;

    (j)    each others landline and mobile telephone numbers;  additionally
         the Appellant had declined to show the  interviewer  text  messages
         between him and his wife, saying they were private.

4     The Appellant has therefore known since being served with  the  notice
    of decision dated 23.5.14 what, at least in summary terms, the  alleged
    discrepancies in their interviews were said to be by the Respondent.

5     The Appellant filed notice of appeal to the First tier  Tribunal.  The
    matter was first listed for hearing on 16.12.14  and  the  matter  came
    before a Judge. The hearing was adjourned with the following directions
    dated 16.12.14, which I have seen in the Tribunal file:

         "The Appeal is adjourned and will be heard  on  the  25th  February
         2015.

         Any further witness statement must be filed with the AIT and served
         upon the other party no later than 11th February 2015.

         The Home Office interview record dated 15th May 2014  to  be  flied
         with AIT and served upon the other party  no  later  than  the  4th
         February 2015.

         All  witness  statements  shall  be  accompanied  by  an  adornment
         certifying that they are understood and adopted by the  witness  as
         her or her (sic) evidence in chief."

6     Indeed, Judge Symes refers to this direction at [11].

7     By the time the matter was listed before Judge Symes on  25.2.15,  the
    Respondent had supplied an 'interview summary sheet' on  form  ICD.4605
    dated 15.5.14 (see [10]). The Judge noted at [11] that  the  Respondent
    had failed to file and serve a copy of the interview record itself.

8     The Respondent was not represented before the Judge,  who  noted  that
    there was no application for an adjournment [17].

9     The Judge heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor,  and
    there were letters from three witnesses confirming that they had  known
    the couple  for  varying  periods  [9];  it  would  appear  that  these
    witnesses also attended court to adopt those letters [24].

    The FtT decision

10    The Judge correctly directed himself in law  in  terms  of  evidential
    burdens, in accordance with   Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC), at [19-20], and held at  [21]
    that the answers to the questions put to the Appellant and  Sponsor  at
    interview gave real cause for concern over the genuine  nature  of  the
    marriage, sufficient to permit the Respondent to raise  the  matter  as
    one requiring determine in the appeal proceedings.

11    The Judge stated at [22] that he was particularly concerned  with  the
    following matters:

    (i)    the Appellant's lack of knowledge  about  the  Sponsor's  living
         arrangements over a time when they claimed  to  be  dating,  as  it
         seemed  inconceivable  that  this  would  not  be  a   subject   of
         discussion;

    (ii)   the circumstances in which  they  moved  their  belongings  into
         shared accommodation;

    (iii)  the lack of the recollection of the name of an important  figure
         at the marriage ceremony, and

    (iv)   the Appellant's uncertainly as the timing and  duration  of  the
         Sponsor's last return to Lithuania.

12    The Judge was less concerned with other matters, for reasons given  at
    [22], but considered that enough of the Respondent's criticisms had hit
    the target for there to be a real concern as to the relationship  being
    genuine.  At [23] the Judge noted his concern that there  had  been  no
    attempt  in  the  witness  statements  provided  to  explain  how   the
    discrepancies arose, or to challenge the manner in which the  interview
    was  conducted.  He  accepted  that  the  interview  should  have  been
    disclosed, applying Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 515 (IAC), but noted that the  statements  were  vague  and
    general in the extreme; there was virtually nothing to give content  or
    colour to their own relationship [24]. The judge held at [26]  that  on
    the evidence available to him and to  the  standard  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that the Appellant  was  not  the  family  member  of  a
    qualified person because the relationship relied upon was a marriage of
    convenience, and dismissed the appeal.

13    The Appellant's Grounds of Appeal dated 7.4.15 are  prolix  and  large
    sections contain submissions as to how the appeal ought  to  have  been
    determined on its merits, rather than seeking to identify errors of law
    in the decision. However, the Grounds,  argue,  in  summary,  that  the
    Judge erred in law in:

    (i)    providing an incomplete summary of the procedural history of the
         appeal: failing to note that the Appellant had  (it  was  asserted)
         twice, on 3.7.14 and 10.9.14 requested that the Respondent  provide
         the transcript of the marriage interview [17];

    (ii)    accepting  the  partial  interview  summary  as   an   accurate
         reflection of the interview, and thereby  misdirecting  himself  in
         law as to the minimum procedural safeguards required in such cases,
         as set out in Miah [17].

14    Permission was granted by judge of the First tier  Tribunal  Robertson
    on 21.5.15 as follows:

         ". ... whilst the drafter of the grounds has been  unduly  critical
         of the Judge (see the accusation levelled against him at para 2  of
         the grounds), it is arguable  that  the  reason  why  the  marriage
         interview record should have been provided was  because  'what  was
         recorded is disputed" (grounds, para 17). In  the  absence  of  the
         interview record, the Judge could not determine whether the summary
         record provided reflected the original record. It is arguable  that
         absence of the marriage interview record resulted in unfairness  to
         the Appellant."

15    Before me, I  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Khan  for  the  Appellant,
    adopting the Appellant's grounds of  appeal.  Mr  Khan,  who  had  also
    appeared before the Judge, confirmed that the Respondent  had  provided
    the ICD 4605 interview  summary  sheet  at  the  adjourned  hearing  of
    16.12.14. I have had sight of  the  interview  summary  sheet.   It  is
    clearly not a complete record of the interview. However, it raises  the
    same issues, in the same order, as the issues  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter, in terms not materially different from the language used in the
    refusal letter.

16    In the course of submissions, I sought clarification  as  to  whether,
    at the hearing before the Judge  on  25.2.15,  Mr  Khan  had  sought  a
    further adjournment of the appeal in order to obtain the full interview
    record. He had not. He had, he said, asked that in the absence  of  the
    interview record, the interview summary sheet should not be relied  on,
    (although he later clarified to me that he had  not  in  fact  made  an
    application to the Judge to exclude the interview summary  sheet),  and
    that the appeal before the Judge should be determined on the  basis  of
    the other evidence before the Judge at the date of hearing, and that in
    those circumstances the Respondent had not met the  evidential  burden,
    which in the first place  rested  on  her,  to  show  that  there  were
    reasonable grounds  to suspect a marriage of convenience.

17    Ms Fijiwala, for  the  Respondent,  argued  that  the  Respondent  had
    discharged the evidential burden on her to establish  that   reasonable
    grounds existed to suspect that the Appellant was a party to a marriage
    of convenience, and that the Judge had been entitled  on  the  evidence
    before him to arrive at the conclusion that the Appellant was indeed  a
    party to such a marriage.

    Discussion

18    The  Appellant's  complaint,  at  its  heart,  is  one  of  procedural
    unfairness. The Appellant should, he argues, have been provided with  a
    copy of the marriage interview. I agree. The Judge also  agreed  -  see
    para [23] lines 5-7:

         "I accept, of course, that interview records should  be  disclosed,
         as shown by decisions such as Miah ... and the failure  to  produce
         the record does however rather diminish the weight I can  give  the
         summary, as it is quite wrong for the record not to be provided  to
         the Appellant and Sponsor."

19    However, the Judge immediately continued:

         "Nevertheless as stated by Lord Carnwath in Secretary of State  the
         Home Department v MN and KY (Scotland) [2015] UKSC 20 at [22] -  in
         Tribunal proceedings, 'the  area  of  legitimate  debate  is  about
         relevance and weight, not admissibility'.

20    Further, I note in Miah itself that the  Upper  Tribunal  referred  at
    [9] to R v SSHD ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531, para [14] wherein  Lord
    Mustill observed that procedural  fairness  in  any  given  context  is
    essentially an intuitive  judgement;  that  what  fairness  demands  is
    dependent on the context of the decision and this is to be  taken  into
    account in all its aspects. The Upper Tribunal also  referred  to  Lord
    Steyn's observation in R(Daley) v SSHD [2001] 2AC 532 at [28] that  'in
    law context is everything'.

21    I find that notwithstanding the fact that the full transcript  of  the
    marriage interview had not been  successfully  filed  and  served  (see
    paragraph 27 below), the interview summary sheet was so  provided,  and
    that it amounted to evidence on which the Respondent  was  entitled  to
    rely in support of her proposition that there were  reasonable  grounds
    to suspect a marriage of convenience. As  evidence,  I  accept,  and  I
    believe the Judge also accepted, that it is less reliable than  a  full
    copy of the marriage interview. However, it  is  evidence  nonetheless,
    and the Judge did not err in law in taking it into account.

22    The context (see Doody, above) in which the Judge  was  assessing  the
    fairness of the Respondent relying on the interview summary record, was
    that since service of the Respondent's decision letter of 23.4.14,  the
    Appellant had been aware of the  basis  on  which  the  Respondent  was
    alleging that there were reasonable grounds  to suspect a  marriage  of
    convenience. The Appellant had also, on 16.12.14, received  a  copy  of
    the interview summary sheet raising the same points.

23    However, the Appellant  chose  not  to  address  any  of  the  alleged
    discrepancies in the witness statement evidence of the Appellant or the
    Sponsor. The Judge remarked that the statements were vague and  general
    in the extreme, and there was no attempt in those statements to explain
    how the discrepancies arose or to challenge the  manner  in  which  the
    interview was conducted. The Judge also observed that the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's supporting witnesses was so scant as to be almost  non-
    existent [24].

24    In that context, I find that it  does  not  behove  the  Appellant  to
    continue to complain that he was not provided with a full copy  of  the
    marriage interview. The Appellant has, by the manner in which he  chose
    to prepare his evidence, forgone his opportunity to address, in witness
    statement and oral evidence, the  matters  concerning  the  Respondent.
    Further, he did not apply for a further adjournment of  the  appeal  at
    the hearing of 25.2.15.

25    I find, notwithstanding the failure of the  Respondent  to  serve  the
    marriage interview, that there was no unfairness in the manner in which
    the Judge proceeded. Further,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Appellant's
    complaint (see [13(i)] above) that the Judge did not  set  out  in  his
    decision that the Appellant had,  he  asserts,  twice  written  to  the
    Respondent asking for a copy of the marriage  interview;  it  is  clear
    from [11] that the  Judge  was  aware  that  the  Respondent  had  been
    directed on 16.12.14 to  file  and  serve  the  document.  Whether  the
    Appellant had written to the Respondent prior to that  date  requesting
    the document adds  nothing  material  to  the  picture,  and  does  not
    demonstrate that the Judge failed  to  appreciate  some  relevant  fact
    which was material to the issue of procedural fairness.

26    Procedural fairness is the only  identifiable  ground  raised  in  the
    Appellant's grounds which are otherwise verbiage. For the avoidance  of
    doubt, I find that the reasons given by the  Judge,  summarised  at  my
    [11] above, were sufficient in law to support his  finding  that  on  a
    balance of probabilities, the Appellant was not the family member of  a
    qualified person, because the relationship relied upon was  a  marriage
    of convenience.

27    I should add that in the course of the hearing before me, Ms  Fijiwala
    discovered in her papers a copy of  the  marriage  interview,  together
    with evidence that the Respondent had in fact  at  least  attempted  to
    file and serve it, by sending a copy to  'Richmond  Magistrates  Court,
    Parkshot, Surrey TW9 2RF' on  29.1.15.  Given  that  this  a  satellite
    court, I query whether this was an appropriate address for the  service
    of documentation. It had clearly not reached the Tribunal file  by  the
    time the Judge heard the appeal at  that  hearing  centre  on  25.2.15.
    There was another letter in the Respondent's  file  indicating  that  a
    copy of the interview had  also  been  sent  to  'M  S  Arif,  Darwin's
    College, 1st Floor, Odd Fellows House, 40 Fountain  Street,  Manchester
    M2 2BE'. Mr Khan informed me that the Appellant had  never  studied  at
    that college, and did not know anyone by the name of M S Arif.

28    The Judge proceeded on the basis that the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    file and serve the  marriage  interview.  I  have  not  considered  the
    interview, save  to  note  that  it  was  very  lengthy.  However,  the
    discovery that the Respondent had at least attempted to file and  serve
    the document does not alter my analysis above. I do not find that it is
    material that the failure of the  Respondent  to  file  and  serve  the
    interview arose from the Respondent posting the document to  the  wrong
    person, rather than taking no action.  The  Appellant  still  took  his
    decision about how to prepare for the appeal,  and  failed  to  address
    adequately or at all the evidence which was being relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent, and had been served on  the  Appellant,  ie  the  interview
    summary sheet.

29    This decision  should  not  be  taken  as  in  any  way  diluting  the
    importance of providing appellants with all  the  material  taken  into
    account by the  Respondent  in  making  an  adverse  decision,  or  the
    guidance provided in Miah. I have held that  in  the  context  of  this
    particular appeal, and in light of the way that the Appellant chose  to
    prepare and present his case  before  the  First  tier,  there  was  no
    procedural unfairness to him.

    Decision

30    I ruled at the hearing before me that the  Judge's  decision  did  not
    involve the making of any material error of law. I  now  provide  these
    written reason for that decision. I uphold the decision  of  the  First
    tier.




    Signed:


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


    Date: 25 January 2016


