

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23933/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 4 July 2017                                |On 11 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                               MR ASIM RAFIQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 15 November 2016, in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom  pursuant  to  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.


 2. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and  none  is  required  at
    this stage.

 3. The appellant's application was refused on 11 June  2015.   His  appeal
    was heard on 20 October 2016.  Neither the appellant nor the respondent
    was represented at the hearing.   The  FTTJ  noted  that  a  notice  of
    hearing had been sent to the appellant and considered  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to  proceed  with  the  hearing.  He  did  so  and
    dismissed the  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated the sponsor, the appellant's purported wife, was in the UK
    or exercising Treaty rights here.


 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal because it was not clear
    why the FTTJ had not considered the  medical  evidence  as  a  possible
    explanation for the appellant's absence.

 5. At the outset of the hearing before me, I indicated  to  the  appellant
    and Mr Bramble, who appeared for the  respondent,  that  the  FTTJ  had
    mistakenly referred to medical  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant
    shortly before the hearing  as  having  been  sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the notice of appeal (his paragraph 5).

 6. Mr Bramble accepted that the FTTJ had failed to take into  account  the
    medical evidence submitted by the appellant prior  to  the  hearing  in
    considering whether it was in the interests of justice  to  proceed  in
    the absence of the appellant.  He conceded the appellant  deserved  the
    opportunity to present his case in court and that the matter should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 7. The power to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  the  appellant
    is contained in Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
    (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  ("the  Rules").   This
    requires the Tribunal to consider whether it is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.  The FTTJ had the power to adjourn
    the hearing of his  own  motion  under  Rule  4(3)(h).  The  overriding
    objective in Rule 2 required the Tribunal to deal with the case  fairly
    and justly when exercising any power under the Rules.

 8. It is clear from the FTTJ's decision that he had failed  to  take  into
    account, in considering whether to proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the
    absence of the appellant, the content of the medical evidence submitted
    by the appellant prior to the hearing (albeit without a formal  request
    for an adjournment). The  FTTJ  knew  the  appellant  was  not  legally
    represented and should have considered whether it was in the  interests
    of justice for the hearing to proceed in the absence of  the  appellant
    in the light of the contemporaneous medical evidence before  him.  This
    evidence was sufficient to demonstrate a good reason for adjournment of
    the  hearing:  it  was  from  the  appellant's  treating  hospital  and
    indicated that the appellant was unwell as a result of an accident.


 9. I am satisfied that the FTTJ's decision to proceed in  the  absence  of
    the appellant was flawed: it was procedurally unfair and  must  be  set
    aside.  I note that the appellant's circumstances  have  changed  since
    the hearing before the FTTJ.  Evidence of his changed circumstances  is
    required. It is appropriate therefore for the matter to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.    It  may  be  that  the
    outcome of the hearing will  be  no  different  but  the  appellant  is
    entitled to a fair hearing.  In passing I observe  that  the  appellant
    pursues an Article 8 claim but this is precluded following the Court of
    Appeal judgment in Amirteymour  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of procedure.


11. I set aside the decision.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ Randall.





A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                        Dated 10 July 2017



