
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/23940/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2016                           |On 5 April 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M T A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr J Waithe (counsel) instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowes,  promulgated  on  11  September
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1968 and is a national of Nigeria.

4.  On  14  May  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bowes ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25 January 2016  Judge  Colyer  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

   "2. The respondent submits that  there  was  the  making  of  a  material
   misdirection of law on a material matter. It is arguable that  the  judge
   erred in law for the following reasons:
     a. The immigration judge records that the appellant was born in  1968,
        and came to this country in 2000 (Paras 1 and 3 respectively).  She
        therefore  lived  in  Nigeria  some  32  years.  She  has  a   long
        relationship with someone of Nigerian ethnicity (Paras 12 and  13).
        The judge of the first-tier tribunal finds that  she  has  ties  to
        Nigeria. (Paras 24).
     b. The judge then makes a finding at paragraph 25 that the  attack  by
        her husband is capable of usurping  those  ties.  That  finding  is
        inadequately reasoned
   3. Permission to appeal may be granted if I am satisfied that  there  may
   be a material error of law that may have made a  material  difference  to
   the outcome of the original appeal. This  could  be  due  to  adverse  or
   irrational findings or a lack of findings on core issues  as  established
   in the case of R (Iran etc) v SSHD 2005 EWCA Civ 982. It is arguable that
   the judge has misdirected himself for the above reasons and  the  grounds
   submitted by the respondent on these points are arguable.  Permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted."

The Hearing

7. Mr Staunton, for the respondent, adopted the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal and focused on [24] and [25] of the decision. He reminded me that  at
[24] the Judge acknowledges that the appellant's claim is not  a  claim  for
international protection, but then goes on to find (at [25])  that,  because
the appellant has been the victim of a violent and life  threatening  attack
by her husband in Nigeria, the appellant has no ties to Nigeria.  He  argued
that the Judge fails to give reasons & provides no  explanation  to  support
the conclusion that the appellant has no ties (whether social,  cultural  or
family) to her country of origin. The respondent's  attack  on  the  Judge's
decision relates entirely to the adequacy of  the  reasons  which  lead  the
Judge to his conclusion.

8. Mr Waithe, counsel for the appellant, told me  that  the  decision  is  a
well-reasoned decision which does not contain an error of law with  material
or otherwise. He drew my attention to what is clearly a typing error in  the
ultimate sentence of [24] and suggested that  the  word  "usurping"  in  the
final  sentence  of  [25]  might  (more  appropriately)  be  "severing".  He
referred me to [22] and told me that it is clear from the  content  of  that
paragraph that the Judge made a rounded assessment of all of  the  evidence,
and  applied  the  correct  legal  test.  He  suggested  that,  because  the
appellant is a recognised victim of domestic violence,  it  is  logical  for
the Judge to draw the conclusion that the acts  of  violence  in  themselves
are sufficient to sever all ties to the appellant's country  of  origin.  He
argued that there was no deficiency in the fact-finding exercise.  He  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.


Analysis

9. The history of the appellant's application is that on  15  December  2010
the appellant, for the first time, made an application for leave  to  remain
on article 8 ECHR grounds. The respondent rejected that application  because
it was not accompanied by a fee. A further application (on similar  grounds)
was submitted on 25 February 2011. That  application  was  rejected  by  the
respondent because the application form had not been  fully  completed.  The
appellant's application was resubmitted on 7 April 2011 and refused  by  the
respondent on 18 April 2011. That refusal did not carry a right of appeal.

10. The appellant's solicitors sought reconsideration of the decision of  18
April 2011 by letters dated for August 2011  and  9  January  2012.  At  the
request of the  respondent,  the  appellant's  solicitors  provided  further
information on both 22 April 2014 and  12  May  2014.  The  respondent  then
considered those representations and rejected  the  appellant's  application
on 14 May 2014.

11. In his decision, the Judge dealt with the appellant's appeal in  so  far
as it related to appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules  between  [19]  and
[21]. The Judge's reasoning is brief, but no challenge is  taken  by  either
party  to  the  Judge's  decision  that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of appendix FM.

12. At [2] of decision the Judge correctly focuses  attention  on  paragraph
276 ADE (1)(vi) of the rules. Paragraph 276 ADE says:-

      "276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
      remain on the
      grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application,
      the applicant:
      (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
      LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
      (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds
      of private life in the UK; and
      (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
      (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
      (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK
      for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it
      would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or
      (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
      least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any
      period of imprisonment); or
      (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
      less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no
      ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
      he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

 The Judge then  considers  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  immigration  rules
between [22] and [26]

13. The Judge's findings at [24] relate to the fear that the  appellant  has
of her violent former partner, from whom she  fled  several  years  ago.  At
[25] the Judge finds that the appellant speaks the language of  Nigeria  and
maintains contact with a cousin there. The Judge finds  that  the  appellant
speaks Yoruba; that the appellant was educated  in  Nigeria,  and  that  the
appellant lived in Nigeria for 31 years.

14. What the Judge does is identify cultural,  social  and  family  ties  to
Nigeria. In the final sentence of [25] the Judge  finds  that  those  links,
which he clearly finds exist, are extinguished  ("usurped")  by  the  attack
that the appellant endured at the hands of her former partner several  years
ago.

15. In Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015]  UKUT  42  (IAC)
it was held that the requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE (vi) (in  force
from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that a person "is  aged  18  years
or above,  has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
(discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including  social,
cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
required to leave the UK", requires a rounded assessment  as  to  whether  a
person's familial ties could result in support.

16. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC)  the
Tribunal said that the natural and ordinary meaning of the  word  'ties'  in
paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules (HC194) imports a concept  involving
something more than merely remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
proposed deportation or removal. It involves there  being  a  connection  to
life in that country. Consideration of whether a person  has  'no  ties'  to
such a country must involve a rounded assessment  of  all  of  the  relevant
circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
circumstances. In Hamzat 2015 EWHC 499 it was said that where  the  evidence
was limited to the fact that there were no relatives in Nigeria it  was  not
appropriate to say that there were no ties in the absence of other  evidence
- in a case in which there was no reference to  what  had  happened  to  the
appellant since school, to any friends or employment opportunities  or  lack
thereof, to the extent of her education or to any  family  members  extended
or otherwise.

17. In R (on the application of Akpan) [2015] EWCA  Civ  1266  the  Claimant
entered the UK at the age of 14 from Nigeria. She claimed to  be  unable  to
get in touch with any of her family in Nigeria since she left  in  2003  and
that she had no exposure to the cultural norms of Nigeria. It was held  that
the decision in Ogundimu, which provided  authoritative  guidance  regarding
the  meaning  of  'no  ties',  referred  at  paragraph  125  to  a  list  of
considerations relevant to the assessment of whether a person  had  ties  to
his or her country of origin. The Deputy Judge erred in  treating  those  as
mandatory considerations, which always had to be present before  ties  could
be  found.  The  Deputy  Judge  treated  the  presence  or  absence   of   a
relationship with persons in Nigeria as  the  critical  factor  in  deciding
whether ties existed for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  In  contrast,
in Ogundimu, the Upper Tribunal correctly construed the relevant  phrase  as
importing a general evaluative judgement as part of an  exacting  test  that
focused on the question of whether there was a continued connection to  life
in the country in question amounting to ties that could  result  in  support
to a claimant in the event of return,  so  that  the  consequences  for  the
claimant in trying to re-establish herself in her country  of  origin  would
not be unjustifiably harsh. The Upper Tribunal was not seeking  to  put  the
rounded assessment into  a  straightjacket  or  to  create  a  checklist  of
matters which had to be present or which had to be addressed directly  in  a
decision letter. It was simply indicating  that  the  listed  considerations
could on no  view  be  regarded  as  irrelevant  for  the  purposes  of  the
assessment to be made. The Deputy Judge had to consider the Claimant's  bald
assertions regarding the absence of family and  friends  in  Nigeria,  along
with the fact that the Claimant had lived in Nigeria until she  was  14  and
hence had acquired familiarity with customs there at an age when it was  not
unreasonable to think she would retain  a  basic  understanding  of  how  to
function in that society.  It could  not  be  said  that  the  Secretary  of
State's conclusion that the Claimant had failed to  demonstrate  an  absence
of relevant ties to Nigeria, and thus failed to show  that  she  was  within
the scope of the exacting test in paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration
Rules, was an irrational one.

18. Although the Judge lists factors which can be interpreted as  indicating
that there are cultural, social and family ties to  Nigeria,  in  the  final
sentence of [25] the Judge  reaches  the  conclusion  that  those  ties  are
extinguished by one historic, violent, act. The Judge does not  explain  why
he reaches that conclusion. It is at  least  implicit  that  the  Judge  was
moved by what the appellant has endured, but implication is not  sufficient.
It is incumbent on the Judge to make reasoned findings of  fact;  and  those
findings of fact are absent from the decision.

19. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

20. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by material errors of  law
and must be set aside.

21. I consider whether I am in a position to substitute my own decision  but
find that I am unable to do so. There is force in Mr  Staunton's  submission
that this case requires to be heard of  new.  The  errors  in  the  decision
include an inadequacy in the fact-finding process. The  Judge  allowed  this
appeal under the immigration rules, but his decision is based on a  material
error of law. No  consideration  has  been  given  to  whether  or  not  the
appellant's case should be considered on article 8 ECHR grounds outside  the
rules. It is  clear  that  the  appellant  lead  evidence  directed  at  the
establishment of both family and private life within the meaning of  article
8 ECHR. The Judge did give adequate consideration to that evidence.

22. These are all matters which may well be determinative of this appeal  at
a renewed hearing; They are matters on which the appellant should  have  the
opportunity of leading up-to-date evidence.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

23. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

24.  In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because of the nature and extent of the fact finding exercise  necessary  to
reach a just decision in this appeal. None of the findings of  fact  are  to
stand. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

25. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Bowes.

CONCLUSION

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

27. I set the decision aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed                                                              Date 21
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
