

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23213/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On  16th May 2017                      |On  26th May 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms. GA BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                    Claimant
                                MRS NAVDEEP KAUR

No anonymity order made

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Wilding Home Office Presenting Office
For the Respondent: Ms L Turnbull Counsel instructed by Malik Law chambers
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1.  I shall refer to the parties as follows; "the appellant"  in  these
    proceedings is the Secretary of State and I shall refer to Mrs Kaur  as
    the "Claimant." This matter comes before me  for  consideration  as  to
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the determination by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chowdhury) ("FTT") promulgated  on  12th
    October 2016, in which the FTT allowed the appeal on private and family
    life grounds.

     2.     The Claimant is a citizen of   India and whose date of birth  is
    14.2.1989.


Background

    3.   The FTT found that the appellant and her partner were in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Eligibility
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met as the parties  were
    not married nor had they lived  together  for  the  required  two  year
    period [16]. (It was accepted that at the time of hearing  the  parties
    were married but this fact was not admitted as relevant evidence [25]).
      The FTT considered Article 8 in  terms  of  compelling  circumstances
    following SS (Congo) & others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  R  (Agyarko)
    [2015] EWCA Civ  440,  and  reached  the  conclusion  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances to justify consideration of Article 8  outwith
    the Rules. Those circumstances  were  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    husband, a British citizen, would not be able to obtain  employment  in
    India and the couple had started IVF treatment.  The FTT found that the
    couples wish to start a family was a  right  encompassed  conditionally
    under Article 8 ECHR [29].  The FTT went on to  consider  the  evidence
    following the approach in Razgar  [30 - 39] and found that it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the  UK  at  this  critical
    time where she had embarked on IVF treatment, the  appellant's  husband
    would face severe  obstacles  in  obtaining  employment  in  India  and
    difficulties in  adapting  to  another  culture.   The  FTT  considered
    finance, language, and  precarious  circumstances  in  the  context  of
    public interest factors under section 117 Immigration Act 2014 [37-39].
     It had regard to Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and decided that  the
    interference was disproportionate given the likely period of separation
    and consequences for the couple "who desperately want a child" [39].


Ground of application for permission to appeal


    4.    The Appellant argued that the FTT erred in law  by  finding  that
    the  circumstances  (IVF  treatment  and  difficulties   in   obtaining
    employment) met the insurmountable obstacles  criteria.   Reliance  was
    placed on R (Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  This was a misdirection  of
    law.

Permission granted

    5.    Permission was granted by FTJ Kelly who found  that  it  arguable
    that the FTT failed to identify (a) any  insurmountable  obstacles  (as
    defined by section EX 2 of Appendix FM)  to  the  appellant  continuing
    family life outside of the UK, or (b)  any  "compelling  circumstances"
    that merited consideration of the appeal outside of the Rules.


Submissions

      6.    Mr  Wilding  for  the  Appellant  focused  on  the   issue   of
    proportionality and argued that the FTT failed to give adequate reasons
    for finding that the decision was disproportionate or to show  that  it
    was contrary to the insurmountable  obstacles  criteria.  The  FTT  had
    given no reasons for finding that the appellant's  husband  would  have
    difficulty in obtaining employment or integrating in India. And further
    in assessing proportionality the FTT relied on those  very  reasons  in
    concluding that the Immigration Rules had not been met.   The issue  of
    IVF treatment was not a sufficient reason and without more the FTT  was
    not entitled to consider the same under Article  8  family  life.   The
    matter could be dispensed with by this Tribunal. There was no need  for
    further hearing. In my consideration of the remaking of  the  decision,
    Mr Wilding was content to rely on the submissions already made.

    7.   Ms Turnbull  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  FTT  erred  in  its   approach   to
    insurmountable obstacles criteria [32].  She  submitted  that  the  FTT
    properly considered the extent to  which  the  appellant  had  met  the
    Immigration Rules and took into account the IVF treatment.  Ms Turnbull
    submitted that although the FTT erred in its approach, it  nevertheless
    found circumstances outside of the Rules under Article 8.  There was no
    error in the Article 8 assessment by the FTT and reliance on  Chikwamba
    was correct given that there was no public interest in  an  application
    for entry clearance being made out of country. The  appellant  and  her
    husband were married and she was now in her  26th  week  of  pregnancy.
    The matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier for  rehearing  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

Discussion and reasons

     8.  I find that there were material errors of law by the  FTT  in  its
    consideration and approach to Article 8 both under the Rules [33, 34  &
    39] and outside of the Rules. The FTT erred by finding that there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles"  in  terms  of  the  appellant  seeking  IVF
    treatment and that the appellant's husband  would  face  difficulty  in
    obtaining employment on India where he would not be able to  integrate.
    In respect of the latter in particular  the  FTT  gave  no  reasons  in
    support. As was made clear in R (Agyarko) EWCA those factors could  not
    come anywhere near the criteria to show that there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life in India as defined under EX 2.

     9.   The Supreme Court in Agyarko upheld the Court of  Appeal  on  the
    issue of insurmountable obstacles.  The Court effectively  removed  the
    threshold  test  for  Article   8   ECHR.   The   relevant   issue   is
    proportionality.  I am satisfied that there was no evidence capable  of
    supporting an argument  to  engage  Article  8  ECHR  and/or  that  the
    decision was disproportionate even having  regard  to  Chikwamba.   The
    Appellant has made out the grounds argued.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Claimant and her husband could return to India and continue family life
    there  or  that  the  Claimant  could  reasonably  return  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.


     Decision

    10.   There are material errors in law and the decision  shall  be  set
    aside.


    Re making decision


    11.  In remaking the decision I take into account the submissions  made
    by both representatives and the findings of fact as made by the FTT.  I
    found no reason for the matter to be remitted to the FTT.  I remake the
    decision by dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds under Article
    8 within and outside of the Rules.





                               Signed                 Date 25.5.2017


                               GA Black


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                               NO ORDER FOR ANONYMITY
                               NO FEE AWARD AS THE APPEAL IS DISMISSED


                               Signed                 Date 25.5.2017


                               GA Black

                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
