
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23247/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th July 2014                             |on 17th July 2014            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   DONG YU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: No attendance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope promulgated on 28th April 2014 in
        which he  allowed  Mr  Yu's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
        Secretary of State to grant him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and  a  direction  of
        his removal from the United Kingdom made  pursuant  to  section  47
        Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


     2. Neither Mr Yu nor any representative attended  the  Upper  Tribunal
        hearing today. No explanation has been provided for such a  failure
        and there is no application for an  adjournment.   I  am  satisfied
        there has been valid service of the notice of hearing at  the  last
        known address  for  service  for  Mr  Yu  in  accordance  with  the
        provisions of the relevant procedure rules.  In the absence of  any
        explanation for his failure to attend I have considered whether  it
        is appropriate to proceed  with  the  hearing  in  his  absence.  I
        consider it is appropriate and in the interests of  the  overriding
        objectives, fairness, and justice to do so. No explanation has been
        provided, no grounds warranting the Tribunal  not  proceeding  have
        been established, there is nothing that cannot be justly determined
        in his absence, and Tribunal resources have been allocated for  the
        purposes of this hearing which will be lost if the matter is to  be
        put off.


     3. Judge Cope records the procedural history  of  this  matter  noting
        that Mr Yu is in the United Kingdom legally as a student.  He  made
        an application for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)
        Student  Migrant  but  the  CAS  assigned  to  him  by   Sunderland
        University had been withdrawn by the date of decision.  The  notice
        of  refusal/decision  is  dated  4th  June  2013  and  in   section
        'Attributes -Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  (CAS)'  notes
        that 30 points were claimed for a valid  CAS  but  that  none  were
        awarded. The decision maker noted in the refusal:


     "In order for points to be awarded, a Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
   Studies (CAS) must not have been withdrawn or cancelled  by  the  Tier  4
   Sponsor since it was issued.


     The Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies Checking Service was checked
     on 04 June 2013 and it confirmed that the  CAS  with  reference  number
   ............ that you submitted with your application has been  withdrawn
   by     Sunderland University.


     As such, you are not in possession of a valid CAS and so you  have  not
   met    the requirements of the rules.  Therefore,  no  points  have  been
   awarded for    your CAS"


     4. It was not disputed before the Judge that the  above  statement  is
        factually correct. The  Judge  noted  that  once  the  refusal  was
        communicated to Mr Yu and  to  the  University  of  Sunderland  the
        matter was investigated and the Secretary of State advised on  10th
        June 2013 that the information  given  to  her  regarding  the  CAS
        having been withdrawn was a mistake as there  were  no  grounds  to
        justify such a withdrawal. Judge Cope also noted confirmation  from
        the University that the CAS had been withdrawn as a  result  of  an
        internal process error which arose as a  result  of  a  failure  to
        communicate between the University  and  what  is  described  as  a
        'partner agency ' the Cambridge Education Group.


     5. The Judge  records  discussing  this  matter  with  the  Presenting
        Officer who attended the hearing before him and being advised  that
        the Secretary of  State  did  not  concede  the  appeal,  that  the
        Secretary of State had not acted unfairly towards Mr Yu,  and  that
        the application had to be refused because there was no CAS and  the
        Secretary of State was not aware of the  error  by  the  University
        until after the  decision  had  been  reached.   The  Secretary  of
        State's view is that the University should have re-issued a CAS  to
        Mister Yu who could then have made a fresh application for leave to
        remain.


     6. Judge Cope, in paragraph 32 of his  determination,  refers  to  the
        lack of judicial review powers which  would  have  enabled  him  to
        quash the refusal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  the
        original decision to refuse leave which I find in itself  to  be  a
        questionable conclusion  on  the  facts.  He  states  that  he  was
        satisfied that Mr Yu not only had  a  CAS  validly  issued  by  the
        University of Sunderland at the time he made  his  application  but
        also when his application was dealt with  by  the  Respondent,  and
        indeed after that as well [36]. In paragraphs 45 to  47  the  Judge
        states:


     45.  Here the heart of the case is whether or not the Appellant at  the
   time           of decision did have  a  valid  CAS.   Given  that  it  is
   accepted  that  an              error  was  made  by  the  University  in
   notifying the Respondent that it              had been withdrawn it seems
   to me that the evidence of Ms                 McLuckie  about  the  error
   and its nature goes wholly to the question             of the validity of
   the Appellant's CAS.  As such then I am satisfied            that  I  can
   take into account what she has had to say about that error            and
   about  the  fact  that  so  far  as  the  University  is  concerned   the
   Appellant always has had a valid CAS.


     46.  That being so, it follows that the decision of the  Respondent  in
          refusing the application for leave to remain was not in accordance
              with the law or Immigration Rules - it is well established  in
   this                jurisdiction that even  if  the  respondent  decision
   maker was not                aware of the actual situation  at  the  time
   that they took  their  decision  ,            that  decision  is  not  in
   accordance with the law or rules if at that time            the applicant
   would have had their application granted if the                  decision
   maker had known what the true factual situation was.


     47.  It is on this basis therefore that I allow the appeal


     7. The Judge's decision is challenged on one ground only, namely  that
        the Judge made a material misdirection in law.



Error of law finding


     8. The Judge appears to have predicated his decision on the basis that
        because the withdrawal of the CAS was erroneous Mr Yu must always
        have had a valid CAS in the eyes of the University. Yet there is no
        finding that the checks made on 4 June 2013 by the CAS Checking
        Service, which revealed that the CAS had been withdrawn by
        Sunderland University, produced an erroneous result. At that time
        the records clearly showed that the CAS had been withdrawn. If that
        was the case, and there was no evidence that a valid CAS existed at
        that time, the refusal on this basis appears to be wholly in
        accordance with the law. The application was refused under
        paragraph 245 ZX (c) with reference to paragraph 116 (c) of
        Appendix A and 245 ZX (d) of the Immigration Rules.


     9. The Judge refers to one piece of case law in paragraph 13 that of
        Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
        [1948] 1 KB 223 but fails to referred to the case of Rahman v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 11 (12th
        February 2014) which is perhaps more pertinent to the issues in
        this appeal. In their judgement in Rahman the Court state:
          32. I am not sure whether the appellant had an opportunity to
   check the CAS following its           completion by the sponsor, and I
   note that part of the argument for the appellant is that             he
   should not be penalised for the shortcomings of an institution of study
   over which he           had no control. Nevertheless I agree with the
   tribunal that the situation here is very               different from
   that in Naved and that fairness did not require the Secretary of State to
   give           the appellant an opportunity to address any deficiency in
   the CAS. There was no question            in this case of the Secretary
   of State obtaining additional information without reference to
   the applicant and relying on it to refuse the application. The Secretary
   of State simply              applied the terms of the Immigration Rules
   themselves. Under the Rules it was the                 appellant who had
   the responsibility of ensuring that his application was supported by a
     CAS that met the requirements laid down. If the CAS did not meet those
   requirements, it             could not earn him an entitlement to points.
   If the deficiency in the CAS was the result of              a mistake on
   the part of the sponsor (a point which, as I have said, was not even
   raised              by the appellant in the tribunals below), it was a
   matter to be pursued between the                   appellant and the
   sponsor. There was no obligation on the Secretary of State to give the
     appellant an opportunity to seek an amendment to the CAS before a
   decision was taken           on the application. Indeed, the importance
   of all relevant information being provided as          part of the
   application was underlined by the tribunal in Naved itself, in the
   passage I           have quoted from paragraph 21 of the determination.
    10. In accordance with Rahman the Secretary of State was not required
        to seek further information as to why the CAS was withdrawn or give
        Mr Yu the opportunity to address any deficiencies in it.  The
        approach of the Judge in accepting that the  CAS had been
        withdrawn, albeit erroneously, but then applying the doctrine of
        fairness/reasonableness to allow him to make a finding that the
        decision, based upon information received that it had been
        cancelled and did not exist at the date of decision, was unlawful
        arguably also falls foul of the principles outlined by the Upper
        Tribunal in the case of Fiaz (cancellation of leave to remain-
        fairness) [2012] UKUT 00057(IAC) in which the Tribunal held that
        the jurisdiction to determine that a decision is not in accordance
        with the law because of a lack of fairness, is not to be degraded
        to a general judicial power to depart from the Rules where the
        judge thinks such a course appropriate, or to turn a mandatory
        factor into a discretionary one: fairness in this context is
        essentially procedural.


    11. I find the Judge erred in allowing the appeal by failing to apply
        the correct legal principles. The fact Sunderland University
        subsequently stated that the withdrawal of the CAS was a mistake
        does not change the fact that at the date of decision there was no
        valid CAS and so the decision made was lawful.


    12. I also find the Judge erred in his application of the doctrine of
        fairness and appears to have used this principle as justification
        for his departing from the rules.  If fairness is essentially
        procedural it has not been shown that there is any unfairness in
        the approach of the Secretary of State within the decision making
        process.


    13. I therefore set the determination aside and proceed to remake the
        decision.



Discussion



    14. As acknowledged by all parties, at the date of decision there was
        no valid CAS.  Although it appears Sunderland University
        subsequently accepted this was as a result of internal error it is
        clear on the facts that existed when the decision was made that Mr
        Yu was unable to meet the requirements of the relevant immigration
        rules.


    15. No procedural irregularity by the decision maker has been
        established on the facts. The existence of a valid CAS is a matter
        between Mr Yu and the University.  If they subsequently discovered
        the error it was open to them to issue a fresh CAS which would have
        enabled Mr Yu to make a fresh application.


    16. On the factors known to this Tribunal it is clear that at the
        relevant date Mr Yu was unable to meet the requirements of the
        rules and his appeal challenging that aspect of the decision must
        be dismissed.


    17. In relation to the section 47 decision, that was made within the
        refusal dated 4 June 2013. Section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act
        2013 substituted a new section 47 (1) and (1A) into the Nationality
        and Immigration Act 2006 from 8 May 2013 (Crime and Courts Act 2013
        (Commencement no 1) Order (SI 2013/1042).  The amendment to s.47 is
        not retrospective. From 8 May 2013, removal decisions made under
        s.47 will be lawful even if made before the applicant has notice of
        the variation decision.  This means that notice of the two
        decisions can be given in the same document. Such a direction is
        therefore lawful.  On the material available to the Upper Tribunal
        no basis of a decision other than dismissing the appeal against
        that direction has been established.


Decision

    18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order in the absence of an application or any
        justification for such an order on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th July 2014












