
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23616/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2014                               |On 7 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                          SALOME NAKASELA SIMWIZYE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon of Counsel (McKenzie Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zambia born  on  11  October  1982.   She
    appeals the determination of First-tier Judge Tipping who dismissed her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 19 May 2013 to
    refuse to grant her further leave  to  remain.   Permission  to  appeal
    against that decision was granted by First-tier Judge Cox on 22 January
    2014.

2.   The appeal came before the First-tier Judge on  3  December  2013  when
    the appellant had the advantage of being represented by Mr Solomon  who
    appears for her today.

3.    The  background  circumstances  and  history  of  the  appellant   are
    summarised in paragraphs 5 to 8 of the determination as follows:

         "5.  The evidence given by and on behalf of  the  appellant  is  as
             follows: She was born in Zambia on 11 October 1982 and at  the
             date of the hearing she was 31.  Her father came to the United
             Kingdom in about 1987, and was joined here  by  his  wife  and
             daughters in 1989.  The appellant and her sister travelled  on
             their mother's passport and were given leave to enter as their
             father's dependant.  The appellant's father qualified to  work
             here as a doctor and obtained a work permit to that end.   The
             appellant remained in the  United  Kingdom  between  1989  and
             1996, and attended school here.  Lanzi was  born  here  on  24
             January 1994.


         6.   The appellants' parents were of the view  that  the  appellant
             and her sister should attend boarding  school,  as  they  had.
             They could not afford to  pay  boarding  school  fees  in  the
             United Kingdom and therefore decided that their two  daughters
             should be  sent  to  boarding  school  in  Zambia.   In  their
             covering  letter  dated  29  January  2013,  the   appellant's
             representatives attribute this in part to a  desire  that  the
             appellant should 'maintain her cultural  links'  with  Zambia.
             In 1996, the whole family returned to live in Zambia and  this
             allowed the appellant and Josephine to return to the  parents'
             home in Zambia during school holidays.  In 2001, however,  the
             other family members returned to live in the  United  Kingdom,
             but the appellant remained in Zambia, having decided to  study
             at the University there between 2002 and 2007.   She  obtained
             visas in order to visit  her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom
             during  some  of  her  vacations.   On  graduating  from   the
             University of Zambia in 2007, she remained in Zambia, and then
             applied  to  study  at  the  University  of  Manchester.   Her
             application was initially refused on  financial  grounds,  but
             eventually granted in 2010, and the appellant returned to  the
             United Kingdom.


         7.   Meanwhile in about 2005, her father and the remainder  of  the
             family were granted indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom,  and  have  since  become  British   citizens.    The
             appellant approached the respondent after her return  here  in
             2010 with a view to obtaining the same status for herself but,
             since she was at the time here on a visit visa, she  was  told
             that any such application would have to  be  made  in  Zambia.
             When she sought to make an application in Zambia, she was told
             that she could not qualify under the immigration rules because
             she was no longer a dependent minor.


         8.   The appellant last arrived here in August 2010 and  was  given
             leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This leave  was
             subsequently extended  to  30  January  2013.   The  appellant
             pursued postgraduate studies at the University  of  Manchester
             and was awarded an MA in Economics in November  2012.   On  29
             January 2013, she made the application that is the subject  of
             this appeal."

4.   The judge then records that the appellant's father, who  was  suffering
    from terminal cancer, died in  this  country  on  7  March  2013.   The
    appellant lived with her mother, sister and  brother  in  Barnet.   The
    appellant was financially dependent on her mother.  In addition to  her
    family life the appellant had established private life in the UK.   She
    was a member of her church and had carried out voluntary work and had a
    wide circle of friends.

5.   The judge considered the appellant's claim under Article 8  within  the
    Rules under paragraph 276ADE.  It was conceded by Mr Solomon  that  the
    only sub-Section under which the appellant's appeal could  succeed  was
    that she had no ties (social, cultural or family) to Zambia.

6.   Counsel relied on Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).   This,  the
    judge considered, required a rounded assessment  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances.

7.   The judge records  that  he  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 1989 aged 6  but  she  had  spent  the
    majority of each of the fourteen years between 1996 (when she was about
    13) and 2010 (when she was 27) in Zambia.  The judge comments:

         "This period alone represents almost half of her life to  date.   I
         do  not  find  it  credible  that  the  appellant  would  not  have
         established a private life in Zambia during this extended period of
         her most formative years, including her teenage and the first  nine
         years of adult life, when she attended boarding school,  and  then,
         at her own choice, the University of Zambia."

8.   In paragraph 13 of the determination, the judge was not satisfied  that
    language would be a barrier and in paragraph 15 the judge  stated  that
    he did not find it credible that the appellant would  not  have  formed
    enduring friendships and other connections during this long  period  of
    residence in Zambia - a period of  residence  that  had  continued  for
    three years after her graduation and had ended only  some  three  years
    previously.  The judge adds:

         "The appellant also said in the course  of  cross-examination  that
         she has relatives in Zambia, an aunt (her mother's sister)  and  an
         uncle (her father's brother) and a number of first cousins.  Though
         she said at the hearing that she was not in contact with  them  she
         gives no satisfactory reason why such contact could not be renewed,
         in the same way that friendships formed while  she  was  living  in
         Zambia could now be taken up again.  For these reasons,  I  do  not
         accept the appellant's claim to have no ties with Zambia."

9.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appellant's claim by  reference  to
    the Rules and turned to consider it in the  light  of  the  well  known
    jurisprudence including Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39 and Razgar v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge accepts that the  appellant  was
    unmarried and had no partner in the United Kingdom and no children  and
    that the appellant enjoyed family life in the United Kingdom  with  her
    mother and siblings.  All the family lived together and they  were  all
    adults.  The youngest would be 20 shortly.

10.  The determination concludes as follows:

         "17. This resumption of this family life is of recent  origin,  the
             appellant having chosen to spend  her  early  adult  years  in
             Zambia.  Even on return to the United  Kingdom  in  2010,  the
             appellant studied for her MA degree in Manchester,  while  her
             family remained in Barnet.  This does not suggest, despite the
             claims made by the appellant  and  her  family  members,  that
             there is anything in their inter-relationships that go  beyond
             the emotional ties that are normal between adult siblings  and
             between an adult child and her parent.  I have considered as a
             compassionate circumstance the appellant's father's death from
             cancer in March 2013.  Such a death is a very sad but  not  an
             exceptional event.  By dint of the leave to remain  here  that
             has ensued from this pending appeal, the  family  has  already
             been able to remain  together  for  most  of  the  first  year
             following the death of the appellant's father.


         18.  I accept that the removal of the  appellant  to  Zambia  would
             interfere with her  family  life  here  with  her  mother  and
             siblings.  I  am  also  prepared  to  accept,  given  the  low
             threshold set by the courts, that this interference  would  be
             of a gravity such as to engage Article 8.


         19.  As to private life, the starting point seems to me to be  that
             the appellant is a healthy,  well-educated  31-year  old  who,
             despite subsisting conflicts  in  the  evidence,  has  on  any
             calculation spent more than half her life in  her  country  of
             birth, Zambia, and all but the last three years or so  of  her
             adult life there.  The appellant's initial claim to have lived
             here continuously since 1989 (which she must  have  known  was
             untrue) also to my mind reduces the weight to be  attached  to
             her evidence overall.  The appellant  has  given  no  material
             evidence of a private life in Zambia.  The considerations  set
             out in paragraphs 13 to 15 above lead me to conclude that  she
             had such a life there and that this could now  be  resumed  if
             she returns to Zambia.


         20.  Indeed, the length of the periods that she has spent in Zambia
             and her relatively recent arrival in the United Kingdom as  an
             adult after a absence of 14 years would alone  satisfy  me  to
             the  relevant  standard  of  proof  that  the  appellant  must
             inevitably have a private life in Zambia to  which  she  could
             now return.  She would go back with the benefit of the  degree
             that she was awarded in her home country  as  well  as  an  MA
             degree awarded here, and there is no reason why she should not
             find employment and establish herself in Zambia.  She also has
             relatives in Zambia.


         21.  I accept  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  also
             established a private life in the United Kingdom in the  three
             years since returning  to  live  here  in  2010.   Letters  of
             support from her church and from a small number of friends are
             contained in the appeal and supplementary bundles, though none
             of  these  attended  the  hearing  to  give  evidence  on  the
             appellant's behalf.  As to  her  religious  faith  and  church
             attendance, documents in the public domain confirm that Zambia
             is constitutionally a Christian  country  and  that  Christian
             worship is widespread  there.   If  the  appellant  wishes  to
             continue her voluntary work, there is no evidence  to  suggest
             that Zambia would not afford her ample opportunity  for  this.
             I have concluded above that  the  appellant  has  friends  and
             connections in Zambia from the period of  14  years  that  she
             spent there between the ages of 14 and about 28.


         22.  Again applying the questions posed in Razgar,  I  accept  that
             the appellant has a private life in the  United  Kingdom  with
             which her removal to Zambia would interfere.   Given  the  low
             threshold set by the courts, I am  again  prepared  to  accept
             that this interference would be of a gravity such as to engage
             Article 8.


         23.  With  regard  to  both  family  and  private  life,  given  my
             conclusion above as to  HC  395,  including  paragraph  276ADE
             thereof, the interference would be in accordance with the law.
              The  appellant  has  no  other  right  of  appeal  under  the
             immigration rules.  I accept, as Mr Solomon  submitted,  that,
             as far as can be discerned from the  evidence,  the  appellant
             has always complied with United Kingdom immigration rules.


         24.  I  turn  to  the  final  Razgar  question,  that  relating  to
             proportionality.  Mr Solomon referred me to  the  decision  of
             the IAT in GS [2005]  UKIAT  00121.   This  records  that  the
             public interest in the effective  maintenance  of  immigration
             control  is  not  of  fixed  weight,  and  is  therefore   not
             unfailingly a 'trump card'  in  the  respondent's  'hand'.   I
             recognise that this is the case,  the  balance  to  be  struck
             being one of proportionality that turns on  the  circumstances
             of each claim, taken in the round.   Mr  Solomon  pointed  out
             that, since the appellant lived with and was wholly  dependent
             on her mother, there would, as matters currently stand, be  no
             significant  additional  call   on   United   Kingdom   public
             resources.


         25.  I  have  studied  the  appellant's  history  and  her  current
             circumstances in the  round,  and  have  considered  both  her
             family life and her private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  I
             have, however, been unable to find anything in her history and
             circumstances that outweigh the public interest to  be  served
             by the enforcement of a firm and fair  system  of  immigration
             control applicable to all."

11.  Accordingly, the judge dismissed the appeal.

12.  Mr Solomon relied on the grounds of appeal which he had settled  on  10
    January 2014.  He submitted that the findings in paragraphs 16  and  17
    were contradictory.  In paragraph 16  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant enjoyed family life in the United Kingdom but in paragraph 17
    it found that there was nothing that went beyond the  normal  emotional
    ties.

13.  The judge had misapplied the appropriate burden of proof  in  paragraph
    3 of the determination when he had referred  to  the  burden  of  proof
    being on the appellant.  The judge having been satisfied that there was
    family/private life which was interfered with  by  removal  the  burden
    shifted to the respondent - see Ghising (Nepal) [2013] UKUT  567.   The
    judge had not properly applied the proportionality test in Huang [2007]
    UKHL 11 and his determination was  not  adequately  reasoned.   He  had
    failed to consider the impact on the appellant's close family  members:
    Beoku-Betts.   The  appellant's  mother  said  she   would   suffer   a
    devastating loss if the appellant went to Zambia following the death of
    her husband.

14.  Counsel noted that the judge had  applied  an  exceptionality  test  in
    paragraph 17 when referring to the  death  of  the  appellant's  father
    being very sad but not "an exceptional event".

15.  In paragraph 4 of the grounds, Counsel submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in finding in paragraph 10 that the appellant had claimed to have
    been in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of more than  twenty
    years because she had made it very clear  in  the  covering  letter  in
    support of her application that  the  period  of  continuity  had  been
    broken  by  virtue  of  her  returning   to   Zambia   for   education.
    Accordingly, the judge had erred in finding that her initial claim  had
    been untrue, which reduced the weight to be attached  to  her  evidence
    overall as he had in paragraph 19.

16.  There had been discrepancies in the appellant's account on the  judge's
    findings but the  judge  should  not  have  accepted  the  respondent's
    assertions in the refusal letter without further enquiry.

17.  In paragraph 6 of the grounds, the judge was criticised for not  making
    findings on the remoteness of the appellant's ties  with  Zambia.   Any
    absences from the UK related  to  her  education  there.   She  had  no
    friends or close relatives in Zambia to whom  she  could  turn  to  for
    support.  Her school friends had dispersed or were married.  She had no
    property, assets or resources in Zambia.

18.  The judge had misstated the appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing  in
    paragraph 15.  She had claimed to have a grandfather and aunt in Zambia
    and stated that her uncle and his children were in Namibia.  Inadequate
    account had been taken of the appellant's evidence  that  she  did  not
    have contact with them and the relationship was distant.

19.  Counsel referred to Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC)  where  the  Tribunal
    had said that issues under Article 8(1) were highly fact-sensitive (see
    paragraph 62 of the decision).  Rather than  applying  a  blanket  rule
    with regard to all adult children "each case should be analysed on  its
    own facts".

20.   The  judge's  analysis  of  proportionality  was  muddled  and  lacked
    clarity.

21.  Mr Tarlow relied on the respondent's  reply.   When  the  determination
    was read as  a  whole,  there  was  no  material  error  of  law.   The
    conclusions of the judge were entirely open  to  him.   The  judge  had
    taken into account the compassionate circumstances and the death of the
    appellant's father.  The judge had  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    established family life and had properly applied Razgar.

22.  At the conclusion of the submissions, I reserved my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the judge's  determination  if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.

23.  I note in paragraph 3 of the decision the judge refers  to  the  burden
    of proof being on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  being  the
    balance  of  probabilities.   This  is  indeed  the  position  in  most
    immigration appeals and I do not find that by making such  a  reference
    the judge was misdirecting himself in relation to  the  proportionality
    exercise.  The judge properly directed himself in  relation  to  Razgar
    and proportionality.

24.  It is said that the Immigration Judge's findings in paragraphs  16  and
    17 are inconsistent.  However it is quite clear that  the  judge  found
    that  Article  8  was  engaged,  that  the  appellant  was  financially
    dependent and that the  family  had  suffered  the  sad  death  of  the
    appellant's father.  This was taken into  account  as  a  compassionate
    circumstance in paragraph 17.  The judge  found  that  removal  of  the
    appellant would interfere with the appellant's family life.

25.  The judge is criticised for referring to the claim that  the  appellant
    had resided in the United Kingdom continuously since 25 March  1989  in
    the representative's letter of 29 January 2013.  The letter does indeed
    say that on the first page for example and indeed at the bottom of  the
    second and the top of the third page.

26.  It is said that the supporting statements made  the  matter  clear  but
    the judge had the benefit of hearing the appellant give  oral  evidence
    and he records that the matter was put to the appellant at the hearing.
     As the judge says in paragraph 19 of the decision on  any  calculation
    the appellant has spent more than half her life in her country of birth
    (Zambia) and all but the last three years or so of her  adult  life  in
    Zambia.

27.  In my view it was open to the judge to conclude on the  evidence  as  a
    whole that the appellant could resume life in Zambia,  a  country  with
    which she had not broken her ties.  The judge refers  to  the  case  of
    Ogundimu and I am not satisfied that  he  misdirected  himself  in  his
    analysis of what constituted ties.

28.  The judge refers to the case of Beoku-Betts  and  I  am  not  satisfied
    that his decision was arrived at without considering the impact on  all
    concerned.  The judge  refers  to  the  written  statements  lodged  in
    paragraph 4 of his decision, as well as the skeleton argument lodged by
    Mr Solomon.

29.  The judge gave weight to the appellant's father's death but noted  that
    the family had been able to remain together for a period following  the
    death.

30.  The judge is criticised for referring to the  fact  of  the  death  not
    being an exceptional event.  It is said  that  the  judge  applied  the
    exceptionality test.   I  am  far  from  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    position. The determination needs to be read as a whole. The judge  did
    not arguably  misdirect  himself  as  claimed  when  referring  to  the
    father's death.

31.   The  judge  correctly  addressed  himself  that  the   proportionality
    exercise turned on the circumstances of each case taken in  the  round.
    There is no indication that the judge failed to conduct  this  exercise
    properly and I am not  satisfied  that  his  analysis  was  muddled  or
    confused as claimed.  It was perfectly open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant must inevitably have a private  life  in  Zambia  to
    which she could return and that she would return with  the  benefit  of
    the degree that she had been awarded in Zambia as well as the MA degree
    awarded in the United Kingdom.  There was no reason why she should  not
    find  employment  and  establish  herself  in  Zambia  where  she   had
    relatives.  I should also note that it is accepted that  the  appellant
    does have relatives in Zambia, although the judge  does  refer  to  one
    relative who was in fact in another country.   It  is  clear  that  the
    judge did not accept the appellant's claim to have no ties with  Zambia
    and he did have the advantage of hearing  her  give  evidence  together
    with other members of her family.

32.  I accept the submissions made by Mr Tarlow that there  is  no  material
    error of law in the determination and that the  findings  made  by  the
    judge were open to him.

33.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 5 March 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

