







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number:  IA/23453/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|9 April 2018                    |On 2 May 2018                   |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT      Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SHOFIUL ALAM PARAZ
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr I Khan of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department. She appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Rayner promulgated on 2 November 2016  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
   under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. However,  for
   ease of reference, I will continue to refer to the Secretary of State  as
   the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Paraz  as  the  appellant  which  were  the
   designations they had before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. Permission to appeal to the Secretary of State was granted by  the  Upper
   Tribunal. The appeal came before me on 19 June 2017 for an error  of  law
   hearing and I found that there is material error of law in  the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I set it aside. I directed that  the
   appeal be placed before the Upper Tribunal at the next available  hearing
   date, to here submissions to determine whether requiring the appellant to
   return  to  Bangladesh  to  make  an  entry  clearance  applications   is
   unreasonable under the circumstances of the appellant and his  daughter's
   circumstances taking into account the jurisprudence on these issues.

3. The appeal came before me on 18 August 2017 and  it  was  agreed  between
   the parties that the matter be placed before the Secretary of  State  for
   her to revisit her decision in light of the new  matter,  which  was  the
   birth of the appellant's child who is a British citizen and  therefore  a
   qualifying child under the age of 18 pursuant to section 117D (1) of  the
   2002 Act.

4. At the hearing on 20 October 2017, the senior presenting  officer  stated
   that she had still not made a decision. It  was  further  agreed  by  the
   representative of the Secretary of State that she will  make  a  decision
   before 1 December 2017 and there was no objection  from  the  appellant's
   representative.

5. I directed that the Secretary of State make a decision before 1  December
   2017 or the appeal be listed for a hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

   The renewed hearing

6. At the renewed hearing on 9 April 2018, the Secretary of State still  had
   not made a decision. Mr Melvin suggested that the appellant make a  fresh
   application because given the passage of time,  the  subsistence  of  the
   appellant's marriage was now an issue.

7. The respondent had not taken issue with the subsistence of  the  marriage
   in her reasons for refusal letter. I found it to be  procedurally  unfair
   for the respondent to raise an issue for the first time  at  the  hearing
   before me. It is imperative that the appellant  knows  the  case  against
   him.

8. There is no evidence before me to suggest  that  the  appellant  and  his
   wife are not in a subsisting marriage. The appellant's  wife  is  present
   and settled in the United Kingdom having  come  from  Bangladesh  to  the
   United Kingdom as a student. They both attended the  hearing  before  me.
   They married under Islamic law on the on 5 February 2014 and had a  civil
   marriage ceremony on 11 October 2014. The appellant's daughter  was  born
   on 24 September 2015 and is a British citizen.

9. The respondent was aware when she made her decision that the  appellant's
   wife was pregnant because she refers to her pregnancy in her reasons  for
   refusal letter. The appellant's appeal was always made on  the  bases  of
   his family life with his wife. I also find like the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge did that the birth of the appellant's child is new evidence  rather
   than a new matter. Mr Khan stated at the hearing that the only  issue  in
   this appeal is Article 8 and accepts that the appellant does not meet the
   requirements of the immigration rules.

10. As I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  remake  the
   decision pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
   as the appellant has accepted that he cannot meet the requirements of the
   immigration rules. The issue for me now to decide  is  whether  requiring
   the appellant to leave the country would interfere with his, his wife and
   British child's rights under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
   Human Rights.

11. In determining whether the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom
   would constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her  right  to
   respect for private and family life under Article 8,  I  have  considered
   each of the following issues, as laid down at paragraph 17 of the  speech
   of Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R v. Razgar:

       (1)  Will the  proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for her private or family life?

       (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such  gravity
           as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

        3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

        4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
           the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
           economic well-being  of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

        5) If so, is such  interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?

12. The first four questions in Razgar are answered in the affirmative.  The
   only  question  remains  whether  it  is  proportionate  to  require  the
   appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom  taking  into  account  all  his
   circumstances.

13. The appellant  has  been  in  this  country  unlawfully  for  14  years.
   Therefore, whatever private and family life he has  established  in  this
   country has been done  at  the  time  when  his  immigration  status  was
   precarious and unlawful. Section 117B of the 2002 Act makes clear that  a
   private life established whilst the  applicant's  immigration  status  is
   precarious is not worthy of respect. I therefore find that  removing  the
   appellant would not interfere with his right to a private life.

14. The appellant's child is a British citizen.  Section  117B  (6)  of  the
   2002 Act  states  "in  the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
   deportation, the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
   where "the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
   a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
   leave the United Kingdom. A Qualifying child includes  a  person  who  is
   under the age of 18 and who is a British citizen.

15. In respect of the appellant's family life with  his  wife  I  take  into
   account the case of WJ  (China))  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2011] EWCA Civ 183 a Chinese failed asylum  seeker  submitted
   an application for leave to remain on the basis of a relationship she had
   entered into with a British citizen. The Court of Appeal said that, given
   the Claimant's prolonged, persistent and dubious history of deception  in
   evading the United Kingdom's immigration  controls,  it  was  practically
   inconceivable that it could be found not to be  proportionate  to  remove
   her.

16. The appellant cannot expect, by presenting the Home Office with  a  fait
   accompli by marrying a British citizen to escape the ordinary consequence
   of his appalling immigration history which  is  what  this  appellant  is
   seeking to do. I therefore find that the respondent's decision in respect
   of the appellant's family life with his  wife  is  proportionate.  I  now
   consider whether the appellant's qualifying child's best interests shifts
   the balance in my proportionality assessment in the appellant's favour.

17. I must consider the best interests of the appellant's  child  who  is  a
   British citizen.  I have regard to the  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
   [2011] UKSC 4 which considered in what circumstances it  was  permissible
   to remove or deport a non-citizen parent where the effect would be that a
   child who is a citizen of the United Kingdom would also  have  to  leave.
   The fact the children are British was a strong pointer to the  fact  that
   their future lies in the United Kingdom.

18. Baroness Hale pointed out that parents of a  British  citizenship  child
   does not hold a trump card, there rights weigh heavily in the balance. In
   MA Pakistan and others [2016)) EWCA Civ 705 where the court proposed that
   even where the conditions in paragraph 117B (6) (a) are met, there  could
   still be matters relating to the conduct of the appellant that  weigh  in
   the "reasonableness" test of 117 (B) (6) (b) and these include the public
   interest  considerations  and  117B  (1)-(5).  It  was  stated  that  the
   reasonableness test applies equally to children with British citizenship.

19. The case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes clear that where the  child  or
   indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a  citizen
   of the European Union, as a matter of  EU  law  it  is  not  possible  to
   require the family as a unit to relocate outside of the European Union or
   for the Secretary of State to submit that it would be reasonable for them
   to do so.

20. The appellant remained in this country unlawfully for 14  years  and  he
   married and had a child at a time  when  he  knew  that  his  immigration
   status was precarious and unlawful. I however do not take the appellant's
   conduct against his British citizen child. However, It is clear from  the
   case of MA, that the fact that there is a qualified child is  a  relevant
   consideration and one that might be said to point  to  it  being  in  the
   child interest to remain in the United Kingdom, but it is  equally  clear
   that the assessment of reasonableness must take account of the conduct of
   the appellant.

21. I cannot require the appellant's child to leave the country as she is  a
   British citizen. The respondent's IDIs as at August 2015, state  that  it
   is never reasonable to expect a British  citizen  child  to  accompany  a
   parent outside of the EU.

22. Therefore, the appellant will be  separated  from  his  wife  and  child
   temporarily  as  he  makes  an  application  for  entry  clearance   from
   Bangladesh to return if he can meet the requirements of  the  immigration
   rules.

23. It may also be the case that the  appellant  does  not  succeed  in  his
   entry clearance application which  could  also  mean  that  he  would  be
   permanently separated from  his  wife  and  child,  unless  they  make  a
   decision to join the appellant in Bangladesh and  continue  their  family
   life in that country. It would be a decision for the appellant's wife  to
   make the same way she made the decision to marry the appellant and have a
   child when he had no immigration status in the country.

24. I accept that the best interests of a child lie with  living  with  both
   parents wherever they live. The removal of the appellant  does  not  mean
   that his child and his wife would be required to leave the United Kingdom
   thereby infringing the Zambrano principle. The appellant's child  is  not
   dependent on the appellant to exercise her union right  of  residence  or
   deprive the child of the effective exercise of residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom. The appellant's child will remain with her mother in the  United
   Kingdom and therefore the child's right to remain in  this  country  will
   not be infringed by the appellant's removal.

  25. In the case of Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 it was stated that where
      the claimant's conduct is persistent and/or serious  the  interference
      with family life may be justified even it involves the  separation  of
      the claimant from his family who reasonably wishes to continue  living
      in the United Kingdom. I find 14  years  of  non-lawful  residence  to
      justify his temporary or permanent separation from his family.

26. I find in this case  it  would  be  a  proportionate  response  for  the
   respondent  to  exclude  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom.  The
   respondent's interests must trump those of the appellant,  his  wife  and
   his daughter given his unlawful stay in the United Kingdom for 14 years.

   Decision

   The appellant's appeal  is dismissed both under the immigration rules and
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. That concludes  the
   matter.


Signed by,
      Dated this 29th day of March 2018
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


.............................................
Ms S Chana

