
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23214/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                           |On 8 July 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                        GAMAGE RUMESH JUDE WIJETUNGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, instructed by Polpitiya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka,  born  24  April  1993.  He
    entered the UK lawfully with his mother in December  2004,  his  father
    having come to the UK as a student in September 2004.  The  appellant's
    leave was subsequently extended on numerous occasions and on 16 October
    2013 he submitted a further in time application for an extension of his
    leave, such application being made at the  same  time  as  applications
    made by his parents.

 2. The appellant's parents' applications were refused in decisions  of  11
    March 2014 and each  had  directions  for  their  removal  set  by  the
    respondent pursuant to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. On the same date the appellant's application  was
    rejected as being invalid, for the following reasons:

         "On 16 October 2013 you  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student. As stated in that
         application, your application is not valid  unless  and  until  you
         undertake all of  the  required  steps,  including  providing  your
         biographical and biometric information.

         As  you  have  not  provided  your   biographical   and   biometric
         information within the time specified by the  Secretary  of  State,
         your application  has  been  rejected  as  invalid."  (emphasis  in
         original)

 3. The appellant lodged a notice of appeal with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the aforementioned decision. However, on 9  April  2014  First-
    tier Tribunal judge Birrell concluded as follows:

         "Section 82 of the 2002 Act gives a right of appeal where there  is
         an immigration decision which is defined in section 82(2)  of  that
         Act. The decision made by the Respondent is not a relevant decision
         as  defined  in  the  2002  Act.  It  is  a  letter  rejecting  the
         Appellant's immigration application for leave as a Tier  4  student
         as invalid. Without a relevant immigration decision that cannot  be
         a valid appeal even on human rights grounds. Accordingly  I  direct
         that a notice be served under Rule 9  of  the  2005  Rules,  and  I
         direct that no further steps are to be taken by the Tribunal."

 4. On 17 April 2014 the appellant  submitted  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain to the Respondent. That application was  refused  in  a
    decision of 19 May 2014, and it is a challenge to that  decision  which
    underpins the appeal now before me. In "Section B"  of  this  decision,
    headed "Appeal Rights", the following is said;

         "You made an application on 17 April 2014. However, your  leave  to
         enter/remain expired on 2 November 2013. You therefore did not have
         leave to enter/remain at the same time of (sic)  your  application.
         Therefore, there is no right of appeal against this decision."

 5. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal judge Clarke  on
    13 March 2015, on the same occasion as the appeals of  the  appellant's
    parents against the decisions made in relation  to  them  on  11  March
    2014. It is sufficient at this stage  to  identify  that  judge  Clarke
    allowed  the  appellant's  parents'  appeals  on  the  basis  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules had been met.

 6. As to the appellant's appeal, Judge Clarke found:

         "[20] On 17 April 2014 the Appellant made  a  combined  application
         for leave as a Tier 4 (Gen) Student - Dependent Joiner  and  for  a
         Biometric Residence Permit.

         [21] On 25th April 2014 the Appellants' Solicitors wrote to the  UK
         Border Agency and made the case that the Respondent's  decision  to
         reject the Third Named Appellant's application for variation of his
         leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student  dependent  as  invalid  was
         "incorrect". The reason  put  forward  was  that  the  Third  Named
         Appellant,  his  mother  and   father   "provided   biometric   and
         biographical information at Southall Broadway  Post  Office  on  11
         November 2013. They  did  this  together."  The  letter  continued,
         "Despite having complied with this requirement, your  office  wrote
         on 23 November 2013 reminding our client to provide  his  biometric
         and biographical information. By letter dated 4 December 2013  this
         firm wrote to you  providing  the  evidence  to  confirm  that  the
         applicant has complied with this request. Nothing further was heard
         from you until your  letter  dated  11  March  2014  rejecting  our
         client's application as invalid. It is abundantly  clear  from  the
         evidence provided to the SSHD that our client  duly  complied  with
         the requirement to provide the necessary biometric and biographical
         information and provided the evidence that this had been done."...

         [24] I was asked as a preliminary issue to decide the  validity  of
         the Third Named Appellant's appeal by Counsel for the Appellants...

         [25] I take as my starting point that a  valid  appeal  requires  a
         valid application and an appealable immigration decision. ...

         [27] In respect of the October application, I find that this was an
         application that was made when the Appellant had  extant  leave  to
         remain. However, it appears that, for  whatever  reason,  the  Home
         Office did not receive the biographical and  biometric  information
         from the Third Named Appellant. I find that  the  biographical  and
         biometric information was received in respect  of  his  father  and
         mother's application as there was  no  query  raised  by  the  Home
         Office about his parent's information. However,  I  find  that  the
         Home Office for reasons unknown did  not  receive  the  Third  Name
         Appellant's biographical and biometric information. The absence  of
         this information thus generated the reminder letter  to  the  Third
         Named Appellant of 11 November 2013.

         [28] The validity of the Third Named Appellant's appeal arising out
         of the October application was decided  by  Judge  Birrell  in  the
         decision of 9 April 2014. Judge Birrell decided that there  was  no
         valid appeal as there was no valid  immigration  decision.  If  the
         Third Named Appellant disagreed with Judge Birrell's decision, then
         the appellant should have appealed the decision or  considered  the
         option of judicial review. Ms Bayati for the Appellants  emphasised
         to me that judicial review was a remedy of last  resort.  I  accept
         that judicial review is indeed a remedy of last resort  but  having
         received the decision of Judge Birrell, the appellant's remedies at
         that point were limited. I note in  the  Skeleton  Argument  of  12
         March 2015 that it is conceded by  the  Appellant's  Counsel,  "the
         only option in such circumstances would be to take judicial  review
         proceedings." The Third Named Appellant - for reasons unknown - did
         not issue any challenge by way of judicial review or appeal against
         Judge Birrell's decision. ...

         [30] ... The October 2013 application was rejected  as  invalid  by
         the Respondent. As there was no valid  application,  there  was  no
         appealable immigration decision.  Judge  Birrell's  decision  makes
         this principle clear: "... Without a relevant immigration  decision
         that cannot be a valid appeal even on human rights grounds."  Judge
         Birrell decided the issue of whether there was a  valid  appeal  in
         respect of the October application and concluded there was no right
         of  appeal.  Nothing  was  done  by  the  Third  Named   Appellant.
         Accordingly, I find that the Third Named Appellant did not  have  a
         valid appeal on the basis of the October 2013 (sic) and  that  this
         matter was decided by Judge Birrell.  I  find  the  matter  of  res
         judicata in respect of the October application.

         [31] Rather than issuing any challenge to  the  decision  of  Judge
         Birrell, the Third Named  Appellant  instead  submitted  his  April
         application. Unfortunately  for  him  his  leave  had  expired  and
         therefore he could not make the application. As he did not  have  a
         valid application, there could not  be  an  appealable  immigration
         decision.

         [32] I therefore find that the Third named Appellant did not have a
         valid appeal. ...

         [34]  When  the  Third  Named  Appellant   submitted   his   second
         application on 17 April 2014 his leave to remain had expired on 2nd
         November 2013 which was more than 28 days before the submission  of
         his application. As the Third Named Appellant did not have leave to
         remain when he made the second  application,  there  was  no  valid
         application and therefore no valid appeal. ...

         [36] On the basis of my findings above, I decided  that  the  Third
         Named Appellant did not have a valid appeal. I  continued  to  hear
         the appeals of the First and Second Named Appellants."

 7. To complete the history of this case before the Tribunal, the Appellant
    appealed the decision of Judge Clarke but that appeal was dismissed  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal judge Doyle  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    October 2015. The Appellant then  sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge
    Doyle's decision to the Court of Appeal. That application  came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede who, on the 7 December 2015,  reviewed  the
    decision of Judge Doyle and set it aside.  The  matter  thus  initially
    came before me to consider afresh whether the decision of Judge  Clarke
    contains an error of law  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

Error of law in FtT's decision

 8. In my conclusion judge Clarke's decision is clearly infected  by  legal
    error.

 9. Judge Clarke's focus on the  decision  of  Judge  Birrell  is  entirely
    misconceived. Judge Birrell was undoubtedly correct in  her  conclusion
    that there had been, at that  time,  no  immigration  decision  against
    which an appeal could have been brought by the instant appellant -  the
    decision of 11 March 2014 obviously not being such a  decision.   This,
    though, says nothing about the lawfulness of the decision of  the  SSHD
    to treat the application of 16 October 2013 as invalid.  Judge  Birrell
    was not required to, nor did she, consider this issue.

10. Neither can I see  the  relevance  of  the  appellant  not  bringing  a
    judicial review against the decision of 11  March  2014  to  treat  his
    application is invalid. The fact that no judicial  review  was  brought
    does not render the SSHD's conclusions unimpeachable and  the  decision
    lawful. This was a matter for Judge Clarke to determine on the evidence
    before her. She erred in such determination, failing to engage  in  the
    appropriate level of analysis and scrutiny  of  the  relevant  evidence
    before her.

Setting aside of FtT's decision

11. The question still remains, however, as to whether the  FtT's  decision
    should be set aside. In order to determine this  I  must  consider  for
    myself whether the SSHD's decision of 19 May 2014 was  an  'immigration
    decision'. If the  SSHD  was  incorrect  in  her  conclusion  that  the
    application of 16 October 2013 was not valid, then the appellant  would
    have had leave to remain on 17 April 2014 i.e. the  date  he  made  his
    latest application;  the  consequence  of  which  is  that  the  SSHD's
    decision of 19 May 2014 would be an immigration  decision  pursuant  to
    section 82(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").

12. On 25 January 2016 I  heard  oral  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant had submitted his biometrics through the Post Office  at  the
    same time and on the same date as his parents i.e. 11 November 2013.  A
    copy of a single Post Office  receipt,  dated  11  November  2013,  was
    produced showing a payment being made for three 'Home Office BRPs'.  Mr
    Norton did not seek to dispute the truth of this evidence and I  accept
    it. In the circumstances I conclude that the appellant did produce  the
    necessary biometric and biographical information to  the  SSHD  at  the
    same time as his parents.

13. Despite this Mr Norton commends me to answer the  question  of  whether
    the decision of  19  May  2014  was  an  immigration  decision  in  the
    negative, albeit for reasons not provided by the SSHD in  the  decision
    notice itself.

14. By way of written submission made on 5 February 2016 Mr Norton asserted
    that  the  decision  of  11  March  2014  to  reject  the   appellant's
    application of 16 October  2013  as  invalid,  was  of  itself  invalid
    because it was made "...contrary to established policy that  Rejections
    (as opposed to Refusals) can only  be  made  within  3  months  of  the
    application."

15. The written submission continues by  asserting  that:  "Therefore,  the
    'Rejection' of 11/3/14  was  invalid  and  the  appellant's  leave  was
    extended (and remains so) as of 16/10/13.  The  decision  under  appeal
    currently before the  UT  is  the  2nd  decision  (a  'Refusal')  dated
    19/5/14. This  is  also  invalid.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the
    appellant has a pending decision before the SSHD as a Tier 4  dependent
    Joiner....if there  is  no  valid  decision,  there  can  be  no  valid
    appeal..."

16. I reject this submission for three reasons. First, Mr  Norton  did  not
    provide a copy of the policy the SSHD is said to have infringed. Absent
    production of the policy, I am not prepared to accept that the terms of
    such  policy  act  so  to  prevent  absolutely  the  SSHD  treating  an
    application as invalid after a period of more  than  3  months  of  the
    application has expired. Second, even if it does I do not accept that a
    decision made in breach of policy is necessarily an  invalid  decision.
    It seems to me as though it would be a valid decision unlawfully  made.
    Third, and irrespective of all I say above,  even if it is assumed that
    the decision of 11 March 2014 is an invalid  decision,  I  can  see  no
    sound basis in law for this having  the  consequence  advocated  by  Mr
    Norton i.e. rendering the decision of  19  May  2014  invalid.  On  the
    contrary, if there had  been  no  valid  decision  on  the  appellant's
    application of  16  October  2013  then  that  application  would  have
    remained pending as of the date of the second application on  17  April
    2014, a date on which the appellant would also have had leave to remain
    pursuant to section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

17. Mr Norton's second submission, developed  at  the  further  hearing  in
    April 2016, was to the effect that by virtue of regulations 3, 4 and 23
    of The Immigration (Biometric Registration) Regulations 2008 ("the 2008
    Regulations"), when taken in combination with the terms  of  the  cover
    sheet to the specified application form submitted by the  appellant  on
    16 October 2013, the appellant  was  required  to  submit  a  Biometric
    Residence Permit with that application. He failed to do so and  instead
    submitted it on 11  November  2013.  His  application  was,  therefore,
    invalid and the SSHD had no discretion to treat it as being otherwise.

18. Once again I find there to be no merit in Mr  Norton's  submission,  it
    being clearly founded on a misreading of the 2008 Regulations.

19. Regulation 3 of the 2008 Regulations is headed  "Requirement  to  apply
    for a biometric immigration  document"  (emphasis  added).   Regulation
    3(1) requires that a "person subject to immigration control must  apply
    for the issue of a biometric immigration document where he satisfies" a
    number  of  identified  conditions.  The   appellant   satisfies   such
    conditions and was therefore required to  apply  for  the  issue  of  a
    biometric immigration document. Nothing in  regulation  3  makes  it  a
    mandatory requirement to provide a biometric  immigration  document  on
    the date that the application is submitted  to  the  SSHD;  indeed,  it
    presupposes that this will not be the case.

20. Regulation 23 of the 2008 Regulations sets  out  the  consequences  for
    failing to comply with, inter alia,  the  requirement  to  "...make  an
    application  for  the  issue  of  a  biometric  immigration   document"
    (emphasis added).

21. The application form sent to the SSHD on 16 October 2013, within  which
    the appellant is identified as being  a  dependent,  has  two  distinct
    sections dealing with biometric information.

22. The first is a section of the form reading as follows:

         "What happens next?

         We will write to you if any of the  required  supporting  documents
         are missing or unsuitable.

         Once we have received all of the required supporting documents,  we
         will send you a biometric notification letter inviting you to enrol
         your fingerprints and facial image"

23. There is nothing before me to suggest the appellant received  a  letter
    of the type referred to in the first of the aforementioned  paragraphs.
    He did, however, receive a letter of a type referred to in  the  second
    paragraph.

24. The second section of the application  form  that  makes  reference  to
    biometric information relates specifically  to  an  applicant's  extant
    biometric resident permit. If such a permit is in  existence  the  form
    requests details relating to it. This section of the form,  insofar  as
    it relates to the appellant, is fully completed. An affirmative  answer
    in relation to the appellant is also given in response to the  question
    of whether the extant biometric resident permit can be  submitted  with
    the application.

25. On page 2 of the "Application cover  sheet"  to  the  application  form
    relating to the instant appellant is a table headed  "Documents  to  be
    provided". The table has two columns - the left  hand  column  being  a
    list of the documents required, some of which are identified  as  being
    mandatory including the biometric  residence  permit.  The  right  hand
    column is headed "For official use only". The material  entry  in  that
    column for the instant purposes is that which reads  "BRP",  under  the
    heading "Evidence of Identity".

26. My conclusion from reading the application form as a whole is that  the
    appellant had an extant biometric residence permit as of  the  date  of
    application (16 October 2013) and that he provided such permit with his
    application, as required.

27.  Although  Mr  Norton  suggested  otherwise,  this  conclusion  is  not
    inconsistent with the terms of the SSHD's  letter  of  11  March  2014,
    which I do not read as suggesting that the aforementioned  requirements
    of the form had not been complied  with.  The  fact  that  this  letter
    specifically identifies a failure by the appellant to provide biometric
    and biographical information within the time  specified  by  the  SSHD,
    also, strongly suggests that what was of concern to the  SSHD  at  that
    point in time was a claimed failure by the appellant to respond to  the
    biometric notification letter inviting him to  enrol  his  fingerprints
    and facial image.

28. I have already dealt with this claimed  failure  above,  and  concluded
    that the appellant did properly respond to such request on 11  November
    2013.

29. For these reasons I conclude that the  SSHD  was  wrong  to  treat  the
    appellant's application of 16 October 2013 as invalid. It was  a  valid
    application which remained outstanding as of  the  date  of  the  later
    variation of the application, made on 17 April 2014. Therefore,  as  of
    that date the appellant had section 3C leave. The decision  of  19  May
    2014 refusing such application was consequently an immigration decision
    pursuant to  section  82(2)(d)  of  the  2002  Act  against  which  the
    appellant was entitled to, and did, bring an appeal before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

30. The FtT had jurisdiction to determine such appeal, and  Judge  Clarke's
    conclusion to the contrary was wrong in law. In all the circumstances I
    set aside Judge Clarke's decision.

Re-making of the decision under appeal

31. I directed, without dispute, that the Upper Tribunal  should  undertake
    the re-making of the decision.

32. Mr Norton properly accepted that the appellant  meets  the  eligibility
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  He  further
    indicated that although formal suitability checks on the appellant  had
    not been carried out by the SSHD, he had himself undertaken such checks
    and, having done so, he had not come across any information  indicating
    that the suitability requirements had not been met.

33. Given this, and having considered the evidence before me for myself,  I
    find that the appellant has  established  that  he  meets  all  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

34. Ms Pinder further commended to the Tribunal that the appeal  should  be
    allowed on the basis that the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules had been met (i.e. that the appellant  has  10  years
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom). She  observed  when
    doing so that: (a) this  was  the  basis  upon  which  the  appellant's
    parents' appeals had been allowed by the FtT; and,  (b)  the  appellant
    has at all times been a dependent on his father's leave to  remain  and
    thus given that his  father  had  been  found  to  have  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for a continuous 10 year period it  must
    follow that the same  findings  should  be  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant.

35. At the hearing Mr Norton did not dispute that the appellant had accrued
    10 years lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom  (given  my  earlier
    ruling). He asserted, however, that if the Tribunal were to reach  this
    stage in its consideration of the appeal then it should simply conclude
    that the SSHD's decision was not in accordance with the law;  the  SSHD
    not yet having considered this  issue  and  in  particular  not  having
    considered whether to exercise the discretion to grant leave identified
    within the rule itself. Ms Pinder submitted to the contrary.

36. On 27 May 2016 I invited further written submissions from  the  parties
    on the issue of whether the  Upper  Tribunal  could  lawfully  consider
    paragraph 276B of the Rules, given that the accrual of 10 years  lawful
    residence occurred after the date of the decision under challenge.

37. Whilst I received detailed submissions from the appellant  in  response
    to the aforementioned directions, no response has  been  received  from
    the SSHD. This has made my task on what is  a  complicated  issue  even
    more difficult. Nevertheless,  I  approach  my  consideration  of  this
    jurisdictional issue on the basis that  the  SSHD  does  not,  save  in
    relation to whether the appellant  had  a  valid  appeal  at  all,  put
    forward the further position that the Tribunal is not entitled to  give
    consideration to paragraph 276B of the Rules.

38. Inherent in Mr Norton's submission that the appeal should be allowed on
    this ground on the limited basis that the SSHD's decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law is an acceptance that the  Tribunal  does  have
    jurisdiction. The fact that no submissions were made to the contrary in
    response to my directions reinforces this view.

39. Nevertheless, it is a matter of jurisdiction so cannot  be  settled  by
    the consent of the parties I must therefore deal with it.

40. I assume in the appellant's  favour  that  any  matter  raised  in  the
    appellant's father's response to the section 120 notice is  capable  of
    being before the  FtT  in  relation  to  the  appellant  as  well  (the
    appellant not having been sent a section 120 in his  own  name  because
    his application was treated as being invalid). This is as a consequence
    of the appellant being a dependent upon his  father's  application  for
    leave and  the  response  to  the  section  120  notice  being  in  the
    appellant's name as well as that of his father.

41. In her written submissions Mr Pinder  contends  that  the  Tribunal  is
    seized of the 276B issue, despite 10  years  not  having  been  accrued
    until after the lodging of the appeal. She places significant  emphasis
    on the following passages from Lord Carnworth's decision in Patel & Ors
    v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, the conclusions in which were given in  relation
    to the issue  of:  "Whether  the  conclusion  of  the  majority  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, that an appeal  to  the  FTT
    covers not only ground before the Secretary of State when she made  the
    decision under appeal  but also any grounds raised in response to a one-
    stop notice issued under section 120 of the 2002 Act, even if they  had
    not been subject of any decision by the Secretary of State and did  not
    relate to the decision under appeal, is correct." [paragraph 10(iv)].
         "[41] The broader approach of the majority seems to me to gain some
         support from the scheme of section 3C, under which  (as  is  common
         ground) the initial application for leave to  remain,  if  made  in
         time, can later be  varied  to  include  wholly  unrelated  grounds
         without turning it  into  a  new  application  or  prejudicing  the
         temporary right to remain given by the section. Thus  the  identity
         of the application depends on the substance of what is applied for,
         rather than on the particular grounds  or  rules  under  which  the
         application is initially made. The same approach can be applied  to
         the decision on that application, the identity  or  "substance"  of
         which in  the  context  of  an  appeal  is  not  dependent  on  the
         particular grounds first relied on.
         [42] It is of interest that,  at  an  earlier  stage,  the  broader
         approach  seems  to  have  accorded  with  the  reading  of   those
         responsible within  the  Home  Office  for  advice  to  immigration
         officers. The Immigration  Directorate's  Instructions,  issued  in
         September 2006, noted that it was not possible under section 3C  to
         make a second application, but continued:
             "On the other hand, it is possible to vary the grounds  of  an
             application  already  made,  even  by  introducing   something
             completely new. A student application can be varied so  as  to
             include marriage grounds. If an application is varied before a
             decision is made, the applicant will be required  to  complete
             the necessary prescribed form to vary his application.  If  an
             application is varied post decision, it would be open  to  the
             applicant to  submit  further  grounds  to  be  considered  at
             appeal... Once an application has been decided it ceases to be
             an application and there is no longer any application to  vary
             under section 3C(5). So any new information will  fall  to  be
             dealt with during the course of the appeal rather  than  as  a
             variation of the original  application."  (para  3.2  emphasis
             added)
         [43] The same approach is  supported  by  the  current  edition  of
         Macdonald's Immigration Law & Practice 8th  ed  (2010)  para  19.22
         (under the heading "The tribunal as primary decision  maker").  The
         only implicit criticism made of the majority approach in AS is that
         it did not go far enough. They observe that even without a  section
         120 notice the tribunal should be free to consider any matter -
             "... including a matter arising after the  decision  which  is
             relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision  regardless  of
             whether a one-stop notice has been served. The  'substance  of
             the decision' is not the decision maker's reasoned response to
             the particular  application  or  factual  situation  that  was
             before it but is one of the immigration  decisions  enumerated
             in section 82 and a  'matter'  includes  anything  capable  of
             supporting a fresh application to the decision maker..."
         Whether or not such an extension of the majority's reasoning can be
         supported, that passage indicates  that  the  broader  approach  in
         itself is not controversial.
         [44] In the end, although the  arguments  are  finely  balanced,  I
         prefer the approach of the majority in AS. Like Sullivan LJ, I find
         a broad approach more consistent with the "coherence" of this  part
         of the Act. He noted that the standard form of appeal, echoing  the
         effect of the section 120 notice, urged  appellants  to  raise  any
         additional ground at that stage, on pain of not being able to do so
         later, and observed:
             "... it seems to me that appellants would have good reason  to
             question the coherence of the statutory scheme  if  they  were
             then to be told by the AIT that  it  had  no  jurisdiction  to
             consider the additional ground that they had been  ordered  by
             both the Secretary of State and the AIT to put forward." (para
             99)"

  42. In his judgment in Patel & Ors Lord Mance (with whom Lord  Kerr,  Lord
      Reed and Lord Hughes also agreed) also  concluded  that  the  majority
      decision in AS (Afghanistan) had been correct [paragraph  63],  albeit
      he also observed that his decision on this issue was obiter [paragraph
      62].



  43. In AS (Afghanistan), the Court of Appeal had to consider the effect of
      responses (hereinafter  referred  to  as  a  statement  of  additional
      grounds) made by the appellants to notices served by the SSHD pursuant
      to section 120 of the 2002 Act.  It was concluded that the effect of a
      section 120 notice, and subsequent  response  thereto,  was  that  the
      Tribunal had to determine not only any  ground  that  was  before  the
      Secretary of State when she made the decision under  appeal  but  also
      any ground raised in the statement of additional grounds, even if such
      a ground had not been the subject of a decision by  the  Secretary  of
      State and did not relate to the decision under appeal.



  44. There were two linked cases before the Court of Appeal. In the  first,
      the appellant had applied for leave to remain as a person intending to
      establish herself in business under paragraph 206E of HC 395 and, that
      application  having  been  refused  she  subsequently   submitted   an
      application for leave  to  remain  under  the  international  graduate
      scheme. In the second, NV (Sri Lanka),   the appellant  had  submitted
      an application for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
      residence in the United Kingdom. This  application  was  refused.  She
      appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision  and  subsequently
      served a statement of additional  grounds  seeking  variation  of  her
      leave to remain on the basis that she was a student.



  45. By a  majority  the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  the  appeals  of  the
      appellants  against  the  decisions  of  Senior   Immigration   Judges
      upholding decisions of  Immigration  Judges  that  they  were  without
      jurisdiction,  and  remitted  the  cases  back  to  the  Tribunal  for
      consideration of the additional grounds.



  46. Moore-Bick LJ considered, at  paragraph  81,  that  all  the  material
      provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  Act
      pointed towards a procedural scheme  under  which  the  appellant  was
      required to put forward all his grounds for challenging  the  decision
      against him for consideration in  one  set  of  proceedings,  and  the
      Tribunal was placed under a corresponding duty to  consider  them.  It
      followed, he concluded, that the section 120 notice was  not  intended
      to be restricted to  matters  relating  to  the  original  grounds  of
      application or that the decision being challenged could be defined  by
      reference to the particular facts on which it was based.



  47. Sullivan LJ, who agreed with Moore-Bick LJ, considered it to be  clear
      that the underlying  legislative  policy  was  to  prevent  successive
      applications, and emphasised that  the  words  "against  the  decision
      appealed against"  at  the  end  of  subsection  85(2)  were  properly
      interpreted as being the decision to refuse to  vary  the  appellant's
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom  rather  than  the  decision  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain under a  particular  paragraph  of  the
      Rules.



  48. It is also necessary to consider the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
      in AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833, the issue  in  that  case
      being summed up by Pill LJ at paragraph 4 as being whether the  points
      entitlement arising from a Master's degree  could  count  towards  the
      minimum if the degree was  awarded  after  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision but before the decision of the Tribunal.



  49.  Having  given  detailed  consideration  to   the   decision   in   AS
      (Afghanistan) Pill LJ (with whom Toulson and Sullivan LJJ agreed) said
      as follows:



         "[25] For the Secretary of State it is submitted that  AS  was  not
         concerned with evidence of events subsequent to  the  Secretary  of
         state's decision. I agree with that submission...




         [35]...A tribunal's task is to "look back at the position as at the
         date of application [now decision]" as stated by  the  Tribunal  in
         the present case at paragraph 14 or, as the Tribunal put it in  MS,
         at paragraph 49, in cases where "the rule in question  specifies  a
         fixed historic time-line."




  50. Also of significance is the short judgment of Sullivan  LJ,  who  also
      gave one of the majority judgments in AS (Afghanistan):




         "[41] ...In AS the Court was not concerned with decisions  made  by
         the Respondent  under  the  "Points-based"  system  of  determining
         applications for leave to remain. In such cases there is  a  "fixed
         historic time-line". The effective  operation  of  a  points  based
         system requires the points to have been accumulated at the date  of
         the Secretary of State's decision."

  51. Drawing all of this together, in my conclusion none of  the  decisions
      cited above deal precisely  with  the  scenario  that  arises  in  the
      instant case. It  is  plain  however  that  in  AQ  the  Court  placed
      importance on the fact that the immigration rule  under  consideration
      therein had a fixed historic time-line. It did not need  to  consider,
      and left open, the possibility of a different conclusion being reached
      if there was no fixed historic time  line  in  the  immigration  rule.
      Paragraph 276B of the Rules falls within  this  latter  category.  The
      rule does not require an applicant to have 10 years continuous  lawful
      residence as of the date of application.


  52. Given all  that  is  said  in  AS  Afghanistan  about  the  underlying
      legislative policy, the approval in  Patel  of  the  majority's  broad
      approach in AS (Afghanistan), the importance attached in AQ (Pakistan)
      to the rule being considered therein incorporating  a  fixed  historic
      timeline, and not having heard any submissions from the  SSHD  to  the
      contrary in this case, I conclude that the issue of 276B  having  been
      raised in the response to the section 120 notice, it is incumbent upon
      the Tribunal to consider it and that it can consider events which post-
      date the SSHD's decision when doing so.


  53. The only matter now left for consideration is Mr  Norton's  submission
      that paragraph 276B of the Rules imports a discretion and that,  given
      that the SSHD has not yet considered the exercise of  such  discretion
      under the Rule, the Tribunal  should  not  impose  its  conclusion  in
      relation to this on the SSHD but rather allow the appeal on the  basis
      that the SSHD's decision was not in accordance with the law.


  54. Whilst there is a legal foundation underpinning such  submission  (see
      Ukus (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)),  this
      presupposes that paragraph 276B contains within a  discretion  of  the
      type relied upon by Mr Norton, it does not.


  55. Paragraph 276B reads:


         '276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the United Kingdom.


         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
         it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:
         (a) age; and
         (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
         (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
         and employment record; and
         (d) domestic circumstances; and
         (e) compassionate circumstances; and
         (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and


         (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general
         grounds for refusal.


         (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the
         English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United
         Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.


         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days
         or less will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying
         between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to
         remain of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying pending the
         determination of an application made within that 28 day period.'


  56. Mr Norton fixed his submissions with particular reference to the terms
      of paragraph 276B (ii); however, I can detect no operative  discretion
      within that subparagraph of the Rule. That  subparagraph  requires  no
      more than a consideration of all of an  applicant's  circumstances  in
      the context of performing an assessment of whether there  are  reasons
      why it would be undesirable for that applicant to be given  indefinite
      leave to remain.


  57. In the instant case, as set out above,  Mr  Norton  has  undertaken  a
      suitability check and found nothing of any consequence adverse to  the
      appellant. There is simply nothing on  the  evidence  before  me  that
      would make it undesirable for this appellant to be granted  indefinite
      leave to remain. This is  not  a  consideration  of  the  exercise  of
      discretion but a determination of an issue of fact.


  58. There being no dispute that all other aspects of the Rule are  met  by
      the appellant, I conclude that the appellant meets the requirements of
      paragraph 276B of the Rules.


  59. If subsequent  to  this  decision  the  SSHD  discovers  a  matter  of
      potential significance relating to this appellant that is  thought  to
      be adverse to the public  interest  then,  no  doubt,  she  will  give
      consideration to such a matter when deciding whether to  exercise  the
      discretion inherent in paragraph 276C of the Rules. The  existence  of
      the discretion in paragraph 276C of the Rules is not though  a  matter
      relevant to my decision.

Decision

   i) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
  ii) Upon re-making the decision the  Upper  Tribunal  concludes  that  the
      appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  both  paragraph  276ADE   and
      paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. Accordingly, I conclude  that
      the decision of the SSHD of 19 May 2014 was not in accordance with the
      Immigration Rules.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
8 July 2016

