
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/23774/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 June 2017                           |On 07 July 2017                   |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     vP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Augustine
Clement
     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 3 October 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Eames allowed the appeal of the  respondent  (hereinafter  called  "the
    claimant"), a citizen of the Philippines, against the decision made  by
    the appellant (hereinafter called "the Secretary of State"  or  "SSHD")
    refusing leave to remain.   The  judge  found  that  the  claimant  was
    credible; that she now had sole responsibility for her child,  D,  aged
    7; that D is a British citizen and that it was in D's best interests to
    remain in the UK; and that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  D  to
    leave the UK.  In light of these findings the judge concluded that  the
    claimant met  the  relevant  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    concluding at paragraphs 53-55 that:

         "53. Since paragraph EX.1 is therefore satisfied, in my  judgement,
             and all of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2 to 2.4, and E-LTRPT.3.1  are
             satisfied,  and  the  respondent  accepts  anyway   that   the
             appellant does not fall for refusal under S-LTR, the result is
             that she satisfies R-LTRPT.1(d).  As well, R-LTRPT.1.1(a)  and
             (b) are plainly met.  Section R-LTRPT is  therefore  satisfied
             overall.  That conclusion is also entirely consonant with  the
             Secretary of State's earlier conclusion - not withdrawn - that
             it was in Darwin's best interests to remain in the UK,  and  I
             find that his best interests do indeed dictate that.


         54.  None of those conclusions are  affected  in  any  way  by  the
             admitted impropriety of the appellant's entry to the UK on the
             false passport, or the fact that she has worked whilst in  the
             UK without status.


         55.  The appeal is allowed under the parent route of appendix FM to
             the Immigration Rules."

2.   In her written grounds of appeal the  SSHD  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the issue of the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the
    child D to leave  the  UK  with  reference  to  wider  public  interest
    considerations.  It was noted that the claimant was an illegal  entrant
    who admits to entering the UK on a passport  in  another  identity  and
    therefore would not meet the status requirements of E-LTRP.3.2.  It was
    submitted that this was contrary to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

3.   At the hearing Mr Bramble said  that  he  was  in  some  difficulty  in
    seeking to maintain the SSHD's challenge as set  out  in  the  grounds.
    The SSHD had not challenged the judge's finding that the  claimant  now
    had sole responsibility for  D  and  that  D's  father  was  no  longer
    involved in his life.  In light of that  finding,  the  fact  that  the
    claimant did not meet the suitability (or status)  requirements  of  E-
    LTRP.3.2. was not fatal to the decision to allow the appeal as, in  the
    case of a British citizen child, it was the SSHD's policy that save  in
    cases of criminality or a very poor immigration history such  as  where
    the person has repeatedly and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
    Rules, it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child's  parents  to
    leave  the  UK.   Mr  Bramble  said  that  so  far  as  the  claimant's
    immigration history was concerned it was part of the  judge's  findings
    that the claimant's admitted impropriety in entering the UK on a  false
    passport and working unlawfully for three years were  not  sufficiently
    adverse factors to outweigh the claimant's right to respect for private
    and family life.  Mr Bramble said that as a result  he  was  not  in  a
    position to submit that the claimant fell outside the SSHD's own policy
    and, in the light of the reported Upper Tribunal  decision  in  SF  and
    others (Guidance, post 2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC),  he  could  not
    submit that the judge's decision was materially wrong in law.

4.   I consider Mr Bramble's submissions pertinent.  To my  mind  the  error
    on the part of the judge in  considering  that  the  claimant  met  the
    relevant Immigration Rules in full was not  material  because,  on  the
    basis of the judge's own findings, it was inevitable that the claimant,
    if not able to succeed under the Rules, would succeed outside the Rules
    by virtue of the compelling circumstance that  the  SSHD's  own  policy
    made clear that someone in the position of the claimant came within the
    terms of that policy, and hence there was no  public  interest  in  the
    claimant's removal.

5.   Even if I had found that the judge materially  erred  in  law  I  would
    have then re-made the decision by  concluding  that  the  claimant  was
    entitled to succeed on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules by virtue of
    falling within the SSHD's own policy.   I  would  also  have  held  the
    claimant met in full the requirements of s. 117B(6) of NIAA 2002.

Notice of Decision

6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and his decision is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 6 July 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




