
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 4th May 2017                    |On 26th May 2017                         |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                              MD SADIKUR RAHMAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F. Junior, of Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on the 2nd  February  1990,
    appeals  with  permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Moxon) who, in a determination promulgated on 11th July
    2016  dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to
    refuse to grant residence card as a dependant family member of  an  EEA
    national ( his cousin) . No anonymity direction was made by  the  First
    Tier-Tribunal and no  application  has  been  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant by his legal representatives.

 2. The appellant submitted an application on the 17 March 2015. He applied
    for a residence card as a dependent family member of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights, namely his cousin Mr Azad, who was  a  French
    citizen and therefore an EEA national.

 3. The application was refused in a decision made  on  9  June  2015.  The
    notice of decision made reference to the basis of the application for a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right of residence on  the  basis
    that he was an extended family member who had been dependent on the EEA
    national sponsor/a dependent member of his household and  continued  to
    be so in the UK. The decision set out that the applicant had failed  to
    produce the original birth certificates as evidence that he was related
    as claimed to the EEA national.  Furthermore,  the  family  member  had
    failed to provide evidence that they are a qualified person are set out
    in Regulation 6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. Accompanying the notice of decision was a reasons  for  refusal  letter
    which expanded on the reasons given for the refusal of the  application
    and made reference to the documentary evidence that had  been  produced
    with the application. It noted that he had failed to  produce  evidence
    to demonstrate that he was related  as  claimed  to  the  EEA  national
    sponsor. The evidence provided of the relationship which was a  foreign
    language document with no translation and 4 photo copies of  Bangladesh
    birth certificates was not accepted as evidence of a relationship.  The
    decision letter made reference  to  the  need  to  see  original  birth
    certificates for the applicant, the sponsor and both of the fathers. As
    the applicant had not submitted original documentation, it could not be
    confirmed that he was a family member of an EEA national.

 5. As to the issue of dependency, the Secretary of State  considered  that
    he had not provided  sufficient  evidence  of  dependency  on  the  EEA
    national sponsor at any  time,  either  in  Bangladesh  or  the  United
    Kingdom. As to the evidence provided, the  four  money  transfer  slips
    from Asad travel was considered but they were in form which  could  not
    be appropriately verified. The slips were not  sufficient  evidence  of
    dependency prior to entering the country.

 6. The applicants immigration history was also considered in which it  was
    noted that he entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (Gen) student from
    7 October 2009 until 24  December  2012  and  in  the  entry  clearance
    application the applicant did not mention his alleged uncle and that he
    had shown the entry clearance officers evidence that  he  was  able  to
    support himself financially. The Secretary  of  State  also  considered
    that the applicant had not provided  sufficient  evidence  of  the  EEA
    family member exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom as defined
    under Regulation 6 of the  EEA  Regulations.  The  accountant's  letter
    which had been provided  was  deemed  insufficient  evidence  of  self-
    employment. Thus the application was refused.

 7. The appellant appealed the decision  on  22  June  2015.  A  notice  of
    hearing was sent to the applicant for a hearing on 2 June 2016. However
    a letter from his legal representatives dated 17 May 2016 requested the
    Tribunal to change the hearing listed as an  oral  appeal  to  a  paper
    hearing. That request was accepted by the Tribunal and on 16 June  2016
    further directions were sent to the appellant to  provide  any  further
    documents by 16 June 2016. Pursuant to  that  direction,  a  bundle  of
    documents was sent to the First-tier Tribunal  under  cover  of  letter
    dated 16 June 2016 which consisted of 221 pages.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

 8. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon) on 1  July
    2016. As set out above, the matter was determined upon  the  papers  as
    requested by the applicant. In a determination promulgated on  11  July
    2016 Judge Moxon dismissed his appeal on all grounds. In doing  so,  he
    made reference to the large bundle of documents that had been  provided
    under cover of letter dated 16 June 2016 and observed  that  there  had
    been no original copies of documents sent  either  in  that  bundle  or
    otherwise. He also made reference to the bundle  containing  statements
    from the appellant and the sponsor dated 16 June 2016 (see paragraph 13
    of the determination).

 9.  The  Judge  identified  from  the  reasons  for  the  refusal  of  the
    application that there were  three  issues  that  he  was  required  to
    resolve. The First issue related to whether or not  the  applicant  had
    demonstrated  sufficient  evidence  of  his  relationship  to  the  EEA
    sponsor. At paragraphs 14 - 17 of the determination the Judge  set  out
    the evidence before him concerning the relationship which included  the
    witness statement in which the appellant explained that the sponsor was
    his cousin (his father's brother's son and  adduced  letters  from  two
    brothers-in-law to corroborate this. At paragraph 15 the Judge set  out
    that the appellant had asserted that he had  submitted  original  birth
    certificates for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  consider.  However
    Judge Moxon observed at paragraph 16 that no original birth certificate
    had in fact been included  within  the  bundle.  The  Judge  also  made
    reference to the photographs at paragraph 17.

10. His findings of fact in respect of this issue are set out at paragraphs
    33 to 38. He found that whilst the appellant had indicated  within  his
    statement that the bundle supplied to the  Tribunal  included  original
    birth certificates that was in fact incorrect and that the bundle  only
    included  copies.  The  Judge  observed  that  despite  the  respondent
    expresses stating that originals would be preferable the appellant  had
    failed to provide them. At  paragraph  34  he  made  reference  to  the
    Bangladesh country of origin information (COI) report dated  31  August
    2013 which made reference to the use of fraudulent documents, including
    birth certificates in Bangladesh and cited objective material  relating
    to the "significant prevalence of fraudulent documents in  Bangladesh".
    At paragraph 35 the  Judge  considered  the  evidence  to  support  the
    relationship, he found that none of  the  individuals  had  given  live
    evidence and thus had not been tested for any inconsistencies. Thus  he
    attached limited weight to those statements and letters. In respect  of
    the photographs, he was not satisfied  that  the  photographs  as  they
    stood did not necessarily show  that  they  were  related.  Whilst  the
    appellant and the sponsor knew each other, the Judge found that he  had
    no reliable evidence that they were in fact cousins thus the  appellant
    had failed to satisfy him on the balance of possibilities that he was a
    family member of an EEA national, namely the sponsor.

11. The second issue identified was that relating to the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor exercising Treaty rights. The Judge recorded  the  evidence  on
    this issue at paragraph 18 - 26. This included the appellant's  account
    of his sponsors work history   (paragraph  18),  and  consideration  of
    documents  within   the   bundle,   including   a   premises   licence,
    documentation including a P60 and P45 concerning employment that ceased
    in December 2014, and accountant's letter dated the 10th of every  2015
    and tax return relating to work as  a  minicab  driver  and  HSBC  bank
    statements.

12. The Judge's findings on this issue were set out at paragraphs 39 to 44.
    When considering the work history of the sponsor he  found  that  there
    was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the sponsor had  his  own
    business and that the licensing document for the purported business was
    of the type that could be easily fabricated and that the land  Registry
    document made no reference to the property which it  concerns  being  a
    business. In addition, there were no business accounts,  invoices  such
    documentation which would have been a  suitably  obtainable  (paragraph
    39). The Judge accepted that there was sufficient documentary  evidence
    to demonstrate that the appellant was employed until 31st  of  December
    2014 (see paragraph 40). The Judge thereafter did  accept  the  sponsor
    had worked as a taxi driver referring to the taxi licence and  payments
    from Uber within the bank account.  However  he  found  that  the  only
    evidence of continuing self-employment of the sponsor was a renewal  of
    the licence and no original documentation had been disclosed  and  that
    had the sponsor continued to work as a taxi driver, documentation would
    have been provided such as bank statements showing  payments,  invoices
    et cetera. He found that the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  the
    sponsor had continued to work as  a  taxi  driver  since  the  5th   of
    February 2015 which is the date of the last payment within the account.
    No further evidence had been provided.

13. The last issue related to dependency. As to prior dependency the  Judge
    set out the evidence relied upon at paragraphs 27 to 32.  The  findings
    of fact made are at paragraphs 45 to 47. The Judge  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was dependent upon the sponsor prior to arriving  in
    the United Kingdom. He considered the money transfer  forms  which  had
    been completed by hand which purported to demonstrate  money  transfers
    from the sponsor to the appellant on four occasions during the time the
    appellant was resident in Bangladesh. The Judge noted that there was no
    signature and where the form required details of who would process  the
    transaction, where it had asked for the ID type it is  completed  "any"
    and no ID number was provided. The box in which to include  the  "order
    number" is also left uncompleted (see paragraph 27). At  paragraph  46,
    the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  rely   upon   that
    documentation for the reasons set out at paragraph 27 relating  to  the
    content of those documents. As the Judge  found  at  paragraph  46  the
    documents or copies, there are various details that  are  omitted  from
    them. The company was based in Cardiff, was at the time the sponsor was
    living in London. Thus he did not accept that that documentation  could
    be relied upon and did not place weight upon them. Furthermore he found
    that the appellant had failed to provide any reason as to why he  would
    have been dependent upon  his  cousin  rather  than  any  other  family
    member. The Judge made reference  to  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    income  and  that  that  did  not  demonstrate  that  he   had   earned
    "significant sums".

14. As to the current  dependency,  the  Judge  set  out  the  evidence  of
    paragraphs 30 to 32 and the findings at  paragraph  48  to  50  of  the
    determination. The Judge made reference to a number of documents in the
    bundle (including electricity bills and bank  statements  addressed  to
    the same address of  the  sponsor)  at  paragraph  48  which  he  found
    suggested that the appellant and sponsor have lived together  for  some
    time. However he found the documents  from  organisations  which  would
    have relied upon evidence from the appellant and  the  sponsor  and  as
    such the credibility was "central" as to whether he could  accept  that
    documentation is a true reflection upon the living together. He  found,
    however, that the credibility had been undermined the reasons given  in
    the determination and therefore had not been satisfied  that  they  had
    lived together at any stage. In any event, at paragraph  50  the  Judge
    did not accept that the appellant demonstrated that  he  was  dependent
    upon the sponsor. In this  respect  he  repeated  his  observations  in
    relation to prior dependency that it was unclear why  the  sponsor  was
    responsible for the appellant but importantly, noted the  lack  of  any
    documentary evidence, such as bank transfers or proof that the  sponsor
    had purchased items or services that the appellant. He also  noted  the
    lack of detail as to how  the  sponsor  supported  the  appellant,  for
    example, it was not outlined as to  whether  he  provided  him  with  a
    specific sum of money.

15.  The Judge went on to consider article 8 at paragraphs 55 to 71 and the
    Judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

16. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision advancing  four
    grounds. On 16 March 2007  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted
    permission. However the Judge did not grant permission by reference  to
    the grounds provided on behalf of the appellant stating as follows:

         "irrespective of the  complaints  made  by  the  appellant  in  the
         application there is an arguable error of law in this  decision  in
         that in accordance with the decision in  Sala [2016) UKUT 411 as an
         OFM the appellant had no  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision
         made."

17. The Secretary of State responded to the grounds of  appeal  under  Rule
    24. That document oppose the appeal observing that the  Judge  granting
    permission identified as an arguable error of law that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  following  the
    decision in Sala and thus there was a procedural error and  that  there
    was no right  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  those
    circumstances, the issues raised  in  the  grounds  did  not  fall  for
    consideration.

18. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Tufan relied upon the Rule
    24 response and the decision of Sala (as cited). He submitted  that  it
    clarified what the law should have been and that as such  the  decision
    of the respondent did not attract a right of appeal

19. Mr Junior, on behalf of the appellant submitted that at the time of the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the decision  in  Sala  had  not
    been made and therefore the Judge could not  have  been  aware  of  the
    existence  of  this  decision  and  therefore  the  Judge  should  have
    considered the legislation in force at  that  time  and  prior  to  the
    decision of Sala.

20. As to the grounds of appeal, he relied upon  the  written  grounds.  In
    respect of ground one he began by submitting  that  the  appellant  had
    produced original birth certificates but later accepted  that  in  fact
    there had been no original documents sent as the Judge had observed  in
    the determination. However he submitted the Judge fell  into  error  by
    seeking to conduct his own enquiries are set out at  paragraph  34  and
    had not given the applicant the opportunity to address  those  matters.
    As to ground 2 and the evidence of dependency, the Judge erred  in  law
    by his failure to attach appropriate weight to the remittance slips and
    that the receipts were available to the Secretary of  State  who  could
    have verified their authenticity. In this respect Mr Junior relied upon
    the evidence in the bundle to  show  that  they  were  living  together
    (ground 4) and that the Judge erred in law by failing to provide cogent
    reasons as to why the documents could not constitute  proof  of  shared
    residence in the UK. As to ground three, which related  to  whether  or
    not the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights, he invited  the  Tribunal
    to consider paragraph 39 and the licensing document that there  was  no
    evidence of fabrication and that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  attached
    appropriate weight to the evidence relating to his employment.

21. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon  the  decision
    in Sala that there was no right  of  appeal  and  thus  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law in this respect. In any event, he submitted
    that the grounds had no merit and that the Judge  attached  appropriate
    weight to the evidence in the light of  the  documents  that  had  been
    presented. He submitted the Judge had gone through the evidence and had
    given cogent and sufficient reasons for reaching the conclusions. As to
    looking at the evidence in the COI S report, that was evidence  of  the
    public domain and thus it was  open  to  the  Judge  to  consider  that
    evidence. As to exercising Treaty rights,  there  was  no  evidence  in
    relation to his present employment other than a historic  taxi  licence
    thus it was open to the Judge to find that there was no evidence of any
    economic activity. Consequently the decision on its merits was open  to
    the Judge to make.

Conclusions:

22. As set out earlier in  the  determination,  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who took the  point  that  the
    arguable error  of  law  in  the  decision  related  to  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction in the light of the decision in Sala. The  Judge  did  not
    give any reasons as to why permission should be granted on the  grounds
    as advanced by the appellant.

23. The decision of Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC)
    was a decision of the Upper Tribunal which was reported  on  19  August
    2016 which was after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It is not
    necessary to set out in any detail the substance of  that  decision  as
    neither party have submitted before this Tribunal that the decision was
    wrongly decided.  The  conclusion  reached  by  the  Tribunal  in  that
    decision was that there was no right  of  appeal  before  the  Tribunal
    against the refusal to issue a residence permit to an  extended  family
    member. On that basis, the Tribunal found that there was  an  error  of
    law because there was no right of appeal and therefore  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and remade  the  decision  finding  that
    there was no valid appeal.

24. I have recorded above the submission made by Mr Junior on behalf of the
    appellant. In essence he submitted that it could not be an error of law
    in the circumstances where the Judge could not  have  known  about  the
    decision in Sala and which was not available to the Judge at  the  time
    of the hearing. I cannot accept that submission. As set out above,  the
    decision in Sala was an error of law decision where the Judge could not
    have known that the law would be decided as it subsequently was by  the
    Upper Tribunal. In any event at  paragraph  44  of  the  decision,  the
    Tribunal stated that the fact that the right of appeal  has  been  long
    assumed or accepted is not, in itself, determinative of how  we  should
    decide this appeal which must be based on the  proper  construction  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006 taking into account  detailed  submissions  on
    the point. The Tribunal  went  on  to  state  "long-standing  universal
    mistake"  is  not  a   Canon   of   construction   of   a   legislative
    instrument...". Furthermore, the position is similar  to  circumstances
    which often come before this Tribunal whereby the Court of Appeal makes
    a contrary decision to that of the  Tribunal  (or  other  court)  which
    changes the law. In those circumstances the law is  assumed  to  always
    have been what the higher court says that it then is  as  I  understand
    the decision in Sala, the Tribunal was stating that the EEA Regulations
    should always have been interpreted as they have  interpreted  them  in
    Sala.

25. Therefore I consider that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  was
    right when stating that there was an error of law  on  the  basis  that
    there was no jurisdiction to hear an appeal  against  the  refusal.  In
    those circumstances, and having found an error on a point of law I  set
    the decision aside and remake the decision  that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

26.  However, I did hear submissions from the parties which did  relate  to
    the merits of the appeal. I  did  so  in  the  event  that  should  the
    decision in Sala  be  reconsidered  on  a  later  appeal  that  I  have
    considered and dealt  with  the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  I  have  summarised  those  submissions  earlier  in   this
    determination. Having had the opportunity to  hear  argument  from  the
    parties and having considered them in the light of the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the documentation before the  Judge,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision on its merits did not disclose any error of
    law as submitted by Mr Junior or as set out in the written  grounds.  I
    shall give my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

27. The first ground relates to the  findings  of  the  Judge  relating  to
    whether or not the appellant demonstrated that the parties were related
    as claimed. Whilst the appellant had submitted  birth  certificates  to
    show the relationship, it is plain from  the  refusal  letter  that  as
    evidence of the relationship with his cousin and sponsor, the documents
    had not been accepted as no original documentation had  been  provided.
    The Secretary of State could not therefore confirm from that there  was
    evidence of the relationship. Whilst the appellant had  stated  in  his
    witness statement that the bundle provided for  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal included original birth certificates to counteract that reason
    for refusal, it is plain from the decision of the Judge   at  paragraph
    33 that no such original documents had in fact been provided.

28. Mr Junior began by submitting that the original document  had  in  fact
    been sent but later accepted that no original documents had  been  sent
    but that there were copies of those documents. Mr Junior submitted that
    the Judge fell into error by conducting his own enquiries at  paragraph
    34. I do not consider the ground  what  is  made  out.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account evidence that was in the  public  domain.
    He was further entitled to take into account that evidence  because  it
    supported the reasoning in the decision letter as to why the  Secretary
    of State was not satisfied that they were related  as  claimed  because
    the original birth certificates had not been  provided.  The  applicant
    was on notice that this was an issue and did not take  the  opportunity
    to  provide  the  original  documents  or  any  further  evidence.  The
    appellant had an opportunity to deal with this issue and the burden  of
    proof remains on the appellant. Contrary to the grounds, the Judge  did
    give cogent reasons for his finding on this issue  and  considered  the
    other evidence was provided  including  the  photographic  evidence  at
    paragraph 36. That was a finding open to the Judge on the evidence that
    whilst the appellant and sponsor knew each other, there was no reliable
    evidence that they were in fact cousins and related as  claimed.  I  am
    therefore satisfied ground one is not made out.

29. Dealing with ground 2 and the evidence of dependency, it  is  submitted
    that the Judge added law by failing to attach appropriate weight to the
    remittance slips and that the respondent could have  sought  to  verify
    their authenticity by contacting the company. I have  set  out  earlier
    the Judge's findings on this issue. The Judge gave full regard  to  the
    evidence of prior dependency at paragraphs 27 - 29 and in his  findings
    at paragraphs 45 to 47. He gave  cogent  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusion that he could not place  any  weight  upon  the
    money transfer documents for the  reasons  amply  demonstrated  in  his
    determination. It was open to the Judge  to  consider  the  content  of
    those documents when reaching a conclusion upon their reliability  (see
    Tanveer Ahmed). He identified that the money transfer documents had  no
    signature and that where the form required details of who had processed
    the transaction, no ID number been provided; other parts  of  the  form
    were left uncompleted. At paragraph  46,  the  Judge  noted  they  were
    copies and is outlined in paragraph 27 there were various details  that
    were omitted from the documents which undermined their reliability.  He
    further found that the company used was based in  Cardiff  but  at  the
    time the sponsor was said to be living in London. It was therefore open
    to the Judge to consider the reliability  of  those  documents  in  the
    context of the evidence as  a  whole  and  this  included  the  Judge's
    finding that the appellant had failed to provide any reason as  to  why
    he would have been dependent upon his  cousin  rather  than  any  other
    family member. The Judge reached that conclusion which was open to  him
    by considering the evidence that had  been  produced  relating  to  the
    sponsor's  income  which  did  not  demonstrate  that  he  had   earned
    significant sums. Ground two was therefore not made out either.

30. As to ground three, it is submitted that the Judge erred in his failure
    to attach appropriate weight to the documentation  as  to  whether  the
    sponsor was exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This
    included the sponsor's accountant's letter and the annual tax  returns.
    I find no merit in this ground. The Judge gave careful consideration to
    all the documents that had been provided relating to the issue  of  the
    exercise of Treaty rights are set out at paragraphs 18 - 26. Mr  Junior
    has not identified any documentation that the Judge has failed to  take
    into account. In essence his submission was  that  the  Judge  had  not
    attached appropriate weight to those documents. However in the findings
    of fact the Judge carefully considered the appellants  account  of  the
    sponsor's work history  and  did  so  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    provided. It was open to the Judge to find  at  paragraph  39  that  in
    relation to the earlier work history there was insufficient evidence to
    demonstrate that the appellant had his own  business.  The  Judge  made
    reference to the licensing document as a document  of  the  type  which
    could be "easily fabricated". However that was not the only reason, the
    Judge went on to state that the land Registry document which  had  been
    provided made no reference to the property which concerned his business
    and importantly, the Judge recorded his finding that there had been  no
    business accounts, invoices or documentary evidence of that type  which
    would have been easily obtainable to  support  his  claim.  Those  were
    findings that were open to the Judge. As to  the  sponsor's  employment
    thereafter, the Judge was satisfied that he had been employed by Shapla
    until 31 December 2014. The documents in that respect related to the  P
    45 and P60 and payslips which have been produced. However it  was  open
    to the Judge to find that whilst  he  accepted  that  the  sponsor  had
    worked as a taxi driver, having seen a taxi licence and  payments  from
    Uber in the sponsor's bank account, the evidence in  this  respect  was
    time-limited and that the bank statements  only  showed  work  in  this
    capacity to 5 February 2015. The documents before the Tribunal  in  the
    form of bank statements supported that finding to show that there  were
    no payments between November 2014  to  January  2015  but  payments  in
    February. There was no evidence in the bundle dealing with  the  period
    after that which dealt with the period for the application and the date
    of the hearing.  Whilst  the  grounds  assert  that  the  evidence  was
    sufficient relying on the accountant's letter,  in  the  light  of  the
    documentary evidence before the Judge it was open to him to  reach  the
    conclusion that if there was evidence of exercise of Treaty  rights  it
    could have reasonably provided but the appellant and sponsor had failed
    to do so. The grounds simply a disagreement with those  findings  which
    were open to the Judge to make on the evidence that was before him.

31. Dealing with ground 4, it is submitted that the Judge erred in  law  in
    failing to provide cogent reasons as to why the documents  relied  upon
    by the appellant could not have constituted proof of  shared  residence
    in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  in  this
    respect at paragraphs 48 to  50.  It  can  be  seen  from  reading  the
    determination as a whole that the Judge gave proper regard to  all  the
    documents (including electricity bills and bank  statements  et  cetera
    which were addressed to the same address of the  sponsor).  However  it
    was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  those  documents  were  from
    organisations which would have  relied  upon  evidence  from  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor thus the issue of credibility  was  a  matter
    that the Judge could take into account. As  a  result  of  the  earlier
    findings, it was open to the Judge to find  that  the  credibility  had
    been undermined. However even if the Judge  accepted  that  they  lived
    together at the same address,  it was open to the Judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the appellant had failed  to  produce  any  documentary
    evidence to show financial or other dependence upon  the  sponsor.  The
    Judge gave cogent reasons at paragraph  50  of  the  determination  for
    reaching  this  view;  it  was  unclear  as  to  why  the  sponsor  was
    responsible for the appellant but also there was  no  evidence  of  any
    bank transfers of  amounts  of  money  or  evidence  that  the  sponsor
    purchased items or services for the appellant. The Judge also noted the
    lack of detail as to how the sponsor had supported the  appellant,  for
    example, it was not outlined by the provided him with a specific sum of
    money per week. The appellant had provided copies of his bank  accounts
    but there was no reference in those statements to monies emanating from
    the sponsor. Consequently it is not been demonstrated  the  Judge  made
    any error of law in his approach on this issue.

32. As a result of the decision in Sala as  set  out  above,  the  decision
    discloses an error of law on the basis of the Judge lacked jurisdiction
    to hear and decide  the  appeal.  In  those  circumstances  I  set  the
    decision aside and remake the decision that there is  no  valid  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal. However for the  reasons  that  I  have
    given, even if the decision in Sala was wrong, I  have  considered  the
    merits and I am not satisfied that the grounds advanced on  behalf  the
    appellant demonstrate any error of law in the decision reached  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


    Decision:


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did involve an error on a point
    of law on the basis that the Judge lacked jurisdiction. I set aside the
    decision and remake the decision that there was no valid appeal  before
    the FTT.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                                             Date:
22/5/2017
