



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23557/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August 2013                              |On 20th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                             Mr farad said ullah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative, Appellant did not attend
For the Respondent:    Ms Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a  determination  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge (Trotter) promulgated on 14th March 2013, following a hearing  on
    the papers.

 2. The Appellant had appealed against the Respondent's  decision  of  12th
    October 2012, refusing to vary his leave to enter the United Kingdom as
    a student under the Points Based System and to remove  him  by  way  of
    direction under Section 47 of the Immigration  Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 3. The Respondent had refused  the  Appellant's  application  because  the
    Appellant did not score 30 points on his CAS on  account  of  the  fact
    that although there was an English Language Test  Certificate  provided
    it did not include the score for writing with the  rest  of  the  TOEIC
    certificate.  The  Judge  who  considered  the  matter  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules. So far as  the  Section
    47 matter was concerned the Judge found that  the  Respondent  had  not
    acted in accordance with the law and suffice to say  that  that  matter
    stands.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mailer granted permission in the following terms.

         "The Judge noted that but for the 'regrettable error' in failing to
         deliver the document which was in his possession  at  all  material
         times he would have had his extension...

         ...It does not appear that the respondent applied  the  flexibility
         policy as described in Rodriguez [2013] UKUT 00042 in force at  the
         time. It may be arguable that the Appellant should have been  given
         the opportunity to provide the missing  score.  That  may  arguably
         amount to an error of law".

    Thus the matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination contains an error of law,  requiring  it
    to be set aside and the decision remade.

 5. At the hearing before me the Appellant  did  not  attend;  nor  was  he
    represented. I was satisfied that he had been served with notice of the
    hearing at his last known address and thus I was entitled to proceed in
    his absence. Ms Ong appeared for the Respondent.

 6. At the outset of the proceedings Ms Ong conceded that she was satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law, because he had not
    even considered the flexibility  policy  described  in  Rodriguez.  She
    submitted that that would amount to an error of law and asked that  the
    decision be set aside and that the matter proceed to a resumed hearing.



Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Trotter
    contains and error of law, for the reasons set out above by Ms  Ong.  I
    announced my decision in court and announced that I would continue with
    the resumed hearing.





Resumed Hearing

 8. Ms Ong made submissions before me. She asked that I dismiss the appeal.
    She directed me to the case of Rodriguez and to the Respondent's policy
    document in force at the date of decision.

 9. She said that the  facts  are  not  in  dispute  in  this  appeal.  The
    Appellant though his own conduct, failed to provide the score  for  the
    writing part of the English Language Test  Certificate.  There  was  no
    information or evidence to lead the  Respondent  to  believe  that  the
    score for the writing part existed. In these circumstances the decision
    to refuse was correct and the appeal should be dismissed.

My Findings

10. Although this may appear a harsh decision, since the  relevant  missing
    document was in existence at the date of  decision,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant did not provide the necessary  document  to  ensure  that  he
    received the extension of leave he requested. That is  solely  down  to
    his conduct.

11. I find that there is nothing in the documentation provided, which could
    be said to be sufficient to alert the Respondent to the fact  that  the
    missing certificate was in existence, and thereby make  a  request  for
    the Appellant to provide it.

12. I am satisfied and I find, that the Appellant cannot take advantage  of
    the  Respondent's  evidential  flexibility  policy   as   outlined   in
    Rodriguez.

13. No Article 8 arguments were advanced before me.

DECISION

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained an error of law
    and is hereby set aside. This appeal is dismissed.

15. Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

