
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23834/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2013                               |On 19 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Suman Bhowmik

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Morris, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rai, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  28  December  1980.
    On 16 November 2011 he applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    dependant of his wife Nibedita Nath.  She was then a Tier 1 (Post-Study
    Work)  Migrant  also  studying  for  her   ACCA   examinations.    This
    application was refused on 17 October 2012 for the reason that  he  was
    last granted leave outside the Immigration Rules and the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the respondent had last been  given  leave
    to enter or remain in the UK as the partner of a relevant  points-based
    system  migrant.   The  respondent  therefore  did  not   satisfy   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and his application  was  refused
    under paragraph 391C(h) of HC 395.  The respondent was also  told  that
    he may wish to rely on a family or private life in that the Rules  were
    amended on  9  July  2012  and  now  include  provisions  for  such  an
    application.  If he wished the UKBA to consider an application on  this
    basis,  he  must  make  a  separate  charged  application   using   the
    appropriate application form.

2.   The respondent lodged a notice of appeal on  24  October  2012  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.  His grounds were that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and otherwise  not  in
    accordance with the  law.   The  decision  violated  his  private  life
    protected under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   The respondent's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  St  J
    Wiseman in a determination promulgated on 8 March 2013.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  there  were  some  confusing
    aspects of this case, particularly in relation to the  last  period  of
    leave granted to the respondent and the fact that it  appears  to  have
    taken almost a  year  to  respond  to  the  current  application.   The
    respondent thought that  he  had  obtained  his  previous  leave  as  a
    dependant of his wife, whereas the Secretary of State said he was  only
    granted leave outside the Rules.  The judge said he suspected that  the
    latter was the case because his visa made no reference to the  category
    of dependant, but it was far from clear on  what  basis  his  visa  was
    actually granted.  He presumed that it had something  to  do  with  the
    fact that between the respondent and his  wife  they  had  a  baby  who
    needed looking after while the wife continued to work and study  there.
    There being no apparent basis for him being granted such  a  visa,  one
    has to presume that the Secretary of State was already  recognising  in
    effect  that  there  were  significant  Article  8  issues   in   play,
    particularly in relation to the wellbeing of the young baby.   If  this
    was the case then it of course made the approach they  adopted  towards
    the present application somewhat illogical.

5.    The  judge  found  that  even   though   there   may   have   been   a
    misunderstanding, he did not believe that the respondent in fact had  a
    dependant visa at the present time and therefore his application  under
    the Immigration Rules must fail.

6.   The judge could not see that the respondent can be required to make  an
    Article 8 application  under  the  new  Rules  by  way  of  a  separate
    application, as the respondent had  raised  Article  8  issues  in  the
    notice of appeal, and he was  required  to  make  a  decision  in  that
    respect.  In any event, he said that it may well be that the respondent
    could not meet any requirements in the new Rules, but  it  was  equally
    clear that he was obliged to go on and consider a freestanding  Article
    8 application in any event, bearing in mind recent authorities in  this
    connection.
7.   Having considered all the evidence before him, the  judge  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal under Article 8.  His findings were as follows:

         "30.     There are no problems  in  this  country  in  relation  to
             maintenance and accommodation  and  of  course  the  appellant
             might have succeeded at some date in the future if he had left
             the United  Kingdom  and  made  a  further  application  as  a
             dependant out of country.  However it is wholly  a  matter  of
             conjecture as to when such an application would be dealt  with
             and when any visa would be granted and the young child of  the
             family requires, on any consideration of section 55 alone, the
             immediate presence of the appellant; not only to  relieve  his
             wife, but to  enable  him  to  have  the  appropriate  bonding
             relationship with his child.  They would spend  a  minimum  of
             months away from each other if not longer if the appellant had
             to return to Bangladesh to make a fresh application and  there
             is no reason whatsoever why the child or indeed the  appellant
             should have to suffer in that  way.   Procedural  issues  only
             arise in this case as the respondent can have  no  fundamental
             objection to the appellant being  here  as  a  dependant,  and
             cannot for example even begin  to  argue  that  he  should  be
             removed and not permitted to return.


         31.  The visa of the wife lasts until 20th September 2014 and  that
             is the only period of time that I am  concerned  about.   What
             this couple may be entitled to beyond that time is an entirely
             separate matter that is not for me.


         32.  All I am deciding is that the removal of  the  appellant  from
             the United Kingdom  without  his  wife  and  child  is  wholly
             disproportionate, and that is it equally  disproportionate  to
             expect the wife and  child  to  return  home  at  the  present
             juncture when there are relevant visas in place for them to be
             here; he should be granted a visa allowing him to remain  here
             until the time his wife's visa expires when they will have  to
             take whatever steps they are so advised at that time.


         33.  The appellant is a man of good character as far as I am  aware
             and causing no problem or difficulty  in  this  country.   The
             respondent had been perfectly content  to  have  him  in  this
             country for nearly six years and cannot in  my  view  possibly
             sensibly argue that there is objection  to  that  now  in  the
             broad circumstances I have heard about.


         34.  I have purposely not tried to go too  deeply  into  historical
             matters about which the evidence could be said to be a  little
             hazy, and in real terms  to  concentrate  upon  the  practical
             result that is required to ensure that the best  interests  of
             the child are given full consideration.  There can only be one
             answer as far as that is concerned, namely that he  should  be
             brought up by his two parents on a day by day basis,  in  this
             country at least until 15th September 2014."
8.   The grounds of appeal that were lodged on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State argued that the judge erred in his approach in paragraph 29  when
    he stated that the respondent should not have had his  case  considered
    under the Article 8  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
    further submitted that the Tribunal was obliged to consider any Article
    8 application made after 12 July 2012 under the new Immigration  Rules.
    In this case the decision challenged was  dated  12  October  2012  and
    Article 8 appears to have been raised as part of  the  ongoing  appeal.
    The Tribunal should therefore  have  considered  Article  8  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  In the  alternative,  it  was  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal failed to apply the correct test in  this  case.   In  a  case
    where entry clearance is an option  to  consider,  the  decision  maker
    should apply Hayat.  The Tribunal has had absolutely no regard to  that
    test here, and in so doing it has materially misdirected itself.

9.   In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne said  she  was
    satisfied that  the  judge  should  have  given  consideration  to  the
    respondent's rights under Article 8 as set out in Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules  even  though  he  was  not  precluded  from  further
    considering his Article 8 rights under Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act as well.  This was confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of
    MF (Article 8 - new  Rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  (IAC).   The
    failure of the judge to  adopt  the  proper  approach  was  arguably  a
    material error of law.

10.  Counsel submitted a skeleton argument on behalf of the respondent.

Findings

11.  I found that the judge  indeed  failed  to  consider  the  respondent's
    rights under Article 8 as set out in Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I find, however, that the error was not material  in  that  the
    appellant could not have met any of the requirements in the  new  Rules
    as acknowledged by the judge at paragraph 29.

12.  I find that the judge did not err in law in his  consideration  of  the
    respondent's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR, which he rightly  said
    he was required to do, bearing  in  mind  recent  authorities  in  this
    connection.

13.  At paragraph 2.8 of Counsel's  skeleton  argument  was  an  extract  of
    Hayat (nature of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00444  (IAC)
    where it was held "the significance of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40
    is to make it plain that, in appeals where the only matter weighing  on
    the respondent's side of an Article 8 proportionality  balance  is  the
    public policy  of  requiring  an  application  to  be  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules from abroad, that legitimate objective  will  usually
    be outweighed by  factors  resting  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    balance.  The Chikwamba  principle  is  not  confined  to  cases  where
    children are involved or where the person with whom  the  appellant  is
    seeking to remain has settled status in the United Kingdom.

14.  I find that although the judge did not specifically mention  Hayat,  it
    is plain from the findings in  paragraph  30  to  34,  that  the  judge
    applied the test in Hayat.

15.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose a material error  of
    law.

16.  The judge's decision allowing the respondent's appeal under  Article  8
    of the ECHR shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
