
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/23022/2015
                                                               IA/23026/2015
                                                               IA/23029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12th October 2017                  |On 27th October 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           Md KT (first appellant)
                            RT (second appellant)
                          A-S MT (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms K Joshi of Counsel, instructed by A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh.  They appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 5th  June
    2015 to refuse their application for leave to remain in the UK  on  the
    basis of their private and family life. In a  decision  promulgated  on
    23rd January 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  dismissed  the
    appeal and the Appellants now appeal with permission granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 4th August 2017.

 2. At the hearing Ms Joshi sought to introduce a further Ground of  Appeal
    based on  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    paragraph 27 in relation to the first Appellant's claim that  he  is  a
    carer for his parents and sister, all of  whom  are  British  citizens.
    She sought to amend the Grounds of Appeal to include a contention  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider whether the  first
    Appellant was the primary carer of his parents and sister. Ms Isherwood
    objected to the introduction of this completely  new  issue  which  had
    never been raised before.  I refused permission to vary the Grounds  of
    Appeal to include this ground as this related to a matter which was not
    raised before the First-tier Tribunal and which is not an obvious point
    that the judge should have dealt with.

 3. The grounds identify one issue, which is the contention that the  judge
    erred in his assessment of the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 in  that  he  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence that the second  Appellant  had  formerly  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence by her family members in Bangladesh and to assess the
    impact of that upon her return to Bangladesh.

 4. It is clear from paragraph 28 that the judge took into account the fact
    that the second Appellant suffers from depression but concluded:

         "Her condition is not  life  threatening  and  nor  is  the  health
         condition of the first appellant and his  children.   There  is  no
         reason why the family cannot access any medical treatment they need
         once they return to their country.  According  to  the  country  of
         origin report there  is  treatment  available  in  the  appellant's
         country of Bangladesh for their various ailments.  The treatment in
         Bangladesh may not be as good as the treatment they  are  receiving
         under the NHS system in the UK but this does not  mean  that  their
         case is exceptional and that they must be given leave to remain  in
         the UK".

    Accordingly I am satisfied on the basis of  this  that  the  judge  did
    consider the second Appellant's mental health  in  his  proportionality
    assessment.

 5. That leave the contention that the judge failed to consider the  second
    Appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh in assessing whether there were
    significant obstacles to the family's integration in Bangladesh   under
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi) and in the assessment of proportionality under
    Article 8.

 6. At paragraph 8 of the decision the judge notes the oral  evidence  from
    the first Appellant in relation  to how his wife's family  had  bullied
    her and abused her before he was able to save her by marrying  her  and
    getting his sister to invite her to the UK as a  visitor  so  that  she
    could leave Bangladesh.  At paragraph  12  the  judge  notes  that  the
    second Appellant gave oral evidence corroborating what her husband  had
    said, saying that she suffered from depression and that "her family had
    abused her at home since childhood and she had been sexually abused  by
    them as well".  I accept that there is no explicit  reference  to  this
    evidence in the proportionality assessment or in relation to  paragraph
    276ADE.

 7. However it was Ms Isherwood's submission that  there  was  no  evidence
    produced as to how the second Appellant's past experiences would affect
    the family upon return.  She highlighted that the second Appellant  had
    not claimed asylum on the basis of  any  fear  of  risk  of  return  to
    Bangladesh.  She submitted that the evidence put to the judge was  that
    the events in Bangladesh happened in the past  and  brought  about  the
    second Appellant's depression but it is not said that there would be  a
    risk to her upon return to Bangladesh.

 8. Ms Joshi highlighted aspects of the witness statements before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In particular she  highlighted  the  witness  statement
    submitted with the application for further leave which were at pages 79
    onwards of the First-tier Tribunal bundle.  However, apart from  a  few
    general statements she was unable  to  point  me  to  any  specific  or
    detailed statements going to the expression of any fear upon return  to
    Bangladesh of the second Appellant's family  or  anything  which  would
    have demonstrated to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  there  was  a
    risk upon return there. In these circumstances I find  that  the  judge
    the judge's findings were open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  There  was
    insufficient evidence to require a fuller assessment of any risk to the
    second Appellant upon return to Bangladesh.

 9. Ms Joshi further submitted that the judge had failed  to  consider  the
    best interests of the children in considering  the  impact  of  removal
    upon  the  second  Appellant  and  the  children.  However  the   judge
    considered the best interests of  the  children  at  paragraph  25  and
    concluded "their best interests would be served with their  parents  at
    such a young age so there would be no issues of concern in the children
    leaving the UK with their parents". In my view Ms Joshi was  unable  to
    point to any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  indicate
    that the children's wellbeing would be adversely affected by  returning
    to Bangladesh with their mother  or  to  any  evidence  detailing   any
    impact of such a return upon her mental health.

10. I do not accept there was any evidence before  the  judge  to  indicate
    that the second Appellant would be unable to look after the children if
    she were returned to Bangladesh.  The Appellant would  be  returned  to
    Bangladesh with her husband and children and there was no evidence that
    there would be any adverse impact on the children.

11. In essence this appeal came down to one  issue  which  is  whether  the
    judge had properly considered  the  second  Appellant's  background  in
    Bangladesh and the impact of her return  upon  her  and  the  children.
    However I agree with Ms Isherwood that this is not the basis  on  which
    the appeal was put.  Apart from a  few  bare  assertions  there  is  no
    evidence as to any risk to the family or to the second  Appellant  upon
    return to Bangladesh.

12. Accordingly, the judge made a decision based on the evidence before him
    accepting that  the  second  Appellant  suffers  from  depression  when
    assessing her condition, but there was no need for the  judge  to  make
    any further assessment in relation to this issue as it was  simply  not
    in the evidence before him.

13. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge made  no  material
    error.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 25th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

