
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23580/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd July 2014                                |On 9th July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                      MARK KENJI DEL RASARIO YAMAGUCHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jeshani, Counsel, instructed on behalf of Aston
                    Broke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Philippines  with  permission,  appeals
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Morris) who in a
    determination promulgated on  15th  April  2014  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  to  grant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  private  and  family
    life and the decision to remove him  pursuant  to  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The background to the appeal:

 2. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant was born on 3rd
    March 1976 and is a national of the Philippines.  He was granted  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    between 11th December 2009 and 31st July 2011.  He entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 27th December 2009.  He studied for an NVQ level 3 in Health
    and Social Care which he achieved in May  2011  and  completed  various
    online training courses.  In October 2012 he achieved level  5  Diploma
    in Leadership for  Health  and  Social  Care  for  Children  and  Young
    People's Services. It was the Appellant's case that  his  plan  was  to
    switch to a Tier 2 category as a senior  carer  on  completion  of  his
    course because that was a position  on  the  shortage  occupation  list
    however he could not do so because the Rules changed in April 2011  and
    he did not obtain his NVQ until May 2011 and a further Rule  change  in
    June 2012 which required NQF level 6 but  all  care  related  positions
    were only skilled to NQF level 4.

 3. Shortly after he arrived in the UK in December 2009 he began working at
    a care home in Beaconsfield known as Sunrise, a residential  care  home
    for the elderly.  He has remained in that  employment  as  a  part-time
    employee working twenty hours per week.

 4. As to his circumstances in the Philippines, he graduated  in  1999  and
    worked for ten years before he came to the UK and  was  able  to  raise
    money for his support.  He lived there with his girlfriend, who  became
    his wife on 11th October 2012.  Subsequently  she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2013 as a Tier 4 (Student)  whose  visa  expires  in
    February 2016.

 5. The Appellant was granted an extension of stay until  14th  April  2013
    subject to a condition restricting employment and  recourse  to  public
    funds being prohibited.  That leave was as a student.

 6. On 14th April 2013 the Appellant applied for a variation of  his  leave
    to enter.  That was accompanied by a letter dated 28th March 2013  from
    his solicitors setting out his background noting that he would "not  be
    able to put his qualifications and experience within the health  sector
    into practice in the Philippines, and is hoping to use his  skills  and
    qualifications to help in the community in the UK and secure a position
    that he enjoys."  Thus it  was  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    private life right under Article 8 of the Convention and thus should be
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 7. In a notice of immigration decision dated 3rd June 2013 the application
    was refused under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    paragraph 276ADE when considering his private life.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State had not considered Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    stating that the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    December 2009 and had developed "strong links with friends in the  UK."



The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

 9. The appeal therefore came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Morris)
    sitting at Taylor  House  on  1st  April  2014.   Mr  Jeshani,  Counsel
    represented the  Appellant  and  a  Presenting  Officer  Miss  Laverack
    represented  the  Respondent.   The  judge  heard  evidence  from   the
    Appellant and that is reflected at [6] and  [7]  and  [8].   The  judge
    heard no evidence from the Appellant's wife nor was there any statement
    in the bundle of documents that had been  prepared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  At paragraphs [9] to [10] the judge set out the submissions
    from each of the advocates.  Miss  Laverack  relied  upon  the  refusal
    letter and submitted that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules.  It was further submitted that applying the  decision  of
    the Tribunal in Gulshan that this was a case which  did  not  have  any
    "unusual" or "unique" features and that it was not  exceptional  taking
    into account his immigration history that he derived as  a  student  in
    2009 was always aware that he had temporary  admission  which  did  not
    give a right to remain indefinitely.  She made reference  to  his  past
    history in the Philippines having graduated in 1999  and  worked  there
    for ten years before coming to the UK in 2009 during which time he  was
    able to raise money for his financial support.  At that time  he  lived
    with this girlfriend, now his wife, and he did not rely upon his family
    before coming to the United Kingdom.  If returned he would be  able  to
    live as he did before.  As to his private life he had only been in  the
    UK for four years and his friendships and contacts could be  maintained
    if returned.  His wife had a visa which expects her to  return  at  the
    end of her studies.  Whilst it was the Appellant's plan that he came to
    the United Kingdom to switch to Tier 2 on completion of his course, the
    opportunity was no longer available due  to  a  change  in  the  Rules,
    however, it would not be unjust or harsh to require him  to  return  to
    the Philippines where he had spent the majority of his life  and  would
    be able to find employment and support himself  as  he  did  before  he
    arrived.

10. Mr Jeshani had provided a skeleton argument and it  was  conceded  that
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules could not be met.  However he
    submitted that notwithstanding Gulshan,  a  two-stage  approach  should
    still be followed and therefore the five-stage test in Razgar should be
    applied to the circumstances.  It is further recorded at  paragraph  10
    "he accepted that the Appellant's Article 8 claim  was  in  respect  of
    private life only because the evidence of family life is with his  wife
    who is in the United Kingdom temporarily."  In relation to his  private
    life Counsel submitted that the Appellant was in  part-time  employment
    but letters in support of his application showed his private  life,  he
    entered in 2009 with a plan and  brought  with  him  some  savings  and
    wanted to Tier 2 but did not obtain his NVQ until  May  2011  by  which
    time the Rules had changed.  It was further submitted the work  of  the
    Appellant in the healthcare industry with vulnerable members of society
    reduced the public interest in removing him from the United Kingdom and
    his strong ties over the four year period tipped the balance into being
    a disproportionate interference in his private  life.   It  is  further
    stated that he submitted that the Appellant's marriage engaged  Article
    8 and that it would not be proportionate to return him whilst his  wife
    was studying in the United Kingdom.  Thus he concluded that  the  judge
    should allow the appeal under family life until February 2016 when  his
    wife's visa expired.  If, on the  other  hand  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal under private life he asked that the order should  be  made  for
    leave to remain.

11. The judge set out his conclusions at  paragraphs  [11]  to  [18].   The
    judge noted that he had considered all the evidence, whether or not  he
    had  specifically  referred  to  it  and  set   out   the   Appellant's
    circumstances and, in particular, his immigration history  noting  that
    he had entered in 2009 and was  granted  an  extension  of  stay  as  a
    student until 14th April 2013.  The current application being  made  on
    14th April (but being dated 27th March 2013).  He  noted  that  he  had
    been working in his  current  care  home  since  2010  in  a  part-time
    capacity and achieved various qualifications during his time.   It  was
    further noted that his wife had entered the United Kingdom  in  October
    2013 when it was known that his application for  leave  to  remain  had
    been refused.  The judge at [13] took into account the Appellant's plan
    and expectation that he would wish to switch to a Tier 2  category  but
    that was not possible due to the Rule changes in 2011 and in 2012.  The
    judge also recorded at [14] "it is accepted that the Appellant does not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  private  or  family
    life."  The judge took into  account  at  [15]  that  there  were  many
    testimonials before him from residents and colleagues at the care  home
    which the judge found "speak of the Appellant in extremely positive and
    complementary fashion."

12. The judge then applied the law and cited  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Gulshan where  it  was  decided  that  after  applying  the
    requirements of the Rules, only if there may be arguably  good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside them it is necessary for Article 8
    purposes  to  go  on  to  consider   whether   there   are   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.  The  judge  went
    on to cite the case of Nasim and Others (Article 8)  [2014]  UKUT  0025
    (IAC) and noted that the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and
    Others [2013] UKSC 72 served to re-focus attention on  the  nature  and
    purpose of Article 8 and, in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity.   The  case
    also considered  the  issue  of  "legitimate  expectation"  and  quoted
    paragraph 29 stating

         "What the present  submissions  amount  to  is  a  contention  that
         Article 8  entitles  an  immigrant  to  compel  the  Respondent  to
         continue to apply to that person the Immigration Rules that were in
         force when the immigrant was granted  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom, or when he  or  she  was  subsequently  granted  leave  to
         remain.  This submission is misconceived.  It finds no sanction  in
         any case law to which our attention has been drawn."

    The judge went on also to  consider  CDS  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305  as
    referred to in Nasim at paragraph 41 as follows:-

         "The Tribunal did,  however,  expressly  acknowledge  that  it  was
         unlikely a person would be able to  show  an  Article  8  right  by
         coming to the United Kingdom for temporary purposes.   The  chances
         of such a  right  carrying  the  day  have,  we  consider,  further
         diminished, in the light of the judgments in Patel and Others.   It
         would, however, be wrong to say that the  point  has  been  reached
         where an adverse immigration decision in the case of a  person  who
         is here for study or other temporary purposes can never be found to
         be disproportionate.  But what is clear is that, on  the  state  of
         the present law, there is no justification for extending the obiter
         findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose course of study has
         yet not ended with a person who, having finished their  course,  is
         precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do  something
         else."

13. The judge concluded at [18] as follows

         "In the light of all the matters set out  above  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has not shown on the balance of probabilities, that there
         may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
         the Rules and a private or family life  and  I  do  not  go  on  to
         consider   whether   there   are   compelling   circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under them."

14. Thus he dismissed the appeal.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

15. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on  19th  May  2014.   The
    reasons were as follows:-

         "I have carefully considered the determination in relation  to  the
         grounds.  Having done so,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  gave
         inadequate consideration to the family life  ground  raised  before
         her and to that extent materially erred.  The  grounds  also  raise
         interesting questions as to the status of Gulshan  in  relation  to
         higher authorities such as MF (Nigeria) and Patel and Others v SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 72."

16. Thus the appeal came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Jeshani,  who
    appeared on behalf of the Appellant in  the  court  below  appeared  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant.   Mr  Tarlow  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing I provided to the parties  an
    extract from the Record of Proceedings relevant  to  the  first  ground
    relied upon by the Appellant at 5(1) in  which  it  was  asserted  that
    Counsel at the hearing did not concede that the Appellant's claim under
    Article 8 was only under private life; it being advanced on  behalf  of
    the Appellant that Counsel (Mr  Jeshani)  had  made  it  clear  at  the
    hearing that both private life and family life  was  being  argued  and
    that this was a material error of  law  for  failing  to  consider  the
    family life of the Appellant with his wife and the impact of separation
    upon family life and the family unit of the couple if he had to  return
    back to the Philippines.  The extract from the  Record  of  Proceedings
    was therefore provided.  I asked Mr Tarlow if he had any note from  the
    Record of Proceedings but it appeared that there was no relevant  note.



17. In respect of the grounds, and the  first  ground  which  I  have  just
    referred to, Mr Jeshani explained that at the hearing he  had  referred
    to private life only in his skeleton argument but on the day of hearing
    it transpired his wife was in the United Kingdom and that was a  factor
    to be taken into account in relation to proportionality.  It  was  only
    on the day of the hearing that he had become aware of  the  Appellant's
    wife, she had not provided a statement and she did  not  give  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  However, Mr Jeshani said that  he  did
    raise the issue of family life and that the passport  showed  that  she
    had leave until February 14th 2016 as a Tier 4 Student.

18. Thus he adopted the grounds as his submissions.  He submitted that  the
    judge erred in law by only considering the appeal on the basis  of  the
    Rules and that even after the Rules were introduced in  July  2012  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others [2013]  UKSC  72,  an
    authority which is binding on all  courts  and  takes  precedence  over
    Gulshan affirmed that the most authoritative guidance to  the  approach
    of Article 8 was that set out in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  and  that
    the failure of an Appellant to qualify under the Immigration  Rules  is
    the starting point at which to begin,  not  the  end.   Furthermore  he
    submitted that MF (Nigeria) v SSHD was also binding on the Tribunal and
    that took precedence over Gulshan which confirmed  that  it  is  always
    necessary to carry out  a  two-stage  process  and  that  the  test  of
    exceptional circumstances or insurmountable obstacles had been declared
    as the wrong test in approaching Article 8 outside of the  Rules.   The
    grounds also submitted that from 9th  July  2012  the  new  Immigration
    Rules only  reflect  certain  aspects  and  factors  and  not  all  are
    adequately reflected under Article 8.

19. In his oral submissions he submitted that there  was  a  constitutional
    point raised in his grounds that the  Immigration  Judge  was  under  a
    positive duty in law after considering Section 84(1)(a) of the 2002 Act
    that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules,  to
    go on to consider all the other Grounds of Appeal and in this case  the
    relevant ones being Section 84(1)(c) and  (g)  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act as being  incompatible
    with the Appellant's Convention rights.  He submitted in  this  respect
    the judge had looked at the Rules and said as the Appellant  could  not
    meet it and therefore did not look at Article 8.  He  should  therefore
    have looked at Article 8 and if the government had introduced the Rules
    in that way then the government should have repealed  Section  84(1)(c)
    and (g) if only the Rules were relevant.  He referred the Tribunal to a
    decision of the outer house, Court of Session reported at  MMM  (AP)  v
    SSHD [2013] CSOH 43 at [35] where it was said that where  a  claim  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules it would  be  necessary  for  an
    Immigration Judge to go on to make an assessment of Article 8  applying
    the criterion established by law.  A failure to comply with  the  Rules
    thus remains the starting point of the Article 8 enquiry  and  not  its
    conclusion.  In such an assessment failure to meet the Rules is only  a
    factor in the proportionality equation.  At [36] it is recorded "in any
    event the exercise of assessing whether there is a good  arguable  case
    will often  involve  in  practice  consideration  of  the  same  issues
    involved in actually carrying out an Article 8 assessment."  Mr Jeshani
    submitted that that case demonstrated that it  was  necessary  to  look
    outside of the Rules.

20. He further submitted that even if the Tribunal had looked at  it  under
    Gulshan and whether it  was  an  arguable  case  the  same  factors  of
    proportionality applied and that on  the  grounds  of  this  particular
    application the evidence show that there were arguably good grounds for
    granting leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules relying  upon
    the following

      i) His wife was in the United Kingdom studying until 2006,

     ii) the strong ties he developed over the years,

    iii) the public interest in his removal being reduced significantly  due
         to his positive contribution to British society by caring  for  the
         elderly and vulnerable in care homes.

    Those were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules and therefore it was a positive duty to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the Rules and apply the five stage test in Razgar.

21. I asked Mr Jeshani that if an error of law  was  found  what  were  his
    submissions on re-making the decision?  Mr Jeshani said that they  were
    as outlined in the grounds namely that in respect of family life he was
    in a genuine marriage  and  his  wife  had  permission  to  stay  until
    February 2006 and it would be unjustifiably harsh to separate them.  In
    relation to private life, he had developed strong ties  over  the  four
    years in the United Kingdom, the public interest  in  his  removal  was
    significantly reduced due  to  his  contribution  and  caring  for  the
    elderly in care homes, that he would not be able to obtain a job or had
    minimal job prospects in the Philippines and that his skills in the  UK
    are care related which would be of minimal use in the  Philippines  and
    he had no home to return to.  He further submitted  that  in  terms  of
    proportionality the Tribunal should take into  account  the  Rules  had
    changed and he would not have been able to switch to Tier  2  but  that
    was a matter to look  at  in  proportionality.   Thus  he  invited  the
    Tribunal to re-make the decision allowing the appeal on behalf  of  the
    Appellant under Article 8 outside of the Rules.

22. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the  Rule  24
    response in which  it  was  submitted  that  the  grounds  advanced  no
    material arguable error of law capable of having a material impact upon
    the outcome of the appeal as it was submitted that no properly directed
    Tribunal would have found that the  Appellant's  appeal  could  succeed
    under Article 8 and thus the grounds were just a mere disagreement with
    the negative outcome of the appeal.

23. In this context he submitted that  the  determination,  taken  together
    with the Record of Proceedings indicated that the Appellant's case  was
    only put on the issue of private life  only.   Whilst  it  was  not  in
    dispute that his wife was as a student, she  could  not  have  had  any
    expectation to be allowed to remain beyond February 2016.  In any event
    there would only be a short separation between them.

24. He submitted the judge properly  looked  at  the  decision  in  Gulshan
    referring to "compelling circumstances."  He submitted that even if  an
    error was found and the Tribunal was to  re-make  the  decision,  there
    would be nothing to  bring  the  case  into  circumstances  which  were
    compelling and that all the Article 8 aspects were considered under the
    Rules.  The Appellant  works  in  a  care  home  and  whilst  that  was
    employment beneficial to the community and he would like to stay  here,
    the Secretary of State has a responsibility in maintaining  immigration
    control and he came on a temporary basis with no  expectation  that  he
    could remain.  In short he submitted that there was nothing  compelling
    to put in the category and in summary, he submitted that there  was  no
    evidence of law and even if there were it would not be material because
    the Appellant could not properly succeed on the particular  facts.   In
    the alternative in re-making the decision it should  be  dismissed  the
    balance in favour of the Respondent.  The Appellant could not meet  the
    Rules and there was nothing compelling to bring his case under  Article
    8 outside of the Rules.

25. As to any constitutional point, Counsel  has  not  produced  any  cases
    relevant to this and therefore he made no submissions.

26. Mr Jeshani by way of reply submitted that there was an error of law and
    it was material.  If the Appellant could not meet the Rules then it was
    necessary to look at proportionality and the test was "is it reasonable
    to expect the Appellant to return to the Philippines?"  Looking at  all
    the factors of the balancing exercise.  He had built up a private  life
    over four years and was working  in  the  care  industry.   The  public
    interest was weakened because he was caring for vulnerable  people  and
    his skills and qualifications do not exist in the  Philippines  and  it
    was not reasonable to expect him to return.  He could  not  work  full-
    time if he  returned.   The  compelling  circumstances  relate  to  his
    private life and also his family life as  he  would  be  separated  for
    eighteen months from his partner.   For  those  reasons,  the  decision
    would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant.

27. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

28. I have had the opportunity of hearing the submissions of both advocates
    and considering them in the light of the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  Morris).   I  remind  myself  that  I  can  only
    interfere with a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  if  it  is  shown
    that the judge made an error of law in the determination  when  dealing
    with the relevant issues.

29. There is an analysis of the  relevant  case  law  in  the  grounds  and
    developed in the oral submissions of Mr Jeshani, Counsel on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, however it is not necessary to consider in detail  those
    submissions as the legal principles are now settled.  The decision of R
    (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) considered the  new  Immigration
    Rules.  They were amended  in  2012  to  address  more  explicitly  the
    factors according to domestic  and  Strasbourg  case  law  weighing  in
    favour of or against a claim by a foreign national based on  Article  8
    of the ECHR to remain in the United  Kingdom.   It  is  said  that  the
    amendments were introduced with the intention to align the  Immigration
    Rules more closely with the approach to be taken under Article 8 and to
    unify consideration under the Rules of Article 8 and also Section 55 of
    the 2009 Act (dealing with the welfare of children), where  there  were
    any to  be  taken  into  account.   Instructions  were  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State regarding the approach to be applied by officials in
    deciding  to  grant  leave  to  remain  outside   the   Rules.    Those
    instructions were that if the Rules are not met it will be  appropriate
    normally to refuse the application  but  leave  can  be  granted  where
    exceptional  circumstances  in  the  sense  of   "unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences" on the individual would  result.   As  Mr  Justice  Sales
    stated, there is  a  dual  discretion  which  "fully  accommodated  the
    requirements of Article 8."  In accordance with the guidance set out in
    MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  the  High  Court  in  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720  and  Gulshan  as  confirmed  in  Shahzad  (Article  8:
    Legitimate Aim) [2014] UKUT 0085 (IAC), a judge is required to consider
    the question of proportionality in the context of the Immigration Rules
    first with no need to go on to a specific assessment of Article 8 if it
    is clear from the facts that there are  no  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances that require that course to be taken.  That  approach  is
    consistent with the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and
    Huang.  In the decision of Shahzad (as cited) it was found  that  where
    an area of the Rules does not have an express mechanism such  as  found
    in a deportation appeal, the approach set out in Nagre  (at  paragraphs
    29 to 31) and Gulshan should be followed, that is, after  applying  the
    requirements of the Rules, only if there may be arguably  good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules  is  it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

30. As Sales J said in Nagre at paragraph 30:-

         "The only slight modification I would make,  for  the  purposes  of
         clarity, is to say that if, after the process of applying the Rules
         and finding that the claim for leave to remain  under  them  fails,
         the relevant official or Tribunal Judge considers that it is  clear
         that the consideration under the  Rules  has  fully  addressed  any
         family life or private life issues  arising  under  Article  8,  it
         would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go
         on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the  Rules.
         If there was no arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to  Article
         8,  there  would  be  no  point  in   introducing   full   separate
         consideration of Article 8 again after having reached the  decision
         on application of the Rules."

31. Thus the starting point for the judge was to look at the Rules and  see
    if the Appellant could meet the requirements.  If the  Appellant  could
    not, the next question should have been whether the decision would lead
    to a breach of Article 8 but  in  the  context  of  whether  there  are
    factors not covered by the  Rules  which  give  rise  to  the  need  to
    consider Article 8 further.  Or to put it another way,  are  there  any
    "compelling circumstances" that would justify  a  detailed  examination
    taken outside of the Rules?

32. It is plain from reading the determination and  in  the  light  of  the
    factual background of the  Appellant,  he  could  not  meet  the  Rules
    relating to private life or family life under Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE.   The  decision  letter  gave  express  consideration  to   the
    Appellant's private life under 276ADE of the Rules.  In this context it
    was noted that  the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  27th
    December 2009 and had not lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least
    twenty years and therefore  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iii).  At the time of his application he was 37  years
    of age and therefore not under the age of 18 or aged 18 years and above
    and under 25 at the time of the application and had also spent 33 years
    in his home country before coming to the UK and therefore the Secretary
    of State was not satisfied that  he  could  meet  the  requirements  of
    276ADE(iv) and (v).  In the context of ties, the Respondent noted  that
    he had spent 33 years in his home country and in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to the contrary, it was not accepted that  in  the  period  of
    time that he had been in the UK that he  had  lost  ties  to  his  home
    country [see Rule 276ADE(vi)].

33.   Looking at the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it  is
    plain that he could not meet the  criteria  for  private  life  as  his
    length of residence was that of only four years.  The judge placed that
    in context with his life in his home country of the Philippines  noting
    that he had spent 33 years in the Philippines prior to coming to the UK
    and that he had graduated in the Philippines in 1999 and had worked for
    ten years before he came to the United Kingdom  in  2009  during  which
    time he was able to raise money for  financial  support.   During  that
    time in  his  home  country  he  had  studied  and  had  also  met  his
    girlfriend, now his wife.  Whilst it  was  claimed  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that he could not live with his family  if  returned  to  the
    Philippines because they had a rift (C7) it was clear from the evidence
    that prior to coming to the United Kingdom he had supported himself and
    did not rely upon his family, having lived with his girlfriend.   Given
    the length of time that he had been in the United Kingdom, namely  four
    years, when balanced against the length of time that he had been in the
    Philippines, taken with a holistic view of the meaning of ties  as  set
    out in the decision  of  Ogundimu,  it  could  not  be  said  that  the
    Appellant had no social or cultural ties to the Philippines  given  his
    length of prior residence.  Thus he could not meet the requirements for
    private life.

34. The decision of  the  Respondent  did  not  consider  any  claim  under
    Appendix FM relating to family members.  That is not surprising because
    at the date of the decision, it was not said that  he  had  any  family
    member in the United Kingdom.   It  is  common  ground  that  his  wife
    arrived in the United Kingdom in or about October 2013 which  was  post
    the  decision.   Nonetheless  even  applying  the  new  Rules  to   the
    circumstances of the Appellant, it could not be said that he met any of
    the Rules designed to deal with family  life  under  Appendix  FM.   He
    would not be able to qualify under the partner route as  his  wife  was
    not a British citizen nor was she settled in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    had not made an application to remain as her dependant but had  instead
    chosen to seek to remain on the basis of private life.  The  fact  that
    she had leave in the United Kingdom, which was temporary until February
    2016, does not by itself demonstrate  any  insurmountable  obstacle  to
    returning to the Philippines her  country  of  nationality  if  she  so
    wished  to  and  continue  with  family  life  with  her  husband,  the
    Appellant.

35. Reviewing the determination in the  round,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    determination was carried out in compliance with those legal principles
    that I have set out above.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  could
    not meet the Immigration Rules for those reasons set out above accepted
    on behalf of the Appellant at [14].  The judge  was  then  required  to
    consider if there were any compelling circumstances that would  justify
    a detailed examination to be taken outside of  the  Rules.   The  judge
    here did exactly what the grounds say the judge should  have  done  and
    the judge looked to see if there were any compelling  circumstances  to
    justify a more detailed analysis outside of  the  Rules  by  way  of  a
    second stage approach.  In this  context  she  gave  consideration  and
    weight to what she described as "the many testimonials before  me  from
    residents and colleagues at the care home which speak of the  Appellant
    in an extremely positive and  complimentary  fashion,"  she  took  into
    account the qualifications and training that he had undertaken and that
    he had been working in a part-time capacity for twenty hours  per  week
    at the care home.  The judge also correctly directed herself at [16] to
    consider  whether  there  were   any   compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules.  In this context at  [17]  the
    judge had regard to the decision of Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014]
    UKUT 00025 and also Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72  noting  that  both
    decisions re-focused attention on the nature and purpose of Article  8,
    and in particular, to recognise what she described  as  "the  Article's
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity."   In  this
    context also she considered the argument put before her  at  [13]  that
    there was some "legitimate  expectation"  that  should  be  taken  into
    account that he would have wished to switch to a Tier 2 category  as  a
    senior carer on completion of his course but was  not  able  to  do  so
    because the Rules changed in April 2011 and a further  Rule  change  in
    June 2012 which then required an NQF  level  6  but  all  care  related
    positions were only skilled to NQF level 4.  Thus he could not  qualify
    in terms of employment under the  Rules  either.   The  judge  in  this
    context cited paragraph 29 that there  was  no  legitimate  expectation
    against that background that could have been taken into  account.   The
    judge also had regard to the decision of CDS (Brazil) [2010]  UKUT  305
    and what was said about that case  in  Nasim  and  Others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 0025 (IAC) citing paragraph 41.  In this  context  that  it
    was unlikely that a person would be able to show an Article 8 right  by
    coming to the United Kingdom for temporary purposes.  In this case,  on
    application of paragraph  41  it  could  not  said  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that he was still studying in the  United  Kingdom.   He  had
    completed his studies; his leave having been extended for that  purpose
    until April 2013.  He had not sought to study further  or  to  make  an
    application in this regard but  had  wished  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds to continue to secure employment that he had had on a part-time
    basis during the temporary nature of  his  studies.   This,  the  judge
    found was not a matter that could properly be said as  a  "good  ground
    for granting leave to remain outside  the  Rules."   Consequently,  the
    judge found on the assessment of the facts before her that  there  were
    no compelling circumstances to justify a more detailed analysis outside
    the Rules and that was  a  finding  entirely  open  to  the  judge  and
    entirely consistent with the legal principles applicable.

36.   The grounds at paragraph 4 (and relied upon in oral  argument  before
    the Tribunal) in which  it  is  said  that  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds, praying-in-aid the strong tie that he had developed over  four
    years, and that the public interest in his removal being "significantly
    reduced" because he had  contributed  to  society  by  caring  for  the
    elderly as a care home  employee,  that  they  were  sufficiently  good
    grounds to go outside of the Rules.  That is a  disagreement  with  the
    finding of the judge. In my judgment those matters had been  considered
    sufficiently under the Rules and that they did  not  constitute  either
    arguably good grounds or compelling circumstances to carry  out  or  to
    justify a more detailed analysis outside of the Rules.  Thus it  cannot
    be said on the grounds submitted  that  any  other  result  that  could
    reasonably be reached by  the  Immigration  Judge  and  that  the  only
    outcome could have been to allow the appeal.

37. A further point raised in the grounds relates to a concession  recorded
    by the judge which it is said Counsel did not  make.   The  grounds  at
    paragraph 5(i) refer to paragraph 10 of the determination in which  the
    judge set out what appears to be a concession made  by  Mr  Jeshani  as
    follows:-

         "He accepted that the Appellant's Article 8 claim is in respect  of
         private life only because the evidence of family life is  with  his
         wife who is in the United Kingdom temporarily."

38. The grounds submit that Counsel at the hearing

         "Did not at any point whatsoever concede that the Appellant's claim
         under Article 8 was only under private life.  Counsel made it clear
         at the hearing that both private and family life was  being  argued
         and therefore the Immigration Judge has materially erred in law  by
         failing to consider the family life of the Appellant with his  wife
         who is studying and would be in the United Kingdom until  2006  and
         the impact of separation upon the family life and the  family  unit
         of the couple  if  he  has  to  return  back  to  the  Philippines.
         Further, family life has  also  been  considered/mentioned  by  the
         Respondent in the refusal letter and ought to have been  adequately
         considered        by        the         Immigration         Judge."



39. There are two matters arising out of that.  Firstly, the Respondent  in
    the refusal letter did not make any reference to  family  life.   As  I
    have set out earlier that decision which was reached on 3rd  June  2013
    did not take into account any family life of the Appellant because that
    was not the basis upon which the application for leave  to  remain  had
    been made.  As the reasons  for  refusal  letter  clearly  states,  the
    application for leave to remain was made on the basis  of  his  private
    life.  That is further evidenced by the letter sent in support  of  the
    application by his solicitors.  There is no reference or mention of any
    family life.  Secondly, the Record of Proceedings does state "Article 8
    private life case only.  Evidence of family life is with wife who  here
    temporary."  Mr  Jeshani  informed  the  Tribunal  that  there  was  no
    reference to family life either in  his  skeleton  argument  dated  1st
    April 2014 (the day of the hearing) because it was only on the  day  of
    the hearing that it transpired that his wife was in the United  Kingdom
    and therefore became an issue.  However there was no witness  statement
    from her, no evidence placed before the judge and indeed  she  did  not
    give oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  That being said, it
    seems to me that there is  evidence  that  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant did raise sufficient reference to the Appellant's wife in his
    submissions recorded at [10]  in  which  it  is  said  the  Appellant's
    marriage engaged Article 8 and thus I am  satisfied  that  Counsel  did
    seek to introduce that into the factual matrix.  At  [6]  the  evidence
    was his wife was a Tier 4  Student  who  had  a  visa  until  2016  and
    submissions were given at [12] reflect the  conclusions  of  the  judge
    that his wife had entered the United Kingdom in October  2013  when  it
    was known that his application for leave to remain  had  been  refused.
    However in the absence of any proper evidence advanced on behalf of the
    Appellant in relation to family life, there being no statement from the
    Appellant's wife nor any oral evidence being heard from her, the  judge
    was entitled not to pursue this any further or expand any more  on  the
    issue than the judge did at [12] where it was noted  that  she  entered
    the UK in October 2013 at a time when  she  knew  his  application  for
    leave had been refused and that she was in the UK on a temporary  basis
    as a student.  The fact that she had permission or leave to stay in the
    UK on a temporary basis does not  necessarily  mean  that  she  has  no
    choice  as  to  whether  she  accompanied  her  husband  back  to   the
    Philippines.  There was no evidence or any assertion either before  the
    First-tier Tribunal or indeed before the Upper Tribunal that she  could
    not pursue or continue her studies in the Philippines and therefore any
    interference with family life does not  result  from  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain but her own decision to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

40. Therefore the complaint made that the judge did not  deal  with  family
    life does not in my judgment take the case  any  further.   It  is  not
    asserted either before the First-tier Tribunal or before this  Tribunal
    that she could not complete or continue her studies in the  Philippines
    and any interference would not be  as  a  result  of  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain but her choice  to  continue
    to study in the UK rather than to complete them in the Philippines  and
    resume family life with her husband.  Even if it  could  be  said  that
    this was an error on the judge's part not to fully explore  the  family
    life issues more fully, it was not material in the light of the lack of
    evidence that was provided before the judge and it is  unarguable  that
    the Appellant would have succeeded under a  proportionality  assessment
    in the light of the particular facts of this case.

Decision:

41. In those circumstances, the Appellant has  not  demonstrated  that  the
    judge made any material error of law that  would  require  the  setting
    aside of this determination.  Thus the decision stands.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


