
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2016                   |On 14 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               VICTORMILLS [L]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson promulgated on 5 April 2016.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria and in June 2015 a decision was made by the respondent refusing
    his application to remain in the United Kingdom.  He appealed from that
    refusal and the matter duly came before Judge Watson.

2.   The key issue with which Judge Watson had to deal concerned  the  child
    of a relationship which was then extant, who was then some 2  years  of
    age.  The  relationship  between  the  mother  of  the  child  and  the
    appellant had broken down.

3.   The judge at paragraph 5 records the appellant's case as follows:

         "He is a devoted father to his young daughter who was born  in  the
         United Kingdom. She has the right to grow up knowing him. He has  a
         child arrangement order that sets out that  he  shall  have  agreed
         contact with his daughter. He owns property in the  United  Kingdom
         and has a business and is not dependent on the state  at  all.  The
         Family Court has clearly indicated that it  is  in  the  daughter's
         best interest that he have contact with his daughter and  therefore
         his application should be granted."

4.   The judge took the view that the partner route  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was not open to the appellant but went on to consider whether  it
    was appropriate, having regard to the paternal  relationship,  for  the
    appeal to be allowed on human rights grounds.

5.   The difficulty is this: the judge records at paragraph  21  that  there
    was minimal contact between the appellant and his daughter.  The  judge
    effectively draws an  adverse  conclusion  from  the  fact  of  minimal
    contact and reading between the lines implies  that  this  was  through
    disinterest or a lack of fatherly concern  for  his  infant  daughter's
    wellbeing.

6.   The case seems to have been advanced (and there  is  some  support  for
    this in the appellant's witness statement dated 12 February 2016  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal) on the basis that  the  reason  why
    contact between father  and  daughter  was  relatively  infrequent  was
    because the mother was working to frustrate the  arrangement.  Although
    one order in the Family Court left the issue of contact to  be  decided
    between the parents, another order expressly  prescribed  that  contact
    take place on a Saturday afternoon.

7.   The issue of  whether  the  lack  of  contact  with  the  daughter  was
    occasioned by the father's lack of interest or the mother's frustration
    of the order of the Family Court was a  highly  relevant  and  material
    consideration, and from the face of the decision,  the  judge  did  not
    engage with that consideration at all. The judge seemed to come to  the
    conclusion that the proportionality argument under Article 8  militated
    against the father because of the nature of the relationship as it  was
    perceived to be between himself and his daughter.  Were it  to  be  the
    case that the mother had actively stood in the way  of  contact  taking
    place, that would certainly throw a different complexion on the  matter
    and it is perhaps significant that when granting permission  to  appeal
    in this case Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliams  very  much  focused  upon
    that aspect of the  grounds.

8.   Entirely sensibly, Miss Brocklesby-Weller who acts for  the  respondent
    accepts that there are difficulties with this  decision  and  the  fact
    that there is significant confusion in the way in which the judge dealt
    with the reason why contact was spasmodic.

9.   In all of those circumstances this amounts to a material error  of  law
    and the matter must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be looked
    at afresh.

10.  I am informed that the Family Court is due to conduct a  final  hearing
    on the issue of contact (to the extent that any  order  in  the  Family
    Court is final) and that is scheduled to take place in January 2017. It
    would be helpful to the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  will  hear  this
    matter to have the outcome of the Family Court matter determined before
    making a decision on the immigration issues. This appeal is allowed and
    the matter will be remitted for a re-determination.

Notice of Decision

(1)  This appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside.

(2)  The matter will be remitted for a re-determination  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a judge other than Judge Watson.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     13 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
