

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23246/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 30 May 2017                                |On 05 June 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     G O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on 5 June 2015 refusing
    her application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights  grounds.
    Her appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  ("the
    FTTJ") both under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to the  Article  8
    jurisprudence.

 2. Given my references to the  appellant's  mother's  health  issues,  the
    appellant is  entitled  to  an  anonymity  direction  and  I  make  one
    accordingly.

 3. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M
    Robertson on 24 April 2017 in the following terms:

         "... Although there is little arguable merit in ground 2  at  paras
         7, it is arguable, as submitted at para 8 of the grounds (ground 3)
         that the Judge did not engage with all the evidence  presented  and
         simply relied on the Appellant's lack of  knowledge  of  the  hours
         worked by her mother to establish  that  there  was  no  dependency
         between them.  This arguably resulted in adequate [sic] reasons for
         his  findings  on  dependency  and  arguably   would   affect   his
         proportionality assessment under  Article  8  and  hence  has  some
         bearing on whether ground one at para 5 and ground 4 are  arguable.
         Permission to appeal is therefore granted."

 4. Thus the appeal has come before me.

Submissions

 5. With the agreement of the  parties,  I  proceeded  on  the  basis  that
    permission to appeal had been granted on all the grounds sought.

 6. Mr Sesay, for the appellant, relied on his skeleton  argument  and  the
    grounds of appeal which I summarise.  It was  submitted  the  FFTJ  had
    made a material misdirection of law, failed to give reasons or adequate
    reasons for his findings on material matters, failed to engage with the
    evidence and that there had been unfairness amounting to  a  procedural
    irregularity. It was submitted  that  by  narrowing  the  existence  of
    family life between the appellant and her mother solely on the basis of
    knowledge or lack of knowledge of her mother's whereabouts  (paragraphs
    10 and 12) was wrong. The FTTJ had failed to engage with  the  evidence
    before him which established the relationship between the appellant and
    her mother and to make a finding of fact accordingly.   There  was,  it
    was  submitted,  a  misdirection  of  law  on  the  approach   to   the
    proportionality  assessment  and/or  insufficient  reasoning  "for  not
    engaging with Article 8"  at  paragraph  11.  Furthermore,  there  were
    factual errors in the decision which led the appellant to conclude that
    the FTTJ had not given her case appropriate scrutiny.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Nath submitted that the  absence  of  dependency
    between the appellant and her mother had been  reasoned  appropriately.
    The evidence suggested a lack of dependency and the FTTJ  was  entitled
    to make such a finding on the evidence. Although the decision was brief
    the reasoning was adequate.   The  FTTJ  had  identified  the  law  and
    applied it correctly on the evidence before him.  He had  engaged  with
    the evidence. As regards alleged  unfairness,  the  FTTJ  had  made  an
    appropriate assessment with regard to  the  father,  querying  attempts
    made  to  contact  him  (at  [8]).   This  was  appropriate  given  the
    presenting officer's submissions to  the  FTTJ  ([8]  and  [9]  refer).
    There was no protection claim; the FTTJ did not  need  to  address  the
    claimed threat of FGM  save  in  the  context  of  whether  there  were
    significant obstacles to reintegration on return.

Discussion

 8. The decision and reasons of the FTTJ is  brief  and  somewhat  muddled.
    There are various discrepancies  in  the  decision.  For  example,  the
    heading states that there was no presenting officer for the  respondent
    whereas I am told the respondent was represented at the hearing.    The
    FTTJ states at paragraph 3 that the appellant  entered  the  UK  on  18
    April 2006 whereas at paragraph 4 he refers  to  the  appellant  having
    lived in the UK "for some 8 years". In fact she had lived in the UK for
    over ten years at the date of hearing.

 9. The paragraph of the Rules to which the  FTTJ  refers  at  [6]  is  not
    intelligible. It refers to "paragraph 276 A, D and E (1) 91 and  2  and
    6B1". These paragraphs do not exist. However, there is reference to the
    appellant's contention that there "would be very significant  obstacles
    to her integration if she were  to  return  to  Nigeria"  and  I  infer
    therefore that the FTTJ intended to cite paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Rules. I agree with Mr Sesay that these errors, at the  least,  suggest
    the decision had not been given the attention it deserved.

10. The appellant's principal issue in the appeal before me is  the  manner
    in which the FTTJ addressed the appellant's claim to have a family life
    with her mother. There is no suggestion that the appellant was  capable
    of demonstrating she fulfilled the criteria  in  Appendix  FM  in  this
    respect. However, the issue is  relevant  not  only  to  an  assessment
    outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds but also pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) in respect of the appellant's private life.  The  nub  of
    the appellant's complaint is that the FTTJ had failed to find,  on  the
    evidence  before  him,  that  the  appellant  and  her  mother  had   a
    relationship with was closer than the norm for an adult child  and  her
    mother (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31).  Mr Sesay  submitted  that
    the finding of a lack of dependency between mother and daughter,  based
    wholly as it was on the appellant's inconsistent  evidence  as  to  her
    mother's working hours, was inadequately reasoned.  The appellant  said
    that her mother went to work early in the morning at  about  5  am  and
    returned home late at about 10 or 11 pm.  The FTTJ noted the  appellant
    did not say her mother returned to  the  family  home  during  the  day
    between those hours. The FTTJ found that "this suggested to [him]  that
    there is no dependency of the appellant on her mother".  I  agree  with
    Mr Sesay that this  discrepancy  in  the  evidence,  without  more,  is
    insufficient to justify a finding of no dependency between  mother  and
    daughter. The FTTJ has failed to  take  into  account,  in  making  his
    finding, the undisputed fact that the appellant and  her  mother  lived
    together, had done so since  her  birth,  and  the  appellant's  mother
    supported her financially.   Indeed  there  is  no  evidence  of  other
    financial provision.  The FTTJ failed  to  take  these  non-contentious
    matters into account in his assessment of the nature and quality of the
    appellant's relationship with her mother.  This  is  an  error  of  law
    which taints the remainder of the FTTJ's findings with  regard  to  the
    appellant's family and private life and whether she met the criteria in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and under the Article 8 jurisprudence. It is  a
    material error because the outcome might have been different.

11. The parties were in agreement that if I  found  one  or  more  material
    errors of law, I should  remake  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me. Neither representative made further submissions  on
    the issue save to confirm  that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  was
    accurately cited in the decision of the FTTJ and, to that extent  only,
    it could be relied upon in the remaking of the decision.

12. The appellant entered the UK on a visit visa  in  April  2006  and  has
    lived here ever since. She has now lived in the  UK  for  a  period  of
    eleven years.  She lives with her mother and brother who  have  limited
    leave to remain in the UK. She is supported financially by her  mother.
    The appellant is engaged in voluntary work for  her  church.   She  has
    been educated in this country, having lived here since the age  of  12.
    There is no suggestion that she qualifies for  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM.

13. I deal first  with  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  The  appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that she is at risk of FGM by her family in Nigeria.  Were
    that  to  be  the  case,  she  would  have  made  a  protection  claim,
    particularly as she is represented by solicitors and has, according  to
    her witness statement, made three applications to live in the  UK,  all
    of which have been refused. Given that  background,  if  the  appellant
    were genuinely at risk of FGM on return, it is inconceivable  that  she
    would not have made a protection claim by  now.   Furthermore,  in  her
    witness statement, the appellant says "as I grew older,  I  have  tried
    without success to trace my father so that he would help me and get  to
    know him as my father". This is wholly inconsistent with the  claim  in
    paragraph 3 of the same statement  that  "my  grandmother  informed  my
    mother that my father and his family were  still  looking  for  me  and
    committed to have me subjected to FGM".  I  give  no  credence  to  the
    suggestion that she is at risk of FGM on return.  I am  satisfied  that
    this is evidence which has been fabricated to demonstrate obstacles  to
    her return.

14. The appellant has always lived with her mother and brother in the  same
    household. She is financially dependent on her mother. Her mother works
    long hours as a cleaner and supports the family. Her  mother  has  some
    health issues. The medical  evidence  is  that  these  include  Type  1
    Diabetes Mellitus for which she is on insulin. She attends hospital for
    regular review of her diabetes; she has to monitor  her  blood  glucose
    levels up to four times a day, sometimes  more  if  she  is  unwell  or
    experiences a hypoglycaemic episode. The appellant's mother also has  a
    long-standing history of osteoarthritis of the  left  knee;  she  takes
    medication for  her  symptoms.  She  also  has  lower  back  pain.  The
    appellant's mother has another specific  chronic  condition  but  in  a
    specialist report dated 3 December 2015 she was described as "generally
    well" and there is no suggestion that this  chronic  condition  impacts
    significantly on her well-being, albeit she  takes  regular  medication
    for it.  Of particular relevance is the fact that, despite  this  range
    of  medical  conditions,  the  appellant's  mother  is  able  to   work
    relatively long hours doing physical work as a cleaner, working  shifts
    in the mornings and evenings.  There is no suggestion  in  the  medical
    evidence that the appellant's mother requires  any  type  of  care  and
    support as a result of her medical conditions, either from her daughter
    or anyone else.

15. The appellant left Nigeria at the age of 12. She has  spent  more  than
    half her life in her country of origin, where she was born and  brought
    up. She has maintained her familiarity with Nigerian life and  culture,
    living as she does within the Nigerian diaspora in the  UK.   I  accept
    she has lost contact with her father. I do not accept she cannot regain
    contact with him and his family or that he or his family would  subject
    her to FGM.  I find that he is a potential source of support for her on
    return. The appellant has relatives in Nigeria. She  can  make  contact
    with them. She  could  also  regain  contact  with  former  friends  in
    Nigeria.  Such people would provide  her  with  practical  support,  at
    least in the short term. Her mother provides her with financial support
    at the moment and could send funds  to  the  appellant  in  Nigeria  on
    return. She is an adult of 23 and has acquired  an  education  in  this
    country. She is capable of employment, albeit perhaps menial.

16. For all these reasons, I am unable  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated that there are very significant obstacles to her returning
    to  Nigeria.  She  does  not   fulfil   the   criteria   in   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

17. I turn to the issue of the appellant's and her mother's family life. It
    was submitted in the First-tier Tribunal that Article 8 was engaged  in
    this respect because of the appellant's dependence on  her  mother  and
    the latter's dependence on her.

18. I accept that Article 8 is engaged in this respect: the appellant lives
    with her mother and is financially dependent on her.  However, whilst I
    accept they have an emotional bond, I am unable to accept it is greater
    than the norm for an adult child and her mother. I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant and her mother  have  exaggerated  the  nature  of  their
    relationship.  Their evidence on the extent of the help and  assistance
    provided by the appellant to her mother, due to her poor health, is not
    consistent with the medical evidence and I find  therefore  that  their
    evidence has been exaggerated. This exaggeration  is  likely  to  apply
    also  to  the  appellant's  and  her   mother's   evidence   of   their
    relationship: the appellant's inability to recite her mother's  working
    hours is consistent with a normal  emotional  relationship  between  an
    adult child and mother, albeit  there  is  cohabitation  and  financial
    dependence in this case. Nonetheless, the threshold for  engagement  of
    Article  8  is  a  low  one  and  I  am  satisfied  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated she has crossed that threshold due to her living with  and
    depending financially on her mother. The decision to  refuse  leave  to
    remain  is  a  lawful  one  and  I  therefore  turn  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

19. In so doing I bear in mind my findings fact above with  regard  to  the
    application of paragraph 276ADE(21)(vi) because, to some  extent,  they
    relate to her family life with her mother.

20. I also take into account the public interest and the factors identified
    in s117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest
    (s117B(1)).  The appellant speaks English and is capable of working  in
    the UK to become less of a burden on the taxpayer.  She  is  integrated
    into society here, having been educated  here  since  the  age  of  12.
    Little weight should be given to her private life because it  has  been
    established while in the UK unlawfully (s117B(4)).  The appellant  came
    to the UK at the age of 12 as a visitor. She  has  been  an  overstayer
    since her visit visa expired in April 2006.

21. There is no evidence that the appellant's support  for  her  mother  is
    required on medical grounds.  I accept they have a close bond which has
    developed as a result of their moving together to this country  but  it
    is no more than the norm for an adult child  and  her  mother,  despite
    their living together and the appellant's financial dependence  on  her
    mother. The appellant and her mother have  exaggerated  the  nature  of
    their relationship to enable the appellant to remain  in  the  UK:  the
    medical evidence and the ability of the appellant's mother to hold down
    a relatively physical job as a cleaner, working two shifts  a  day,  is
    not consistent with the evidence of the appellant and her mother as  to
    the nature of the support provided by the appellant.

22. The decision will result, in due course,  in  the  appellant's  removal
    from the  UK,  causing  the  separation  of  the  family  members:  the
    appellant's mother and brother will remain in the UK for  the  duration
    of their limited leave  and  the  appellant  will  return  to  Nigeria.
    However, the appellant will continue to have the financial  support  of
    her mother in Nigeria; she can regain contact with  her  family  there.
    The appellant is a capable adult who is able to find accommodation  and
    employment in Nigeria with funds provided by her mother in the UK.  She
    has produced a letter of support to the effect  that  she  is  "a  very
    responsible young adult, she has  been  able  to  demonstrate  this  by
    serving  in  a  very  delicate  department  of  the   church   (Finance
    department), she deals  with  counting  and  recording  of  the  weekly
    offerings, which shows that she  is  a  trust  worthy  and  responsible
    person to be kept in such a position".  The letter goes on to refer  to
    her being denied a university education, but she could go to university
    in Nigeria, with her mother's financial support.

23. For these reasons, I find the  degree  of  interference,  both  to  the
    appellant's and her mother's right to a family life, resulting from the
    respondent's decision is proportionate to the public interest.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

25. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it,
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  of
    5 June 2015.



Signed           A M Black                         Date       2 June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award
The appeal has been dismissed and a fee award is therefore not appropriate.



Signed           A M Black                         Date      2 June  2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
