

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Numbers: IA/23025/2014
                                                               IA/23027/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th April 2015                    |On 29th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    O B O
                                    E O F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Hannan (solicitor, Corban Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this determination the term Appellant refers to Ms O and her son who
    were the Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal, the term Respondent
    refers to the Secretary of State for the Home Department. As those  are
    the terms that applied in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  I  have
    retained them to  avoid  doubt.  In  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal the Respondent  challenged  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as explained below.

 2. The First Appellant was born on  the  23rd  of  March  1978  and  is  a
    national of Nigeria. She arrived in the UK illegally in December  2004.
    The Second Appellant is the son of the First Appellant, was born on the
    1st of May 2003, he arrived in the UK, also illegally early in February
    2007 (paragraph 25 of the First-tier Tribunal decision).

 3. The history of the Appellants is set out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision but in summary both have remained in the UK  since  then,  the
    First Appellant was convicted  on  the  18th  of  September  2013.  The
    application under appeal was made on the  28th  of  May  2013,  it  was
    refused with a right of appeal following a review.

 4. The case was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bell  on  the  4th  of
    September 2014 at Bennett House  in  Stoke  on  Trent.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on the 12th of September 2014 the appeals were allowed.  It
    was found that the First  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules by reason of  the  conviction  of
    September 2013. So far as the Second Appellant was concerned the  Judge
    found that he had been living in the UK for 7 years at the date of  the
    hearing and could qualify to remain as a child  because  of  the  First
    Appellant's status. The appeal was allowed under paragraph 276ADE.

 5. The grounds argued that the Judge had erred in finding that the  Second
    Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE in that it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect him to return to Nigeria. Permission was granted
    on the basis that the Judge had not considered the cost of  the  future
    education of the Second Appellant when he  was  not  entitled  to  that
    education.

 6. At the hearing Mr Smart for the Secretary of State applied to amend the
    grounds of appeal. The basis of the application was that the Judge  had
    erred in finding that paragraph  276ADE  applied.  The  submission  was
    based on  the  terms  of  paragraph  276ADE  which  requires  that  the
    applicant has  been  in  the  UK  for  7  years  at  the  date  of  the
    application. By rule 34G an application is made on the date of posting.

 7. Having found that the Second Appellant entered the UK in February  2007
    and the application having been made in May 2013 he did  not  meet  the
    basic requirements of the rule. That infected the article 8 assessment.
    For the Appellants it was submitted that this was  irrelevant  and  the
    matter was at my discretion.

 8. At the hearing I indicated that I found that the Judge had erred. It is
    clear from the terms of the rule set out in paragraph  276ADE  that  an
    Appellant's presence is to be measured between arrival and  application
    and on the unchallenged findings relating  to  the  Second  Appellant's
    arrival in the  UK  and  the  clear  date  of  application  the  Second
    Appellant did not have the required time in the UK. Accordingly  I  set
    aside the decision in order to remake it.

 9. At that point I invited submissions  on  how  the  decision  should  be
    remade. I indicated that I did not feel that further evidence would  be
    required and this was accepted. The submissions  are  set  out  in  the
    Record of Proceedings. In summary the Home Office relied on the Refusal
    Letter and also adverted to the Appellant's conviction.  The  Appellant
    and her son would return to Nigeria together. In  the  social  worker's
    report there was reference to the Appellant having no relatives in  the
    UK in contrast to her own reference to an  older  sister.  It  was  not
    clear who had looked after the Appellant's child in her absence and  it
    was submitted that she was  unreliable.  Relying  on  Azimi-Moyed  they
    would return together and the First Appellant would assist with his re-
    integration.

10. For the Appellant reliance was placed on the skeleton argument  and  on
    the First-tier Tribunal decision. It  was  submitted  that  the  Second
    Appellant had entered when he was 3 or 4 and has now been in the UK for
    9 years (actually 8 years), he had made friends in his time  here.  The
    Judge had not said that the Appellant was  not  credible,  her  witness
    statement should be considered and she had suffered  domestic  violence
    from her husband. Her sister  lives  in  the  UK  and  she  can  obtain
    support. It was in the best  interests  of  the  child  to  remain  and
    reliance was placed on ZH (Tanzania) [2011] AC 166, she had no home  or
    work to go back to and removal would have a detrimental effect on him.

11. By section 55 of the 2009 Act the best interests of a child in  the  UK
    are a primary consideration. They are not a paramount consideration and
    a  child's  best  interests  will  not   necessarily   override   other
    considerations. Also applicable is section 117B of the 2002  Act  which
    provides that the maintenance of immigration control is in  the  public
    interest. By section 117B(4) little weight  is  to  be  attached  to  a
    private life formed when a person is in the UK  illegally.  Removal  is
    not  required  by  subsection  (6)  where  the  person  has  a  genuine
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK. Having lived in the  UK  for  over  7
    years (there  being  no  reference  in  the  statute  to  the  date  of
    application) the Second Appellant is a qualifying child.

12. The background to this case is clearly relevant. The Appellant  entered
    the UK illegally leaving her child behind in Nigeria until his  illegal
    entry to the UK could be  facilitated.  Neither  has  been  in  the  UK
    legally at any stage and in that time  he  has  received  education  to
    which he has not been entitled. If he remains then  that  is  a  burden
    which would have to be borne by the UK taxpayer.

13. The situation in which the Appellant and her  son  find  themselves  is
    entirely the result of the decisions and actions of the  Appellant.  It
    may be that she suffered at the hands of her former husband but  unless
    it could be shown that she would  be  in  danger  in  Nigeria  with  no
    adequate protection and/or the inability to  relocate  internally  then
    she is not, and has never been in need of international protection. The
    clear implication is that the First Appellant is  an  economic  migrant
    who has come to the UK and later arranging for the Second Appellant  to
    join her for the opportunities available, that  may  be  understandable
    but does not confer any rights as such.

14. In addition to that the First Appellant was convicted on  the  18th  of
    September 2013 in relation to a  fraudulent  document  and  received  a
    suspended sentence. It was for that reason that she could not meet  the
    suitability requirements. There is the inconsistency between the social
    worker's report that she has no relatives in the UK and  the  statement
    that her sister lives here. In any event even if her sister  is  living
    in the UK and may provide her with some support there is no evidence of
    dependency that would engage article 8 and the case has not been argued
    on that basis.

15. If removed the Appellants would be returned to Nigeria together and the
    First Appellant would be able to assist the  Second  Appellant  in  his
    reintegration. It is said that the First Appellant has no support there
    but the background suggests otherwise. She left the Second Appellant in
    Nigeria when she first came to the UK. That,  incidentally,  undermines
    claims of danger arising from domestic violence but  it  suggests  that
    support is available to her, there is  no  evidence  that  the  support
    relied on then is no longer available to her and her son.

16. Obviously if the Appellants were to  return  to  Nigeria  reintegration
    would involve dislocation and adjustment.  However  if  the  Appellants
    remain in the UK and chose to  move  within  the  UK,  for  example  to
    Penzance or Berwick upon  Tweed  they  would  face  some  of  the  same
    difficulties.  I  accept  that  circumstances  in  Nigeria,  even  with
    support, would be more challenging for them but the First Appellant has
    the advantage of having spent most of her life there and she  would  be
    able to assist the First Appellant.

17. It is also true that the opportunities and support available to them in
    Nigeria may be of a lower standard than in  the  UK  but  that  is  not
    determinative.  Although  the  Appellants  rely  on  the  case  of   ZH
    (Tanzania) the more appropriate authority is Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74. In
    that case it was noted that  while  it  might  be  in  a  child's  best
    interests to remain in the UK as education etc might be better  in  the
    UK things were not equal where the children were not British  nationals
    and did not have a right to be in the UK or to remain here.

18. So far as the Second Appellant is concerned is reasonable to expect him
    to return to the country of his nationality and birth? I note  that  he
    is regarded as vulnerable and has lived something of an unsettled life,
    largely the result of decision taken by the First Appellant. What would
    be unreasonable about removing  him  to  Nigeria?  He  would  lose  the
    educational opportunities and access to the health care system  of  the
    UK but he has no right to access these anyway and his use of  these  to
    date has been when he had no right. It is in the public  interest  that
    immigration control should be enforced and his mother sought  to  evade
    that by facilitating her own and his illegal entry. She has exacerbated
    matters with her criminal offending.

19. The matters relied on by the Judge at  paragraphs  33  and  34  of  the
    decision do not begin to show that his removal would  be  unreasonable,
    given the observations  in  Zoumbas  even  without  the  error  of  law
    identified above I would have found  an  error  in  this  part  of  the
    determination. I would also add that as was observed in Jeunesse states
    are entitled to expect individuals to comply with the  rules  and  laws
    that apply to them, something rather lacking from the First Appellant's
    behaviour, and children are not to be used by  adults  as  a  route  to
    evading immigration control.

20. There  is  nothing  in  the  evidence  that  shows  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to remove the Appellant to Nigeria and for that  reason  I
    find that the requirements of paragraph 117B(6) of the 2002 Act are not
    met. I find that their removal would be a proportionate response in the
    circumstances and the UK would not be  in  breach  of  its  obligations
    under article 8 of the ECHR. Accordingly I dismiss the appeals of  both
    Appellants.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
Appellant.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

I make no fee award.

Reasons: Appeals dismissed.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd April 2015
