
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23613/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons                 |
|On 5 June 2015                       |Promulgated On 10 July 2015          |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                MR SAAD MIRZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar, counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. The Secretary of State appeals a decision promulgated on 23  February
       2015 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaniker who allowed an appeal,  on
       human rights grounds, against a  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant
       leave to remain as the dependant of a Tier 4 migrant.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on 17 April 2015.

   3. Although the Secretary of State was the appellant before us we  will,
       for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as she was  the
       respondent in the First-tier. Similarly, we will  refer  to  Mr  Saad
       Mirza as the appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

 Background


   4. The appellant was last granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
       as a Tier 4  migrant,  until  27  April  2014.  He  made  an  in-time
       application for further leave to  remain  as  the  dependant  of  his
       partner, Ms Aqeela Parveen who had leave to remain until  19  January
       2016 as a a Tier 4 migrant. Their child, Sanaya born on  18  November
       2013, was granted leave in line with her mother on 20 May  2014.  The
       appellant's application was refused on 19 May 2014 with reference  to
       paragraph 319C(i) of the Rules because his partner was  not  studying
       in one of the specified ways and the appellant had  not  applied  for
       further leave to remain at the same time as her.

    5. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal which
       took place on 3 February 2015, it was accepted by both  parties  that
       the appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  relating
       to student dependants, Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

    6. Judge Swaniker found as follows:

       a. That the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law
          owing to the failure to have any regard to  the  consideration  of
          Article 8.

       b. That the respondent had  granted  the  sponsor  further  leave  to
          remain as a student one day after the refusal of  the  appellant's
          application.

       c. That the sponsor would be unable to continue her  studies  without
          the presence of the appellant in order to look after  their  young
          child.

       d. Following Chikwamba, it was not reasonable to expect  the  sponsor
          to return to Pakistan solely for the purpose  of  obtaining  entry
          clearance.

       e. It was not reasonable to expect  the  family  unit  to  return  to
          Pakistan in order to continue family life there when  the  sponsor
          had been granted leave to remain to continue her  studies  in  the
          United Kingdom.

 Error of law


    7. The grounds of appeal submit:

       1. The judge made a material  error  of  fact  in  finding  that  the
          sponsor had leave to remain as  a  student  at  the  time  of  the
          hearing. Home Office records showed that the  sponsor's  leave  to
          remain was curtailed on 10 December 2014, to expire on 11 February
          2015.

       2. The judge paid no regard to the public interest considerations  in
          section 117B of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum  Act  2002
          in allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

    8. Permission was granted in relation to the first ground alone.

    9. At the hearing before us, Mr Tarlow handed up two  letters  addressed
       to the sponsor, both dated 10 December 2014.  One  of  these  letters
       purported to curtail her leave, such leave to expire on  11  February
       2015 and the second referred to the revocation of the sponsor licence
       of London St. Andrew's College. At this juncture, we observe that the
       hearing of the appeal took place on 3  February  2015  when,  by  all
       accounts, the sponsor still had leave to remain.

   Mr Tarlow was unable to advise us whether  the  above-mentioned  letters
       were provided to the FTTJ, owing to there being no file note from the
       presenting officer on the day. Mr  Jafar,  who  was  present  at  the
       hearing before the FTTJ, confirmed that the said documents  were  not
       before the FTTJ and that the issue of curtailment was not alluded to.
       We also noted that the FTTJ's record of proceedings made  no  mention
       of them. Mr Tarlow recognised that he was in a difficult position and
       said no more regarding this ground.


   10. In relation to ground 1, we are unable to find that  the  curtailment
       evidence was before the FTTJ. In  addition,  there  was  no  evidence
       before us to show that the respondent ever sent  these  documents  to
       the sponsor. We conclude that the FTTJ  made  no  error  of  fact  in
       finding that the sponsor had leave to remain as a student as  at  the
       date of the hearing.

   11. With regard to ground 2, Mr Tarlow was of the view that only  section
       117B(1) was relevant. He conceded that it was  not  the  respondent's
       strongest point and was unlikely to amount to  a  material  error  of
       law. We agreed. We were of the view that paragraph 15 of  the  FTTJ's
       decision illustrates  that  she  had  in  mind  the  public  interest
       considerations even if she did not explicitly  say  so.  Included  in
       that paragraph are clear references to  the  appellant's  immigration
       history and conduct during his time in the United Kingdom as well  as
       to the law and Immigration Rules. Furthermore, the judge referred  to
       an analogous case, that of R  (oao  Zhang  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  891
       (Admin), where the Court concluded that proportionality, in  relation
       to a similar paragraph 319C refusal decision, will be  achieved  only
       in circumstances where applicants entertain a poor immigration record
       or there is only a tenuous engagement of Article 8.  Neither  is  the
       case here. We therefore concluded  that  the  judge's  error  in  not
       stating that she had regard to section 117B was not material and  had
       she done so it would have made no difference to the  outcome  of  the
       appeal.

   12. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there are no  errors  of
       law such that the decision be set aside. We uphold  the  decision  of
       the FTTJ.

 Conclusions

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
 making of an error on a point of law.   The decision of the FTTJ is
 upheld.

 No application for anonymity was made and we could see no reason to make
 such a direction.






 Signed     Date: 7 June 2015


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
