
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23963/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |                      Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 6 October 2015                     |                      On 20 January 2016 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           Funmilayo Joy Oshibajo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Funmilayo Joy Oshibajo, was born on 2 February  1982  and
    is a female  citizen  of  Nigeria.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Birrell) against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    16 May 2014 to refuse her application for further leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the dependant of  a  points-based  migrant.   She
    also appeals against the decision to remove her under Section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal,
    in a decision promulgated on 14 November 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both parties  agreed  that  the  appellant  was  obliged  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 319 of HC 395 (as amended):





         319C.    Requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain



         (i)  Where the relevant Points Based  System  Migrant  is  applying
             for, or has been granted, entry clearance, leave to enter,  or
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)
             Student either:

             (i)  the relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant  must  be  a
                  government sponsored student who is applying for,  or  who
                  has been granted, entry clearance or leave  to  remain  to
                  undertake a course of study longer than six months;


             (ii) the relevant Points Based System Migrant must:

                  (1)  be applying for, or have been granted entry clearance
                      or leave to remain in order to undertake a course  of
                      study at post-graduate level that  is  12  months  or
                      longer in duration; and


                  (2)  be sponsored by a sponsor who is a Recognised Body or
                      a body in receipt of funding as  a  higher  education
                      institution from either:

                      (a)  the Department for Employment  and  Learning  in
                           Northern Ireland;


                      (b)   the  Higher  Education  Funding   Council   for
                           England;


                      (c)  the Higher Education Funding Council for  Wales;
                           or


                      (d)  the Scottish Funding Council;


             (iii)    the relevant Points  Based  System  Migrant  must  be
                  applying for, or have been granted leave to  remain  as  a
                  Tier  4  (General)  Student  on  the  doctorate  extension
                  scheme; or

             (iv) the following conditions must be met:

                  (1)  the relevant Points  Based  System  Migrant  must  be
                      applying for entry  clearance,  leave  to  enter,  or
                      leave to remain, to undertake a course of study  that
                      is longer than six months and either:

                      (a)  have entry clearance, leave to enter,  or  leave
                           to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student or  as  a
                           student to undertake a  course  of  study  longer
                           than six months; or


                      (b)  have last had entry clearance, leave  to  enter,
                           or  leave  to  remain  within  the  three  months
                           preceding the application as a Tier  4  (General)
                           Student or as a student to undertake a course  of
                           study longer than six months; and

                  (2)  the Partner must either:

                      (a)  have entry clearance, leave to enter,  or  leave
                           to remain as the Partner of a  Tier  4  (General)
                           Student or a student with entry clearance,  leave
                           to enter, or leave  to  remain,  to  undertake  a
                           course of study longer than six months; or


                      (b)  have last had entry clearance, leave  to  enter,
                           or  leave  to  remain  within  the  three  months
                           preceding the application as  the  Partner  of  a
                           Tier 4 (General)  Student  or  as  a  student  to
                           undertake a  course  of  study  longer  than  six
                           months; and

                  (3)  the relevant Points  Based  System  Migrant  and  the
                      Partner must be applying at the same time."

 3. The judge noted that, in May 2013:

         the appellant and her partner made a joint application  as  Tier  4
         Student and dependant as the appellant's  partner  Olatunji  Busari
         had been accepted onto a PhD programme  at  the  London  School  of
         Commerce (an Associate College of Cardiff Metropolitan  University)
         starting on 17 June 2013 lasting until 30 June 2016.

    The judge went on to record at [23]:

         the particular provisions in issue  are  complex  and  not  clearly
         worded in my view but I am satisfied that there is  more  than  one
         way to satisfy 319C(i) because the word either appears at  the  end
         of 319C(i).   It  can  either  meet  it  [sic]  by  satisfying  the
         provisions from 319C(i)-(iii)  or  alternatively  meeting  319C(iv)
         onwards.

 4. The judge rejected Counsel's argument that the appellant either had  to
    show that he was a government-sponsored student  or  had  been  granted
    leave for a course of study for six months or more; that  was  not  how
    the judge "read the provisions".  The judge found the  appellant  could
    not succeed under the route set out in 319C(i)-(iii).  As regards  sub-
    section (iv) the  appellant  did  not  claim  to  be  involved  in  the
    Doctorate  Extension  Scheme  referred   to   in   sub-section   (iii).
    Furthermore, the judge was:

         not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements   of
         (iv)(1)(a) or (b) but would  require  the  appellant's  partner  to
         already have leave as a Tier 4 Student (1)(a) or have had leave  as
         a Tier  4  Student  within  three  months  prior  to  the  date  of
         application (1)(b).

 5. Referring to paragraph 319C, the appellant, in the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal, asserts that the judge erred by failing to consider
    whether the appellant met the requirements of either 319C(i) or (ii) or
    (iii) or (v) in isolation; the grounds assert that paragraphs (i), (ii)
    and (iii) are not to be read  conjunctively.   As  a  consequence,  the
    requirement for an applicant to be a "government-sponsored student"  is
    only relevant to an assessment under paragraph (i) which can and should
    be read independently from the other provisions.  The appellant asserts
    that she was able to satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    by meeting the requirement of paragraph 319C(iii) alone.

 6. The use of the word "either" at the end of the initial paragraph (i) of
    paragraph 319C certainly gives rise to the possible construction of the
    remaining sub-paragraphs of the Rule as being read  disjunctively;  the
    use of the word "either" anticipates the subsequent appearance  of  the
    word "or".  There is, however, neither "or" nor "and"  at  the  end  of
    subparagraph (i).  The difficulty for the appellant, however,  lies  in
    the fact that subparagraph (ii) provides  that  a  points-based  system
    migrant has been granted entry clearance to  undertake  a  postgraduate
    level course of study of more than twelve months' duration  (which  she
    had) but also that she be sponsored by a Recognised Body or a  body  in
    receipt of funding as a higher education  institution;   the  appellant
    failed to meet this  requirement  because  she  was  privately  funded.
    Further, it is  not  clear  why  the  appellant  should  qualify  under
    subparagraph (iii) (as the grounds of appeal contend) when there was no
    evidence that the appellant was on  a  doctoral  extension  scheme  (as
    Judge Birrell noted at [25]).  In addition,  I  see  no  error  in  the
    judge's assessment that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of sub-paragraph (iv) (see [26] above).  In  the  circumstances,  Judge
    Birrell did not  err  in  law  by  dismissing  this  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. The grounds of appeal also complain that  the  judge  has  produced  an
    unsafe assessment of Article 8 ECHR.  At [28], the judge recorded  that
    "Mr Brown  [Counsel  for  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing] did not address Article 8 in his submissions".  The  appellant
    asserts that the judge had indicated to  Mr  Brown  no  submissions  on
    Article 8 were required.

 8. If the judge had not considered Article 8 (which had  been  pleaded  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal) then she may, if  the
    assertion made in the grounds of appeal is accurate, fallen into  legal
    error.  However, whatever may have been the  reason  for  there  having
    been no oral submissions as regards Article 8, the judge  proceeded  in
    her decision to carry out a thorough analysis of the relevant  evidence
    and to apply the law as  regards  Article  8  accordingly.   The  judge
    observed [39] that "the decision to remove the appellant does not  have
    to break up this family as clearly they have the option of returning to
    Nigeria together to pursue their family and private life".   The  judge
    had proper regard to the best interests  of  the  appellant's  children
    [38] and noted that there was "never a guarantee that the appellant and
    her family would be permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom  because
    they were dependants of a student  ..."   The  Article  8  analysis  is
    thorough and legally sound.  If the matters raised in  the  grounds  of
    appeal are an indication of the submissions which Mr Brown chose not to
    make at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, then I find that that  failure
    has made no difference whatever to the outcome of the appeal on Article
    8 grounds.

 9. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 10 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 10 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



