
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23608/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Promulgated                     |
|On November 9, 2016             |On November 11, 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS RIYA MANUBHAI KAPADIA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant     Mr Parmindar-Singh (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent    Ms Nasim (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    3. The appellant is a national of  India.  The  appellant  entered  the
       United Kingdom on April 14, 2011 on  a  visa  that  enabled  her  to
       remain here until December 31, 2012.

    4. On September 22, 2012 she applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
       (General) Student. The respondent refused her application on January
       9, 2013.

    5. The appellant appealed that decision on July 1, 2015  under  Section
       82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  her
       appeal initially came before  a  Duty  Judge  on  August  26,  2015.
       Permission to appeal out of time was granted.

    6. Her substantive appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Eban (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on May 23, 2016. In  a
       decision promulgated on June 15, 2016 the Judge allowed  the  appeal
       under the Immigration Rules  to  the  extent  that  it  was  not  in
       accordance with the Rules. In essence, the Judge found the appellant
       had failed to consider the available  documents  and  therefore  the
       respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

    7. The respondent appealed the Judge's decision on June  29,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Colyer on October 14, 2016.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date.

PRELIMINARY ISSUES

    9. Ms Nasim submitted a Rule 24 response which due to  its  lateness  I
       did not treat as Rule 24  response.  However,  she  raised  in  that
       document that the respondent had agreed  to  the  course  of  action
       taken by the Judge.

   10. Neither party had a contemporaneous note of what  happened  and  the
       only record available to me was the Judge's note. This note is brief
       but I read the record out to the representatives so they were  aware
       what had been recorded.

SUBMISSIONS

   11.  Mr  Parmindar-Singh  submitted  the  Judge  erred  by   effectively
       remitting the matter back to the respondent because  the  respondent
       had considered the CAS issue and the Judge  should  have  found  the
       Rules were not met because no CAS had been provided.

   12. Ms Nasim argued that the Judge allowed the appeal in the  manner  he
       did because he was not satisfied the respondent had  considered  the
       documents or checked the correct document. She submitted  the  Judge
       was not satisfied the correct document had  been  checked  and  that
       approach was open to him.



FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

   13. This was an old appeal that was delayed due to the fact it  was  not
       properly served. When the refusal came to the appellant's notice she
       appealed. Duty Judge Law gave permission to appeal out of  time  and
       the matter was then listed before the FTT Judge.

   14. The Judge's notes are brief but record the following:

 a. The appellant was not called although she was present to give evidence.

 b. The respondent's bundle had evidence of a CAS certificate (page E1).

 c. The respondent had proved there was a CAS  document  by  producing  the
    document.

 d. The Home Office representative could  not  add  anything  more  to  the
    situation.

 e. The Judge allowed the appeal as the decision was not in accordance with
    the law.

   15. The respondent's bundle includes two CAS records at pages C1 and  D1
       but  neither  of  these  documents  were  relevant  to  the  current
       application.  The  correct  CAS  details  were   included   in   the
       application form (A16) and a letter contained at E1.

   16. The Judge was not  satisfied  the  respondent  had  considered  this
       evidence and it seems the Judge's reasoning for that  was  based  on
       the evidence presented.

   17. Nothing argued by Mr Parmindar-Singh addresses the judge's  approach
       or the fact his colleague did not even argue the point  he  made  in
       the FTT.

   18. In the circumstances I find the  Judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
       decision he did and the respondent needs to review the evidence  and
       decide if the Rule was met.



DECISION

   19. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       decision.


Signed:  Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the fee award previously made.


Signed:  Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
