
[pic]

Upper Tribunal


Immigration and Asylum Chamber                    Appeal Number:
IA/23452/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Birmingham                              Decision Promulgated

On: 4 September 2014                         On: 5 September 2014



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Mazharul Haque
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Not present



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh and was born on 10 October 1990.

For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as  the
respondent, her position before the First-tier Tribunal.
This  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against   the   determination
promulgated on 10 January 2014 of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart
which refused the claimant's Tier 4 and Article 8 appeals  but  allowed  the
case to the extent that the s.47 removal decision was found not lawful.

The claimant initially appealed against the decision of  Judge  Bart-Stewart
but in a letter dated 28 January 2014 withdrew that challenge before it  was
considered. In so far as the decision  of  Judge  Bart-Stewart  refused  the
Tier 4 and Article claims, therefore, it stands.

The respondent was correct, in my  view,  to  appeal  the  judge's  decision
regarding the s.47 notice and the First-tier  Tribunal  equally  correct  to
allow the application for permission to appeal out of time.  The  provisions
of s.51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013  amended  the  legislation  to  the
effect that the respondent was able to make a s.47 removal decision  at  the
same time  as  refusing  the  substantive  appeal.  The  s.47  decision  was
therefore lawful and Judge  Bart-Stewart  in  error  in  finding  it  to  be
otherwise.

For these reasons, I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal   to
the limited extent set out above and remade it,  finding  the  s.47  removal
decision to be lawful.

DECISION

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a  point
      of law only in relation to the s.47 notice. That part of the decision
      only is set aside and remade, the  s.47  notice  being  found  to  be
      lawful.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 4 September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




