
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/23895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2018                             |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                MR TAIWO AKA
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Aminu, solicitor, of Aminu Aminu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holms, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robinson promulgated on 26 April 2017. This is the resumed  hearing  of
    the appeal, it having been adjourned on the last occasion  because  the
    appellant was not present nor was his  then  legal  representative.  Mr
    Aminu has now come on the record for the appellant.

2.   The appellant's immigration history was summarised  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision at paragraph 2. Mr Aminu  confirmed  to  me  that  he
    accepts the accuracy of that summary so for convenience I adopt it:

         "He entered the United Kingdom on  19  December  2000  and  claimed
         asylum at port.  The application was refused on 26 April 2001.   He
         lodged an appeal against the refusal.  The  appeal  was  dismissed.
         On 2  September  2002  he  submitted  an  application  for  an  EEA
         Residence Card. The application was refused on 21  September  2002.
         He appealed against the decision.  The  decision  was  subsequently
         withdrawn and on 13 January 2004 he was  issued  with  a  Residence
         Card valid until 21 September 2007. On 23 August  2007  he  made  a
         further application for an EEA Residence Card which was refused  on
         30 January 2008.  He lodged an  appeal  against  the  decision  but
         withdrew his appeal on 31 March 2008.  On 12 November 2009 he  made
         an application for human rights (leave outside  the  Rules).  On  9
         December 2005 he applied for leave to remain as a student  migrant.
         This application was refused with no right of appeal on 9  November
         2010.  On 4 August 2011 the Home Office agreed to  reconsider  this
         decision.  He was issued with an IS.75  and  IS.76  on  27  January
         2015.   He  has  subsequently  provided  additional   grounds   for
         consideration".

3.   The decision in the First-tier Tribunal was to dismiss the appeal.

4.   The grounds of appeal comprised three paragraphs, each said  to  amount
    to a material error of law. In the first paragraph  it  was  said  that
    because the appellant had filed his application for human rights  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules on 12 November 2009  and  a  decision  to
    refuse it was made on 9 November 2010, then the Secretary of  State  in
    reconsidering the matter should have  done  so  under  the  Immigration
    Rules prevalent  before  9  July  2012  when  paragraph  276ADE  became
    effective.  Paragraph 2 expands upon  this  stating  that  because  the
    application was made prior  to  9  July  2012  the  judge  should  have
    considered whether or not the decision was  proportionate  taking  into
    account the case of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  the  five-questions
    therein outlined. It is suggested that the judge erred in not  applying
    that step  by  step  approach.   Then,  in  the  third  paragraph,  the
    contention is made that the judge did not deal appropriately  with  the
    medical evidence.

5.   The grant of permission to appeal is dated 8 April  2017.  Paragraph  4
    reads:

         "The judge looked at the case through the  Rules  post-dating  2012
         and under Article 8 somewhat briefly.   It  is  arguable  that  the
         wrong law  was  applied  if  this  was  a  case  where  the  extant
         application pre-dated a change in the law.   It  is  arguable  that
         given the lengthy time spent in the  United  Kingdom  more  perhaps
         needed to be considered under Article 8."

6.   A very full Rule 24 response was served by the Secretary  of  State  on
    22 November 2017.  That made reference to the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Singh v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 and in particular the  effect  of  new  Rules  coming  into
    existence, summarised at  paragraph  56.  The  pre-existing  Rule  only
    obtained in respect to decisions taken in the two month window  lasting
    from 9 July until 6 September 2012.  This decision  fell  outside  that
    window and therefore the correct law was applied.

7.   Mr Aminu fairly accepts the propositions set out in Singh and does  not
    pursue criticisms of the judge for applying  the  post-2012  law.   His
    submissions were  more  narrowly  focused.  He  takes  two  substantive
    points.  First, he says the judge  failed  to  carry  out  an  adequate
    proportionality assessment; and secondly, that the he gave no  adequate
    weight to delay on the part of the Secretary of  State  from  the  time
    when  she  indicated  that  she  would   reconsider   the   appellant's
    application to the time when a decision was made.  That delay, Mr Aminu
    reminds me, was from 4 August 2011 until 27 January 2015.  Mr Aminu did
    not pursue in oral argument the third matter in the grounds of  appeal,
    namely a possible misinterpretation by the judge of such as the medical
    evidence as may have been before him.

8.   I have given detailed scrutiny to the totality of  this  decision.   It
    is a painstaking and focused decision  which  recites  the  immigration
    history, the evidence heard during the course of  the  hearing,  and  a
    discussion of the law to be applied.   In  particular,  there  is  very
    detailed consideration given by the judge at paragraph 17 and following
    of the medical conditions which have affected and  continue  to  affect
    the appellant and of the availability  or  otherwise  of  treatment  in
    Nigeria were the appellant to be returned.

9.   Mr Aminu's main argument is in relation to paragraph 22 which  he  says
    is flawed.  It reads:

         "I have considered the appellant's Article 8 situation through  the
         prism of the Immigration Rules and Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.
         The public interest in this case is strong.  The appellant  has  no
         meaningful ties  here  and  has  not  provided  any  evidence  from
         extended family members or friends.  His attempts to regularise his
         stay in the past have been  considered  and  dealt  with  on  their
         individual merits.  The appellant lived in Nigeria for more than 45
         years before coming to the United Kingdom.  I do not accept that he
         has lost touch with every  family  member  and  friend  during  the
         period he has resided in the UK.  Even if he has,  it  is  apparent
         that he is familiar with the language, culture and customs with his
         country of origin".

10.  And at paragraph 23:

         "I find his claim for leave on human rights grounds  based  on  his
         private life in the United Kingdom was properly refused  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  He built up a private life during a long period
         of unlawful residence in the United Kingdom.  He has not shown that
         there would be serious obstacles to his returning to  Nigeria.   He
         is not at risk from the state or state agents.   He  has  not  been
         threatened with harm.  He has treatable  medical  conditions  which
         are diagnosed and for which treatment is available in  Nigeria  and
         he has relevant skills which would enable him  to  support  himself
         there in the same way as he has supported  himself  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I find that the Secretary of State's decision  is  lawful
         proportionate and in the public interest and  I  therefore  dismiss
         the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR".

11.  I cannot find nothing in the decision to give support to either of  the
    criticisms  made  by  Mr  Aminu.   The   judge's   treatment   of   the
    proportionality exercise is full, complete and balanced. It is  further
    clear that the judge has had in mind the fact that there was a delay in
    the Secretary of State dealing with the reconsideration.  The fact that
    some time elapsed while the matter was under the Secretary  of  State's
    consideration is not dispositive of the matter  in  the  way  which  Mr
    Aminu suggests. It is but one part of  the  factual  matrix  which  the
    judge took into account.

12.  It is not the function of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  re-visit  decisions
    which have been made by a First-tier Tribunal.  Rather it is to  assess
    whether there is any error of law sufficient to require the decision to
    be set aside.  I can find no error of law in this decision, whether  as
    contended by Mr Aminu or otherwise.   On  the  contrary,  the  decision
    demonstrates the proper exercise  of  judicial  discretion  based  upon
    legitimate findings, all of which are clearly and adequately expressed.



13.  For all of these reasons this appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed and decision of First-tier Tribunal affirmed.


Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



