
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23908/2015
                                                               IA/23909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2017                    |On 12 January 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                AASTHA JOSHI
                               SWADHIN BATAJOO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. K. Manzur-e-Mawla, Lexpert Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Seifert, promulgated on  17  March  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that, as the Appellants were victims of fraud regarding
    their documentation, it  was  unfair  to  then  find  against  them  in
    relation to the  lack  of  a  CAS  that  depended  on  that  fraudulent
    documentation and could not be obtained  because of  it,  without  them
    having a chance to rectify the problem.  All grounds may be argued."


 3. The Appellants attended the hearing.  I  heard  oral  submissions  from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Jarvis submitted at the outset that the Judge was wrong  in  saying
    that there was no mandatory refusal under paragraph 322(1A).


 5. Mr. Manzur-e-Mawla relied on the grounds of appeal.  In relation to the
    CAS he submitted that the Judge had not considered the  information  in
    the grounds  of  appeal  and  application  form.   On  page  6  of  the
    application form the Tier 4 Sponsor details had been given.  The  Judge
    was aware of this information which was in  the  bundle.   No  findings
    were made on this.  The first  Appellant  was  not  in  a  position  to
    provide a CAS because of what had happened in the previous application.
     The Appellants had been victims of fraudulent activities which had had
    a bearing on the first Appellant's application.


 6. The first Appellant had varied her Tier 2 application as  the  COS  was
    not valid.  She made a subsequent application for a Tier 4  visa.   She
    asked for some time.  She had a conditional offer from a Sponsor.   The
    Respondent, having noted the conditional offer, could  have  asked  for
    verification of the position.


 7. These were unique circumstances.  There  had  not  been  a  fundamental
    breach of the rules by the Appellants.  There were only two  paragraphs
    dealing with the CAS issue.  The Judge had not considered the  material
    facts.  Mr. Manzur-e-Mawla confirmed that the appeal was only under the
    immigration rules.  No human rights grounds  had  been  raised  at  the
    appeal.  He submitted that the Judge should have made a  decision  that
    the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    Judge should have found that the Respondent should have  exercised  her
    discretion and allowed the first Appellant more time.


  8. In response Mr. Jarvis submitted that the grounds were legally  flawed.
     Setting aside the issue of mandatory refusal  raised  in  the  Rule  24
     response, the only way in which the first  Appellant  could  have  been
     given more time was if the underlying decision of  the  Respondent  was
     not in accordance with the law.  However,  there  was  no  CAS  so  the
     decision was in accordance with the immigration rules.  As  to  whether
     the decision was not in line with common law fairness,  the  Appellants
     would have to show that the Respondent acted  contrary  to  common  law
     principles.  This was not the case.  It was not a "60 day" case of  the
     type when an applicant had under 60 days' leave remaining and could not
     obtain a CAS.


  9. On 29 April 2014 the issue of curtailment had  been  raised  internally
     with the Respondent.  On 19 May 2014 a curtailment decision  was  made.
     The Appellant's leave to remain expired on 22 July 2014.  The Appellant
     had made an in-time Tier 2 application with a forged document.   Before
     that application was decided, the Appellant made an application varying
     her Tier 2 application to a  Tier  4  application.   It  was  the  same
     application, but varied.  I was referred to the case of  JH  (Zimbabwe)
     [2009] EWCA Civ 78.


 10. I was referred to the case of EK (Ivory Coast) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517,
     and the judgment of Lord Justice Briggs at [54] and  [55].   The  issue
     was whether the Respondent was to blame for the unfairness.  There  was
     nothing said in the application to vary about the situation surrounding
     the false COS.  There was no reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the
     provision of the false document.


 11. He acknowledged that the first Appellant was in a "bit of a  bind"  due
     to the actions of her legal representatives.  Her COS was fake and  she
     had no CAS.  The first Appellant was not personally responsible, but it
     was not the Respondent's actions that had led to  this  position.   Had
     the Respondent been told of the circumstances, she may have  chosen  to
     exercise  discretion.   However  the  rules  required   refusal   under
     paragraph  322(1A).   No  explanation  had  been  made  for  the  first
     Appellant's difficulties.  She could not meet the Tier 4  requirements,
     and a false document had been provided.


 12. Mr. Jarvis referred to the case of EG and NG (UT rule  17:  withdrawal;
     rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 (IAC), paragraph [46] for an
     example of how a rule 24 response could be used.  He submitted that  he
     was able to raise the issue of the legal mistake made by the  Judge  in
     relation to the application of paragraph 322(1A).  I  was  referred  to
     paragraph 67 of AA [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773.   There  had  been  a  false
     representation.  The Judge had been wrong to consider  whether  or  not
     the Appellant had been aware of that.


 13. If the Appellant had wanted to raise the details regarding the COS, she
     should have set them out when she varied her  application  rather  than
     just stating that she did not have a CAS.  The point of the immigration
     rules was that they should be consistently and predictably applied.


 14. There had been no claim under Article 8, and there was  no  claim  now.
     There was no prospect of success under the immigration rules,  and  the
     decision was ultimately correct.


 15. In response Mr. Manzur-e-Mawla submitted that the first  Appellant  had
     not provided an explanation to the Respondent regarding the forged  COS
     because she had been to the police.  Reasonable steps had been taken by
     the first Appellant.  She had gone through the  correct  procedures  to
     address the issue.  The Tier 2 application had been made in June  2014.
     The application had been varied in September 2014.   He  accepted  that
     she had not had a CAS when she varied the  application.   However,  the
     application contained information about her  prospective  sponsor,  and
     the Respondent should have considered this as a matter of discretion.


 16. This situation could be distinguished from  EG  and  NG.  The  rule  24
     response had been made after the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
     The challenge by the Respondent went to another limb of  the  decision.
     The Judge considered paragraph 322(1A) and gave reasons why he did  not
     find dishonesty.  The burden of proof was on the Respondent.  The Judge
     correctly found that the Appellant played no part in the dishonesty  or
     deception.  The Appellant believed that  the  representative  had  been
     working with them.  There was no error in the Judge's consideration  of
     paragraph 322(1A).

Error of law


 17. The Judge dismissed the Appellants' appeals because the first Appellant
     did not provide a valid CAS with her application.  He  states  at  [13]
     and again at [46] that it was "common ground" that the application  did
     not meet the requirements for a Tier 4 visa as she had not  provided  a
     valid CAS in support of her Tier 4 application.  At [47] he states:


     "I find that Mrs Joshi failed to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
     245ZX(c) and was  correctly  awarded  zero  points  in  that  category.
     Further, Mrs  Joshi  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
     245ZX(d) because zero points were awarded for Maintenance  (Funds)  for
     the reasons stated in the reasons for refusal letter."


 18. It was again acknowledged before me that the Appellant had not provided
     a valid CAS in support of her application.  Therefore the appeal  could
     not succeed under the immigration rules, and there can be no  error  in
     the Judge's finding that the requirements of the immigration rules were
     not met.


 19. It was submitted on behalf of the Appellants that the Judge should have
     allowed the appeal as not being in accordance  with  the  law,  as  the
     Respondent had failed to exercise discretion and grant the Appellant  a
     further 60 days in which to find a valid CAS.


 20. From reading the decision and the submission made by Mr. Dey set out at
     paragraph [14], it does not appear that  it  was  submitted  that  this
     should be done,  but  rather  the  emphasis  was  on  the  Respondent's
     decision to  refuse  the  application  under  paragraph  322(1A).   "If
     paragraph 322(1A) did not apply the appellants would be  able  to  make
     future applications."  It appears that the main reason for bringing the
     appeal was  to  overturn  the  Respondent's  decision  under  paragraph
     322(1A) in order that future applications could be made.


 21. In any event, whether this course of action was proposed in the  First-
     tier Tribunal or not, I find that it would not have been right for  the
     Judge to find that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with
     the law in relation to an alleged failure to grant the first  Appellant
     a further 60 days in which to  find  a  CAS.   The  obligation  on  the
     Respondent to issue a "60 day" letter only arises when  it  is  due  to
     some action on the part of the Respondent that the applicant is in  the
     position of not having a valid CAS.


22. Paragraph [38] of EK states:


    "But that requirement was found to arise where there had been a  change
    of position of which the Secretary of State was aware, and indeed which
    she had brought about, in circumstances in which the students were  not
    themselves at fault in any way, but had been caught out by action taken
    by the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to  which  they  had  had  no
    opportunity to protect themselves.  In the present case,  by  contrast,
    the Secretary had no means of knowing why the  Appellant's  CAS  letter
    had been withdrawn and was not responsible for its withdrawal, and  the
    fair balance between the public interest in the due  operation  of  the
    PBS regime and the individual interest of the Appellant was  in  favour
    of simple operation of the regime without further ado."


23. Paragraph [59] states:


    "Secondly, like Sales LJ, I consider that a  fairness  principle  which
    would lead to success for the applicant in the present case would  make
    too great an inroad into the simplicity,  predictability  and  relative
    speed of the PBS process, contrary to the thrust of the PBS  regime  as
    laid down by the Immigration Rules, particularly in a situation such as
    the present, where the Secretary of State bears  no  responsibility  at
    all for the mistake or the lack of communication of it,  which  led  to
    the unfair outcome for the Appellant."

 24. In the first Appellant's case the Respondent bore no responsibility for
     the fact that the first Appellant did not have a valid CAS.   This  was
     therefore not a case where the Respondent should have issued a  60  day
     letter.  The Respondent's decision was in accordance with  the  law  on
     this point.


 25. In relation to whether the Respondent should have exercised  discretion
     under paragraph 322(1A), given that the Respondent had no knowledge  of
     the circumstances which led to  a  false  COS  being  provided,  it  is
     difficult to see how she could have exercised discretion differently in
     this regard.  The first Appellant  did  not  give  the  Respondent  any
     information about the false COS.  It is submitted that  the  Appellants
     took appropriate steps by going to the police, but they  did  not  tell
     the Respondent that they had gone to the police.  There can  have  been
     no expectation that the police would tell the Respondent, even had they
     known that there was an outstanding application before the  Respondent.
     There was no  failure  on  the  part  of  the  Respondent  to  exercise
     discretion due to the circumstances of the COS if she  was  unaware  of
     those circumstances.


 26. It was  also  submitted  that  the  Respondent  should  have  exercised
     discretion and made enquiries about the proposed sponsor.  There is  no
     obligation on the Respondent to do this.  It was not  the  Respondent's
     fault that the offer from the sponsor was only  conditional.   Had  she
     known  about  the  circumstances  of  the  COS,  she  may  have   acted
     differently, but she did not know about these circumstances.


 27. I therefore find that there is no error in the Judge's  dismissing  the
     appeal under the immigration rules, and no  error  in  his  failure  to
     allow the appeal on the grounds that the Respondent's decision was  not
     in accordance with the law.


 28.  In  relation  to  the  point  raised  by  Mr.  Jarvis  regarding   the
     consideration of paragraph 322(1A), the Judge found that there  was  no
     ground for refusal of the application under paragraph 322(1) [45].  Mr.
     Jarvis submitted that this was wrong.


 29. As stated  above,  this  point  was  not  cross-appealed.   Mr.  Jarvis
     submitted that I could consider it with reference to the case of EG and
     NG.  Paragraph [46] states:


     "Suppose a man seeks entry clearance as a husband and suppose that  the
     Entry Clearance Officer finds that he has not  shown  that  he  can  be
     either accommodated or maintained in accordance with the rules. A First-
     tier Tribunal Judge may decide, arguably wrongly, that the husband  can
     satisfy  the  accommodation  requirements  but  not   the   maintenance
     requirements. In that event the judge would  dismiss  the  appeal.  The
     Entry Clearance Office would have  no  interest  in  appealing.  He  is
     content with the decision to dismiss the appeal.  The  husband  however
     may want to challenge the decision. He might want  to  argue  that  the
     decision that he did not satisfy the maintenance requirements was wrong
     in law and he may be given permission to  appeal.  In  that  event  the
     Entry Clearance Officer may well  want  to  argue  not  only  that  the
     decision that the husband did not meet the maintenance requirements was
     right but  that  the  decision  that  he  did  meet  the  accommodation
     requirements was  wrong.  In  short,  without  wanting  to  appeal  the
     decision, the Entry Clearance Officer may want to rely on a ground that
     failed before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Rule  24  permits  the  Entry
     Clearance Office to give notice of his intention to raise such a  point
     in a reply. In short rule 24 does have a meaning that does  not  depend
     on Ms Dubinsky's premise and we reject the construction that she  urged
     on us. Rule 24 does not create a right of appeal to a party who has not
     asked for permission to appeal. Rule 24 is not in any way  to  do  with
     seeking permission to appeal and it is not an  alternative  to  seeking
     permission where permission is needed. It is to do with  giving  notice
     about how the respondent intends to respond  to  the  appeal  that  the
     appellant has permission to pursue. If a respondent wants to argue that
     the First-tier Tribunal should  have  reached  a  materially  different
     conclusion then the respondent needs permission to appeal."


 30. I find that the example set out in EG and NG is on all fours  with  the
     Respondent's approach here.  The rule 24 response gives notice that the
     Respondent intended to respond  to  the  appeal  by  reference  to  the
     mandatory refusal point under paragraph 322(1A).


 31. Rule 322 is headed "Grounds on which leave to remain and  variation  of
     leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are to be  refused"  (my
     emphasis).


 32. Rule 322(1A) provides that an application is to be refused "where false
     representations have been made or false documents or  information  have
     been submitted (whether or not material to the application, and whether
     or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material facts have  not  been
     disclosed, in relation  to  the  application  or  in  order  to  obtain
     documents from the Secretary of State or  a  third  party  required  in
     support of the application" (my emphasis).


 33. Paragraph 67 of AA states:


     "First, "false representation" is  aligned  in  the  rule  with  "false
     document". It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a  lie
     about itself. Of course it is possible for a person to make  use  of  a
     false document (for instance a  counterfeit  currency  note,  but  that
     example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the  context  of
     this discussion) in total ignorance  of  its  falsity  and  in  perfect
     honesty. But the document itself is  dishonest.  It  is  highly  likely
     therefore that where  an  applicant  uses  in  all  innocence  a  false
     document for the purpose of obtaining  entry  clearance,  or  leave  to
     enter or to remain, it is because some  other  party,  it  might  be  a
     parent, or sponsor, or agent, has dishonestly promoted the use of  that
     document. The  response  of  a  requirement  of  mandatory  refusal  is
     entirely understandable in such a  situation.  The  mere  fact  that  a
     dishonest document has been used for such an important  application  is
     understandably a sufficient reason for a mandatory refusal. That is why
     the rule expressly emphasises that it applies "whether or  not  to  the
     applicant's knowledge"."


 34. It was not in dispute that a false document in the form of the COS  had
     been provided with the application.  The Tier 2 application was  varied
     to a Tier 4 application.  The  Tier  4  application  was  not  a  fresh
     application, and indeed it was not argued by Mr. Manzur-e-Mawla that it
     was.  As stated in JH (Zimbabwe):


     "As a matter of language, there is no reason why  a  later  application
     should not also be treated as a "variation" of  the  first  application
     even if it is for a different purpose. I do not accept that a variation
     can only arise where the later application is for the same purpose  but
     with different details" [37].


 35. Therefore the COS was provided "in relation to the  application".   The
     Respondent was entitled to take the provision of a false document  into
     account.  The Appellant was unaware of it at the time, but rule 322(1A)
     is clear that it applies whether or not the applicant was aware of  it.




 36. I therefore find that the appeal fell to  be  refused  in  relation  to
     paragraph 322(1A), which is a mandatory ground for refusal.  I find the
     Judge erred in finding  that  the  application  should  not  have  been
     refused under paragraph 322(1A).  However, this error is  not  material
     as he dismissed the appeals in any event for lack of a CAS, and I  have
     found above that there is no error of law in this decision.


Decision


 37. While the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves an error of  law
     in relation to paragraph 322(1A), this error is  not  material  as  the
     Appellants' appeals were dismissed in any event.  There is no error  of
     law in the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals and the decision
     to dismiss the appeals stands.


 38. In relation to paragraph 322(1A), I remake the decision and  find  that
     the Respondent was correct to refuse the Appellants' applications  with
     reference to paragraph 322(1A).


 39. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
