
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23433/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            muhammad rizwan asif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel instructed by Asons Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has obtained permission to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Spicer) who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 July 2015 allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision made on 14 May 2014 to remove him and to refuse him  leave  to
    remain. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction,
    and I do not consider that the claimant requires  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. On 23 October 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons. It was arguable  (Ground  1)  that
    the judge might have erred in law by failing  to  apply  the  mandatory
    requirement of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  had  found  that  the
    claimant had not provided payslips for the relevant six months prior to
    the date of  application  as  specified  in  Appendix  FM-SE  paragraph
    2(a)(i) but the judge then went on to find that  the  missing  November
    payslip was verifiable from subsequent payslips.  It was also  arguable
    (Ground 2) that the judge might have erred in law by  failing  to  give
    reasons for accepting  the  claimant's  postdecision  English  language
    certificate dated June 2014 as meeting the requirements of paragraph 27
    and paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In respect of ground  1  the  relevant  finding  of  the  judge  is  at
    paragraph [46] of his decision which I set out verbatim:

         "Ms Turnbull states in her skeleton argument that the  Sponsor  has
         provided the requisite payslips.  However, on looking  through  the
         Appellant's bundle after the hearing, I could not  find  a  payslip
         for November 2013 in the Appellant's  bundle.   I  am  prepared  to
         accept that the November 2013 payslip may have been mislaid in  the
         photocopying process.  In any event, I find the  information  which
         would have appeared on the November payslip is verifiable from  the
         subsequent payslips  which  show  the  cumulative  balance  of  the
         Sponsor's pay, and the bank statement for November 2013 which  also
         evidences a salary payment."

 4. The judge then went on to say in paragraph [47]  that  taking  all  the
    evidence into account, and with the  exception  of  the  November  2013
    payslip, the sponsor had supplied all of the specified information  for
    the specified period, and the financial requirements were satisfied.

Discussion

 5. On the face of it the judge's decision discloses an error of law as  it
    is a mandatory requirement under paragraph 2  of  Appendix  FM-SE  that
    payslips covering  a  period  of  six  months  prior  to  the  date  of
    application should be provided.  However, the only issue taken  in  the
    refusal decision with respect to the  financial  requirement  was  that
    there were insufficient bank statements  provided  to  corroborate  the
    payslips submitted to confirm the earnings made by the sponsor.

 6. Accordingly, on the basis of the position taken  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the refusal  letter  the  claimant  prepared  for  the  appeal
    hearing on the basis that there was  no  issue  about  whether  he  had
    complied with the  requirement  to  provide  a  series  of  six  months
    payslips in advance of the date of application.

 7. It is clear that Ms Turnbull submitted that the  sponsor  had  provided
    the requisite payslips, so she was unaware that a payslip  was  missing
    from the claimant's bundle.

 8. Accordingly, I find that the error made by the judge was  not  material
    as it goes to a matter which was not  an  issue  between  the  parties.
    There is also an  important  distinction  between  the  omission  of  a
    payslip from the claimant's bundle and the omission of a  payslip  from
    the series of payslips that were provided  with  the  application.  The
    failure to provide a payslip in the claimant's bundle was immaterial in
    circumstances where it was not alleged  that  the  required  series  of
    payslips had not been provided with the application.

 9. Accordingly, I find that the judge did not err in law in  finding  that
    the financial requirement  was  met,  and  in  thus  finding  that  the
    claimant could qualify for leave to remain on that ground.

10. I turn to ground 2 which is the issue of compliance  with  the  English
    language requirement.  I am satisfied that the SSHD  correctly  refused
    to accept the English language certificate that was provided  with  the
    application as it did not comply with Appendix O.

11. However, the judge found that a  subsequent  certificate  from  Trinity
    College, London dated June 2014 at page 87 of the claimant's bundle met
    the English language requirements of the Rules.  The judge  also  noted
    the claimant was able to give evidence in fluent English  at  the  oral
    hearing.

12. The case advanced by the Secretary of State on appeal is that the judge
    was precluded from taking  into  account  a  postdecision  certificate.
    This submission is based on the wording of paragraph (d) of Appendix FM-
    SE.  This provides that in deciding an application in relation to which
    this appendix states the specified  documents  must  be  provided,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer or Secretary of State (the decision maker) will
    consider documents that had been submitted with  the  application,  and
    will only consider documents  submitted  after  the  application  where
    subparagraph (b) or (e) applies.

13. In my judgment the Secretary of State's reliance on  paragraph  (d)  in
    this context is misconceived.  Paragraph (d) sets  out  the  parameters
    for consideration by the primary decision maker of documents which have
    not been provided with the application.   It  says  nothing  about  the
    scope of the judge to consider documents or information provided by way
    of appeal.  If this was a points-based system  case,  the  judge  would
    have been precluded from  taking  into  account  postdecision  evidence
    subject to specific exceptions. But  in  this  case  the  general  rule
    applied,  which  was  that  the  Tribunal  could  take   into   account
    postdecision evidence. Therefore I find that the judge did not  err  in
    law in taking into account the postdecision  certificate  in  order  to
    reach  a  finding  that  the  claimant   met   the   English   language
    requirements.

Notice of Decision

14. Accordingly, for the reasons I  have  given  above,  I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law and
    the decision stands.  This appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

