
IAC-TH-CP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23594/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2015                               |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                             MR TANWEER SUBHANI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 3 August  1982.   On  17
    April 2014 he applied for an extension of stay in the United Kingdom as
    a  student  having  first  entered  in  that  capacity  for  an   IELTS
    preparation course in July 2011 and subsequently studying  for  a  BTEC
    HNC in business management.  The completion date for that course was 19
    December 2013.  He had leave until 19 April 2014 for that purpose.

 2. He subsequently made application  to  remain  to  study  at  University
    Tutorial College for a health and social care management  NQF  level  5
    qualification which was refused on 9 May  2014.   The  application  was
    refused in a decision of the respondent dated 9 May 2014.   Initially,
    no right of appeal was given but in the event, the appeal before  Judge
    Wiseman (the judge) proceeded on human rights grounds on the basis that
    the refusal was a breach of the appellant's right to private life.  The
    judge found that the appellant's application breached  the  requirement
    that prohibited the appellant from being allowed to study here for more
    than three years below degree level.  The judge  went  on  to  consider
    Article 8 but given that he found the appellant had not put forward any
    relevant circumstances in that regard the appeal was dismissed on human
    rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds claimed the judge had failed to deal with Section 88(4)  as
    it was a ground of appeal  that  the  decision  was  a  breach  of  the
    appellant's human rights on the basis that  the  respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the Notices Regulations 2003.  In particular
    inter alia, as the claim was said to be unlawful under Section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act (see  (7)(b)  and  (c))  the  decision  maker  had  an
    obligation to re-serve the notice of the decision under  Regulation  4.
    The appellant took issue with the procedure followed by the  respondent
    such that the grounds claimed the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law and therefore failed the third Razgar question in terms of  the
    lawfulness of the decision.  That is, the appellant was entitled  to  a
    fully appealable decision, regarding which the judge failed  to  engage
    so as to resolve the issue.

 4. Further, the grounds claim the  judge  failed  to  impose  the  correct
    burden and standard of proof.  That was because the  judge  placed  the
    burden upon the appellant to show that the respondent's calculations as
    to the three year period were in error.  The timing of the  appellant's
    various CAS dates were unclear.   The  appellant  could  not  show  the
    respondent's calculations were in error because those calculations  had
    not been published or made available to  the  appellant.   The  grounds
    claim that as a minimum,  the  respondent  should  have  disclosed  the
    calculations used to decide that  the  appellant's  current  course  of
    study would take him over the three year cap and the failure to  do  so
    and the failure on the part of  the  judge  to  engage  with  the  same
    rendered the decision  as  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law".   The
    appellant could not raise the "not in accordance with the  law  ground"
    except through the prism of human rights,  hence  the  purpose  of  the
    Notice Regulations.

 5. Further, the grounds claimed that the judge had no power to dismiss the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules as the  appellant  did  not  have  a
    right of appeal.  It was claimed that the appellant had made no  proper
    submissions in that regard as he had no right of  appeal  against  that
    aspect of the decision such  that  the  judge  should  have  restricted
    himself to the decision-making powers in s86(3) of the NIA 2002.   That
    would have made a crucial difference to the appeal.  The  judge  should
    have recognised that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law
    which was relevant to the human rights ground.

 6. Judge Grimmett considered the grounds but found there was  no  arguable
    error of law.  Whilst the grounds claimed the judge failed to deal with
    s88(4) he considered human  rights  at  [14]  and  [15].   The  grounds
    claimed that the respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 but Judge Grimmett could not see
    that Regulation 4 referred to in the grounds included a [6].

 7. The grounds were renewed.  Judge Eshun in a decision dated  5  February
    2015 granted permission to appeal on the papers as follows:

         "The respondent refused the appellant's application  for  leave  to
         remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 9 May 2014 without a  right
         of appeal under S.88(2)(c) of  the  2002  Act.   According  to  the
         grounds the appellant is claiming that the procedure adopted by the
         respondent was not in accordance with the  law  and  therefore  the
         respondent's decision is contrary to the Human  Rights  Convention.
         The appellant relies on CHH (Notices Regulations - right of  appeal
         - leave to remain) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00121 (IAC), and argues that
         he is entitled to a fully appealable decision.  The  grounds  argue
         that the judge failed to consider this  argument  and  consequently
         erred in law.  The grounds raise an arguable error of law."

 8. Thus the matter came before me.

 9. Turpin & Miller wrote to the Upper Tribunal on  12  March  2015  saying
    they were instructed that the appellant wished the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    determine his appeal on the basis of the grounds submitted  in  support
    of the original application for permission.  No additional grounds were
    submitted.  Turpin & Miller  said  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    attending the appeal in person or through a representative.

10. The respondent's Rule 24 letter dated 16 February 2015  submitted  that
    the judge had directed himself appropriately and had  not  erred.   The
    appellant had no right of  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   As
    regards human rights, the judge had considered those at [14]  and  [15]
    of  his  determination.   The  appellant's   circumstances   could   be
    distinguished from those in CHH.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The appellant's circumstances can be distinguished from  those  in  CHH
    which was an out of  time  appeal.   See  [4]-[5]  of  CHH.  That  case
    involved a one year gap and various correspondence between the parties.
     It may be that the respondent in this appellant's case failed  to  re-
    serve the notice of decision under  Regulation  4  of  the  Immigration
    (Notices)  Regulations  2003,  however,  the  appellant   suffered   no
    prejudice in that regard as he lodged his grounds of appeal in time and
    included a human rights appeal at section 3 "Non-asylum Decision".

12. It was not in dispute that the appellant was only able to appeal on the
    restricted human rights grounds and the judge erred in considering  the
    appellant's position under the Immigration Rules although I do not find
    that to be material.  The judge considered human rights at [14]-[15] of
    the determination.  He found that "...in real terms...", no  Article  8
    claim had "...been properly put  forward..."  by  the  appellant.   The
    judge commented that the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds was inevitable on the basis of the  evidence  before  him.  Put
    simply, the appellant had failed to make out any private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom before the judge and I find the Notice  Regulations  had
    no material bearing.  That was because he made an in  time  appeal  and
    raised human rights which the judge considered and dismissed.

13. In summary, I conclude  that  the  determination  does  not  contain  a
    material error of  law,  such  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

Anonymity direction not made.



Signed   Date 7 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
