

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/23153/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 3 March 2014                             |On 4 March 2014           |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                          Mr Shahid Mehmood Hussain
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      17 January 2014 by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McKee  in  respect  of  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  who  dismissed  the
      appeal following a hearing at Birmingham on 22 October 2013 by way  of
      a determination promulgated on 31 October 2013.

   2.       The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 18 April 1977.  He
      seeks to remain as a Tier  1  Entrepreneur  but  his  application  was
      refused on 22 May 2013 because  he  had  not  supplied  the  specified
      documents; specifically, that the letter from the bank did not confirm
      the required details of the third party and  provider  of  funds.  The
      appeal was accordingly dismissed by  the  judge  who  found  that  the
      evidential flexibility rule did not assist the appellant.

Appeal hearing

   3.       At the hearing, Mr Jarvis conceded  that  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State had been unlawful  in  that  it  had  not  been  in
      accordance with the policy in force  at  the  time  (since  rescinded)
      which  required  caseworkers  to  ask  for  missing  information.   He
      submitted that in the circumstances the appeal should be remitted back
      to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

   4.       Mr Chohan submitted that the missing information had been before
      the Secretary of State all along in the  paperwork  submitted  by  the
      appellant's 'team  member'  who  had  simultaneously  made  a  similar
      application. He submitted that the judge should have  considered  that
      information and that the appeal should now be allowed outright on  its
      merits as to remit it would mean "going round in circles".  He  sought
      to rely on paragraph 245AA (d).

   5.       Mr Jarvis pointed out that  it  had  not  been  shown  that  sub
      section (d) was in force at the  time  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision. He submitted that it was a subsequent amendment.  Mr  Chohan
      could not confirm when (d)  had  come  into  force  but  repeated  his
      earlier submissions.

   6.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give. In so doing I have had  regard  to  a  copy  of  the
      policy supplied by Mr Jarvis and to the written submissions  from  the
      appellant dated 3 March 2014.

Findings and Conclusions

   7.       Given Mr Jarvis' concession, I find that the Secretary of  State
      acted unlawfully in that she did not follow her own policy when making
      the decision to refuse the application. I note, as pointed out  by  Mr
      Jarvis, that the policy indicates that missing information  from  bank
      letters is an example of the kind of  inadequate  document  which  the
      respondent may  consider  it  appropriate  to  follow  up.  I  am  not
      persuaded by Mr Chohan's argument that the respondent was  duty  bound
      to consider the documentary evidence submitted by the appellant's team
      member when considering the  appellant's  own  application.  Had  that
      evidence also been relevant to his application, it  should  have  been
      submitted with it as well as with the other individual's  application.
      However, it appears that in accordance with  her  policy,  a  copy  of
      which Mr Jarvis was able to supply, the Secretary of State should have
      sought the missing information from the appellant before deciding  his
      application.

   8.        In  the  circumstances  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge is set aside.

   9.       I now consider whether the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
      Secretary of State as Mr Jarvis submitted or whether I should  re-make
      the decision and allow the appeal as Mr Chohan urged.

  10.       I am unable to follow Mr Chohan's submission. As  the  Secretary
      of State's decision was unlawful, a fact  seemingly  accepted  in  the
      written submissions from the  appellant,  it  follows  that  a  lawful
      decision has yet to be made and in those  circumstances  there  is  no
      option other than to remit the matter to the  Secretary  of  State  so
      that she can consider  the  missing  information  from  the  appellant
      (which was submitted as part of his appeal bundle) and make  a  fresh,
      lawful, decision.

Decision

  11.       The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.  The  decision  is
      set aside and the appeal is  allowed  only  to  the  extent  that  the
      decision was not in accordance  with  the  law.  The  matter  is  thus
      remitted to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision to be made.


      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      4 March 2014.

