
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23294/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th December 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              valentine gordon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Vencatachellum of Counsel instructed by
Capehill Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Phull of the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a Jamaican citizen born 28th May 1977.  He applied  for
    leave to remain in the UK based upon the family and private life he had
    established since his arrival as a visitor on 5th October 2000.

 4. The application was refused on  12th  May  2014  and  on  that  date  a
    decision was made to  remove  the  Appellant  from  the  UK,  following
    refusal of his human rights claim.

 5. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 17th March 2015.  The FtT found that
    the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law,  because
    the Claimant had made his application for leave to  remain  before  the
    Immigration Rule changes on 9th July 2012.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    Respondent was wrong to consider  the  application  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM in relation to private life,  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  in
    relation to private life, as those provisions had only been  introduced
    into the Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012.

 6.  Because  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  consider   the   Claimant's
    application with reference to the Immigration Rules in force  prior  to
    9th July 2012, the FtT  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, and therefore
    the matter remained outstanding before the Secretary  of  State  for  a
    lawful decision.

 7. This prompted the Secretary of State to apply for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it was submitted that  the  FtT  had
    erred by failing to consider Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and in
    particular paragraph 56.  It was submitted that the Secretary of  State
    was entitled to apply the Immigration  Rules  introduced  on  9th  July
    2012, unless a decision  was  taken  between  9th  July  2012  and  6th
    September 2012.  It was submitted that in this case  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was dated 12th May 2014, therefore the FtT  was  wrong
    to find the decision not in accordance with the law.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted and directions were issued that  there
    should be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the
    FtT had erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

 9. Mr Mills relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal and submitted that  in  the  light  of  Singh  and
    Khalid, the decision of the FtT was clearly wrong in law and could  not
    stand and it would be appropriate to set aside the decision  and  remit
    the appeal to be heard again before the FtT.

10. Ms Vencatachellum accepted that the FtT had not taken into  account  he
    principles set out in Singh and Khalid.

My Conclusions and Reasons

11. The FtT erred in law and the decision is set aside.  The  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to take  into  account  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1) which had been introduced into the Immigration Rules  on  9th
    July 2012, and the FtT was wrong to conclude to the contrary.

12. The FtT erred in not considering Singh and Khalid, and I set out  below
    paragraph 56 of that decision, which explains why the FtT erred in law;



         "56. The foregoing analysis has regrettably  been  somewhat  dense,
             but I can summarise my conclusion, and the reasons for it,  as
             follows:

             (1)  When HC 194 first came into force on 9th July  2012,  the
                  Secretary of State was not entitled to take  into  account
                  the provisions of the new Rules  (either  directly  or  by
                  treating them as a statement of her current  policy)  when
                  making decisions on private or  family  life  applications
                  made prior to that date but  not  yet  decided.   This  is
                  because,  as  decided  in  Edgehill,  "the  implementation
                  provision" set out at para. 7 above  displaces  the  usual
                  Odelola principle.

             (2)  But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by
                  the introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with  effect
                  from 6th September 2012.  As from that date the  Secretary
                  of State was entitled to take into account the  provisions
                  of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE - 276DH  in  deciding
                  private or family life applications even if they were made
                  prior to 9th July 2012.  The result is that the law as  it
                  was held to  be  in  Edgehill  only  obtained  as  regards
                  decisions taken in the two month window between  9th  July
                  and 6th September 2012.

             (3)  Neither of the decisions with which we are  concerned  in
                  this  case  fell  within  that  window.   Accordingly  the
                  Secretary of State was entitled to apply the new Rules  in
                  reaching those decisions."

13. The decision in this appeal was made on 12th May  2014,  and  therefore
    the Secretary of State was entitled to apply the new rules.

14. When I announced that the  decision  of  the  FtT  was  set  aside,  Ms
    Vencatachellum  did  not  oppose  Mr  Mills'  suggestion  that  it  was
    appropriate to remit to the FtT.

15. In consideration that issue I have taken into account  paragraph  7  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statements dated  25th  September  2012
    which provides as follows;

         '7.1 Where under Section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under Section 12(2)(b)(ii).

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

         7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary.'

16. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2 are met.  This appeal  has
    not been substantively considered by the FtT and judicial  fact-finding
    is necessary, which should be carried out by the FtT, rather  than  the
    Upper Tribunal.

17. Therefore, with the consent of both parties, the appeal is remitted  to
    the FtT, to be heard by a Judge other than  Judge  Phull.   The  appeal
    will be heard at the hearing centre at Sheldon Court Birmingham and the
    parties will be advised in writing of the time and date of the hearing.
     The Tribunal  has  been  advised  that  an  interpreter  will  not  be
    required.  If that is not the  case,  the  Tribunal  must  be  notified
    immediately.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law such that it is set aside  with  no  findings  preserved.   The
appeal is allowed to the extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  there  has
been no request for anonymity made to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  is  no
anonymity order.


Signed   Date: 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  This must be decided by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
