
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23619/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd February 2016        |On 14th March 2016                   |
|                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                         mr mojibola oloruntimilehin
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Counsel, instructed by M&K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria whose appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Hussain in a decision promulgated on 28th May 2015.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that it would be a breach of his
    rights under Article 8 ECHR if he was removed to Nigeria.

 3. There was no representation from the  Respondent.   The  Judge  made  a
    critical factual finding in paragraph 38 of his decision that  she  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant was in a cohabiting relationship  with
    his partner May.  He had noted that the documentary evidence  submitted
    showed that he and his partner were residing at a different address and
    while the Appellant gave an explanation about that the Judge considered
    that very little evidence  was  produced  of  his  residence  with  his
    partner and  hence  the  factual  finding  that  they  were  not  in  a
    cohabiting relationship.

 4.  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  with  reference  to  the  Surendran
    guidelines.  They state that:

         "Where no matters of  credibility  are  raised  in  the  letter  of
         refusal  but,  from  a  reading  of  the  papers,  especially   the
         Adjudicator himself considers that there are matters of credibility
         arising therefrom, you should similarly point these matters out  to
         the representative and ask that  they  be  dealt  with,  either  in
         examination of the Appellant or in submissions."

 5. The grounds narrate that the  Judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant's
    involvement with his British citizen child was not  substantial  noting
    that he had no explanation from the Appellant as to how he  managed  to
    earn money whilst at the same time taking his son to school and picking
    him up from school.  The grounds say the Judge ought to have  indicated
    his concern  to  the  Appellant's  representatives  or  ask  clarifying
    questions of his own volition in  order  to  afford  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to address that issue.  He rejected  the  possibility  that
    there might be a perfectly plausible explanation  of  his  concern  and
    took neither option.  This was  said  to  be  procedurally  unfair  and
    contrary to the principles of natural justice and also contrary to  the
    Surendran guidelines.  Furthermore the Judge had similarly acted in the
    concern  he  expressed  over  the  absence  of  evidence  relating   to
    cohabitation between the Appellant and his partner.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Martin but  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane.

 7. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule  24  Notice  indicating  that  the
    Judge's decision had been properly reasoned.

 8. Before me Mr Wells relied on  his  grounds  and  said  that  it  was  a
    fundamental issue of fairness.  The Judge had  reached  conclusions  on
    points which had never been put to the Appellant for his  consideration
    either in the refusal letter or at the hearing.  I  was  asked  to  set
    aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. For the Home Office it was said by Ms Willock-Briscoe that she did  not
    have all the documents that had been placed before the Judge.

10. I reserved my decision but indicated to the parties  that  I  would  be
    allowing this appeal.  My reasons are as follows.

Conclusions

11. The fundamental issue in this case is whether or  not  there  has  been
    unfairness to the Appellant and it seems to  me  tolerably  clear  that
    there has.  An Appellant is entitled to prepare his case on  the  basis
    of what is said against him in the reasons for refusal  letter.   While
    not a system of written pleadings between parties this procedure allows
    the Appellant to prepare the case within the confines  of  the  refusal
    letter.  In addition he has to deal with matters which may be  properly
    raised at the hearing.  Unfortunately,  in  this  case,  that  did  not
    happen.  The Judge found against the Appellant on critical issues  that
    went to heart of his claim  and  where  the  Appellant  was  denied  an
    opportunity  to  deal  with  them.   It  is,  of  course,  not   always
    straightforward for a judge  to  grasp  what  they  consider  to  be  a
    material point at the time of  the  hearing  and  that  sometimes  only
    occurs when in the privacy of chambers.  Given his  concern  about  the
    issues on which he found against the Appellant the  Judge  should  have
    reconvened the hearing however administratively inconvenient  that  may
    have appeared to be.  It was manifestly unfair to the Appellant for the
    Judge to proceed in the way he did and accordingly this  decision  must
    be set aside.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is  proportionate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is necessary.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

