
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23236/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2017                           |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                               Mr Tufail Islam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Oji, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd
which was promulgated on 19 April 2016.  The appellant is a national of
Pakistan who applied for a residence card as the spouse of the sponsor. The
issue which fell to be determined by Judge Lloyd was whether the marriage
which they contracted was one of convenience.

2.   The judge heard oral testimony from both the appellant and the sponsor
and had in mind the reasons that had been set out in the Secretary of
State's refusal letter.  The legal approach under the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was set out by the judge and there was no
criticism made before me as to that legal approach.

3.   The judge then assessed the evidence which was before the Tribunal,
both the oral testimony and the limited documentation and ran through the
various factors which in the judge's consideration caused concern as to the
genuineness of the marriage.  Significant reference was made to the timing
of the marriage, the difference in age, the speed at which the relationship
was said to have developed, the fact that though said to be a practising
Muslim the initial marriage was of a civil nature although followed some
months later by a Muslim ceremony.  The judge looked at joint bank
accounts, correspondence and so on.  The judge also looked at
inconsistencies in testimony of the witnesses, particularly with regard to
wedding rings.

4.   The conclusion the judge came to is at paragraph 26:

"I take all of this together and in the round.  The unusual and
dramatically quick timing, differences in age, the anomaly of the appellant
marrying in a civil ceremony despite the importance he attached to the
religious aspect, and the discrepancies in account add together for me to
find on balance that the appellant's motivation was obtaining the right to
remain in the United Kingdom, and accordingly I find that the marriage was
one of convenience under Regulation 2."

5.   In the course of her submissions to me Ms Oji has not identified any
error of law in relation to that determination.  She has indicated that the
judge appeared to attach weight to certain factors and not others and that
judge at some points applied a benefit of the doubt to the appellant and at
other times not.

6.   There is no substance in any of those criticisms.  The determination
is clear, lucid and thorough.  It is perfectly possible to read from it the
precise reasons the judge had to coming to the clear conclusions which were
articulated.  It is well-established that the weight to be given to
different relevant features is entirely a matter for the First-tier
Tribunal and not something which the Upper Tribunal should interfere with.
Though Ms Oji, on her client's behalf, may be dissatisfied with the result
there is no error of law in the determination and this appeal must
accordingly be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     7 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
