
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/23753/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 8th May 2017                       |         On 20th June 2017            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               mildred makore
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khurram of Khurram & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe born on  9th  June  1958.
    She first arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th July 2002 when she  was
    granted leave to enter as  a  visitor  for  a  period  of  six  months.
    Thereafter the Appellant overstayed and on 2nd April 2015  she  applied
    for leave to remain as a partner.  In the meantime  the  Appellant  had
    married J K, also a citizen of Zimbabwe who had been granted indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK as a refugee  because  he  had  worked  as  a
    teacher in Zimbabwe.  The Appellant's application was refused  on  12th
    June 2015 for the reasons given in a Reasons for Refusal letter of that
    date.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes (the Judge) sitting at  Birmingham  on  6th  July
    2016.  He dismissed the appeal for the reasons given  in  his  Decision
    dated 16th August 2016.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 12th January 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE
    of HC 369.  That decision is not in issue in this  appeal.   The  Judge
    also dismissed the appeal under the provisions of  Appendix  FM  of  HC
    369, and in particular found that the requirements of  paragraph  EX.1.
    were not satisfied because although the Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner with refugee leave,  there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to their family life continuing outside the
    UK as defined in paragraph EX.2.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Khurram first applied for  leave  to  introduce  new
    evidence relating to the Appellant's deteriorating health.   I  refused
    that application as the new evidence was not relevant to the issue of a
    possible error of law in the decision of the Judge.  As this aspect  of
    the appeal hearing is not relevant  to  the  eventual  outcome  of  the
    appeal, I will not give my reasons further.

 5. Mr Khurram then argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming to his
    conclusion.  He referred to the Grounds of  Application  and  submitted
    that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband continuing their family life in  Zimbabwe  as  the  Appellant's
    husband was at risk there as a  former  head  teacher  of  a  secondary
    school and a member of the MDC.  The Appellant and her husband  had  no
    right to live elsewhere.  The Appellant's husband was still at risk  in
    Zimbabwe according to the current Country  Guidance  given  in  CM  (EM
    country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni argued that there was no such error  of  law  in
    the decision of the Judge.  She referred to her Rule  24  response  and
    said that the Judge had considered the  situation  of  the  Appellant's
    husband in Zimbabwe when he had referred to the Determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lowe at paragraph 10 of the  Decision.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lowe had decided in January 2004  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was not at risk on return.

 7. I do find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore   set   aside.    When   considering   whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and  her  husband  continuing
    their family life in Zimbabwe for the purposes of paragraph EX.1.,  the
    Judge did take account of the circumstances of the Appellant's  husband
    and the possible risk to him of return to Zimbabwe at paragraphs  9  to
    11 inclusive of the Decision.  However, he dealt with  that  aspect  of
    the matter by relying on the findings made in a  Determination  decided
    in January 2004.  He failed to consider the  risk  to  the  Appellant's
    husband at the date of the hearing before the Judge in July  2016.   It
    was not in dispute that the Appellant's husband had been a head teacher
    and an MDC member in Zimbabwe, and the Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    risk on return according to current Country Guidance.  This amounts  to
    an error of law.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the  decision  in  the  appeal.   This  was
    because there were new circumstances relating  to  the  health  of  the
    Appellant which required further evidence.  Those  circumstances  would
    be  relevant  to  the  issue  of   insurmountable   obstacles   and   a
    consideration of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules if applicable.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the   Practice
Statements.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


