

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/23793/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|on    1st June 2017                 |on 9th June 2017                      |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                           Obinna Peter IKEDIANYA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Frances Allen  (counsel instructed by Owens, Luton)
For the respondent: Mr Chris Avery

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge NA Malik), sitting at Manchester on 18 October 2016, to
     a long residence appeal by  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  born  1984.  The
    appellant came here on a student visa in 2003, and had leave to  remain
    on that basis till 16 December 2010. His out  of  time  appeal  against
    refusal of further leave to remain on 17 January was  finally  rejected
    on 16 May 2011, and Miss Allen accepted that he was here without  leave
    from then till 18 June 2014, when he was given leave to remain till  18
    October that year.

 2. On 14 October 2014, the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, on the basis that he had been  lawfully  here  for  ten  years.
    Owing to the break in his leave, that was  refused;  and  he  was  also
    refused leave to remain under article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.
    The  judge  held,  for  reasons   she   gave,   that   this   was   not
    disproportionate to the legitimate purpose of . Permission was  granted
    on the basis that the judge had been wrong  about  the  length  of  the
    break in leave, which it is now accepted she was not; but also  in  the
    way she treated his explanation for it.

 3. The judge dealt with the evidence on this point at paragraphs 26 -  27:
    she noted that the appellant  blamed  his  former  solicitors  for  not
    appealing the 17 January 2011 refusal  in  time,  and  that  there  was
    evidence  showing  the  Solicitors  Regulation  Authority   [SRA]   had
    intervened in their practice; but he had retained their services up  to
    and including the  present  application  in  October  2014.  The  judge
    declined to consider whether the appellant was right in saying that the
    only reason for that  refusal  had  been  his  failure  to  produce  an
    original birth certificate, which he eventually did. It is  now  agreed
    that, since this was not a 'specified document' for the purpose of  the
    points-based system [PBS], an in-time appeal on that basis should  have
    succeeded.

 4. The way in which Miss Allen put the  appellant's  case  on  this  point
    before the judge was based on the Home Office long  residence  guidance
    of 8 May 2015. At paragraph 28 she set out the relevant provisions:

       When considering an application on the grounds  it  was  made  by  an
       applicant who has overstayed by more than 28 days, you must  consider
       any  evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  which  prevented   the
       applicant from overstaying within the first 28 days  of  overstaying.
       The threshold for what  constitutes  'exceptional  circumstances'  is
       high,  but  could  include  delays  resulting  from   unexpected   or
       unforeseeable causes.

 5. As the judge pointed out, this  appellant  had  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in time, but appealed out of time; so the decision-maker did not
    have the discretion given by that paragraph. Miss Allen did  not  argue
    the point before me in the same way, but on the basis  that  the  judge
    should nevertheless have taken into account the appellant's history  of
    what happened, in her decision on proportionality.

 6. At paragraph 32 the judge declined to do this, on the basis that  there
    was nothing  to  show  that  the  respondent  was  made  aware  of  any
    exceptional circumstances when the applicant made  his  long  residence
    application. That would have been an entirely valid reason for refusing
    judicial review; but on a statutory appeal, the judge  needed  to  make
    her own decision, except on  points  that  had  to  be  established  by
    'specified documents' under the PBS.

 7. At paragraph 37 the judge did however go on to consider the appellant's
    history, but said "... this does not though negate the fact that  there
    has been a break in his lawful residence such that he does not meet the
    requirements of the rules, nor am I able to second guess what may  have
    happened had the decision been appealed in time". At paragraph  38  she
    considered the proportionality of requiring the appellant's  return  to
    Nigeria, in terms of his private and family life, in a  way  which  was
    not, and could not have been the subject of criticism, apart  from  the
    point made about the break in the appellant's stay.

CONCLUSIONS

 8. Miss Allen did not argue that the appeal could have been allowed  under
    the Rules; so the judge needed to consider the effect of s. 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  the  proportionality
    equation. The relevant parts for present purposes  are these:



       (1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
          public interest.
       ...
       (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.
       (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
          person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status   is
          precarious
       ...

 9. I agree with Miss Allen that there are degrees of unlawful presence, as
    with most things; and this appellant's history, accepted as it is, puts
    him at the very bottom end of the scale of persons unlawfully  present,
    for the three years till 18 June 2014, as the grant of further leave to
    remain at that point really showed. On the other hand, even  precarious
    presence requires little weight to be given to  private  life.  As  the
    judge pointed out at paragraph 38, this appellant's  presence  in  this
    country has been precarious throughout: as a student, he was here  with
    short-term leave, which had to be renewed from time  to  time,  on  the
    assurance that he would leave when he finished his course, or any post-
    study work. There was no evidence of any private or  family  life  here
    with which he could not keep in touch from Nigeria.

10. I am sorry for the appellant having been let down  by  his  solicitors,
    but he is still in time to bring an action against them, so far as that
    may be any consolation. What must be clear is that whatever sympathy  I
    might have with him could not have obliged the judge, or entitled me to
    allow  this  appeal  by  giving  greater  weight  than  Parliament  has
    prescribed to what has happened during his time here as a  student  (or
    for a short time a post-study work migrant).

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                   08. 06.
                                   2017


