
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st November 2017                     |On 28th December 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                                Olubukola [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adetoye, Legal Representative of DPD Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on 5th July 2017 in  which  he
    allowed the Claimant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse her application for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Judge Rowlands within his decision noted that the Claimant  had  a  son
    and that the Claimant's evidence was that [YM] was the  father  of  her
    son and that she had not had  sexual  relationships  with  any  of  his
    relatives.

 2. The judge noted that there was DNA evidence in the case which had  been
    prepared by a retired haematologist. The Judge found  at  paragraph  14
    that the Claimant was a competent, truthful and compelling witness  and
    he found that having looked at the DNA report and  specifically  issues
    raised by the Respondent, he was not convinced by the validity  of  the
    Respondent's points concerning  the  haematologist  being  retired  and
    found the fact that someone was retired did  not  make  them  any  less
    capable of taking the particular samples, and he found that at the  end
    of the DNA report it was  said  that  from  the  analysis  it  was  not
    impossible to exclude other relatives from being  the  alleged  father,
    i.e. his father, brothers or sons as being the  father  of  the  child.
    However, the judge found that that  he  had  heard  evidence  from  the
    Claimant whom found him to be a credible witness and accepted that  she
    had never had sexual relations with anyone other than the father of the
    child and that he was prepared to accept that she was telling the truth
    in that regard, and that he was satisfied with her evidence and the DNA
    report and that the evidence pointed to [YM] being the  father  of  the
    child, Judge Rowlands so found.

 3. The judge noted that there did not seem to be any challenge to the fact
    that [YM] was a British citizen and therefore went on to find  that  he
    was satisfied that the child [A] was a qualifying child, but  he  noted
    that even if there were doubts about the DNA evidence, there  was  also
    evidence of the birth certificate.  He accepted the fact that a claimed
    father has to be present at registration in order for his  name  to  be
    put on the birth certificate and that can be done either at the time of
    registration or later, as he found happened in  this  case.   He  found
    that although it was clear that although he  was  prepared  to  do  the
    right thing by the child by coming back to  complete  the  registration
    process, it was difficult for him to be persuaded to come  back  to  do
    the right thing, as far as the DNA test was concerned.  In that respect
    the Claimant had had to go and pay for him to be brought back  for  the
    DNA test to be carried out.

 4. The judge found at paragraph 16 that there was a qualifying  child  who
    was a child entitled to British citizenship and in the alternative  who
    had resided in the UK for a sufficient length of time.

 5. At paragraphs 17 and 18  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to
    consider Section 117B of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act and found that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave  the  UK  to  go  with  his  mother  to  Nigeria  and  in   those
    circumstances, there being  a  qualifying  child  pursuant  to  Section
    117B(6), and it not being reasonable for the child  to  leave  the  UK,
    that the Claimant's appeal should succeed.

 6. The Secretary of State has now sought to appeal against  that  decision
    for the reasons set out within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   Within  the
    Grounds of Appeal three grounds are argued.   Within  Ground  1  it  is
    argued that the judge erred by relying upon the birth  certificate  and
    failed to have regard, it is said, to Section  9  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2003 which amended the  British  Nationality
    Act 1981 regarding the fact that the child's passport had been  revoked
    on the basis of the father's details not being  entered  within  twelve
    months after the child's birth.  It was argued that the judge failed to
    give weight to that relevant matter, and that given the issue raised by
    the Respondent regarding the DNA results and revocation of the  child's
    passport it was argued that cumulatively that would have had a material
    impact upon the hearing and the revocation of the passport should  have
    been a relevant factor in the proportionality assessment.

 7. Within Ground 2 it is argued that the Claimant took no steps to  inform
    the judge that the child's passport had been revoked and  reliance  was
    placed upon the case of R (on the application of Mohammad Shahzad Khan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 416.  It was argued that there was a duty upon  her  to
    inform the judge that the child's passport had been revoked despite, it
    was argued, the Claimant had been made aware of the decision of the  HM
    Passport Office to revoke her son's passport, which decision letter was
    said to have been sent to  the  same  address  as  the  notice  of  the
    Tribunal's decision.  It is argued that that caused  an  unfairness  in
    the hearing leading to procedural irregularity, given what is argued to
    be a lack of candour from the Claimant.

 8. In the third Ground of Appeal it is argued that the judge has failed to
    give any adequate reasons for finding that  the  Claimant's  son  would
    face difficulties upon returning to Nigeria in light of his educational
    needs (paragraph 18 of the decision).  It is argued that the judge  has
    merely allowed the Claimant's appeal on a whim and has failed  to  give
    sufficient reasons and adequate reasons for his finding.  Reference  is
    also made then to  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  00194  (IAC)  and  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  It was argued that  the  period  of
    seven years from the age of 4 is given weightier consideration than the
    first  seven  years  of  life  and  that  the  UK  does  not   have   a
    responsibility to educate the world.

 9. I am also grateful for the skeleton argument submitted this morning  by
    Mr Adetoye, Legal Representative for the claimant and for  the  helpful
    submissions made by Ms Willocks-Briscoe on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State and Mr Adetoye, Legal Representative for the claimant.

10. Together with his skeleton argument Mr Adetoye this morning submitted a
    further bundle of documents and at this stage only two are relevant for
    the error of law hearing, given that they are actually documents sought
    to be relied upon by the Secretary of State, namely two letters from HM
    Passport Office, the first dated 23rd June 2015, and the  second  dated
    29th July 2015 sent to the Claimant at her  address  at   [  ]  Elstree
    regarding the revocation of [A]'s  passport   (her  son).   Within  the
    letter of 23rd June  2015  it  was  said  that  evidence  of  proof  of
    paternity requires the father's details to be registered on  the  birth
    certificate within twelve months of the birth, which was  said  not  to
    have been done and said in that  letter  that  the  passport  would  be
    revoked within 30 days as there was no evidence  that  [A]  had  direct
    entitlement to British citizenship.

11. Pursuant to Section 9 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2003 a child's father is the husband at the time of the child's  birth,
    or a person who is treated as a father of the child under Section 28 of
    the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990, or where neither  sub-
    section (1) or (2) applied, a person who satisfied certain requirements
    regarding proof of paternity.  Under  Regulation  (3)  of  the  British
    Nationality (Paternity) Regulations, paternity  is  always  established
    where the person is  named  as  the  father  of  a  child  in  a  birth
    certificate issued within one year of the  child's  birth,  or  if  the
    person satisfies the Secretary of State that he is the  father  of  the
    child.  For the  purposes  of  (b),  where  the  person  satisfies  the
    Secretary of State that he is the father of the child, the Secretary of
    State may have regard to evidence including DNA test reports and  court
    orders.  The letter of 29th July 2015 indicated that the  passport  for
    the child had been revoked on HMPO systems.

12. Although the Secretary of State seeks to rely upon those  two  letters,
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe cannot actually confirm to me that either of  those
    letters were actually before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands  as  at
    the date of the hearing before him. Indeed although  certain  reference
    to various documents is made within the Respondent's  documentation  as
    to what was before the Tribunal, that did not seemingly  include  those
    two letters, and although within the original file there was  reference
    to various e-mails regarding a proposal to cancel the passport from the
    passport office, Judge Rowlands himself noted at paragraph  11  of  the
    decision that it had been accepted that there was no  evidence  of  the
    fact that the passport had been revoked.  Clearly if those letters  had
    been handed up by the Secretary of State at the hearing, then the judge
    would not have made that finding, and in light  of  the  evidence  that
    there is no evidence to show that in fact  those  letters  were  before
    Judge Rowlands I find that in fact  those  letters  were  not  actually
    before the judge. As Ms Willocks-Briscoe concedes, it appears that they
    were actually submitted along with the Grounds of Appeal subsequent  to
    the decision before the First-tier Tribunal.  In such  circumstances  I
    do not accept that the  learned  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  be
    criticised for having failed to take account of letters which were  not
    before him, and the evidence before him as stated in  paragraph  11  of
    his decision was that there was  no  evidence  the  passport  had  been
    revoked, although clearly there was  e-mail  correspondence  indicating
    that it was likely to be.

13. Permission to appeal in this case has been granted by Designated  Judge
    McClure on 21st September 2017.   He  found  that  the  Respondent  had
    produced documentation to substantiate the child's British status as  a
    British citizen had been revoked and the passport had been revoked  and
    it was also for the Respondent to show that the Claimant was  aware  of
    such.  However, he found that in light of the  case  law  relied  upon,
    Mohammed Shahzad Khan, the Grounds of Appeal could be argued.

14. I am grateful also, as  I  have  said,  for  all  submissions  of  both
    parties.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    argues that there was a duty of candour upon  the  Claimant  and  again
    relies upon the Mohammed Shahzad Khan case in  that  regard.   Although
    she could not point me to any authority in terms  of  the  points,  she
    argued that the duty of candour extended to  all  proceedings  and  not
    just judicial review proceedings or proceedings for an injunction.  But
    was not able to indicate any authority or support for  that  submission
    either within the actual judgment itself or any other case or  statute.
    She says that the  Claimant  should  not  be  seeking  to  mislead  the
    Tribunal and has a duty of candour in all cases  and  sought  to  argue
    that the Claimant's case  was  that  her  child  was  a  British  child
    despite, she argued, that the mother was aware that  the  passport  had
    been revoked.   She  referred  me  to  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  the
    Claimant's statement which  dealt  with  the  situation  regarding  the
    passport when I asked as to what the actual evidence  from  the  mother
    was regarding the passport and as to whether or not  the  Claimant  had
    sought to deceive the Tribunal regarding the  status  of  her  son,  in
    respect of the passport application.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe further  that
    the judge's findings regarding whether or not the child was  a  British
    citizen were not clear. She conceded that if the child  was  a  British
    citizen then Ground 3 of the Grounds of Appeal did not apply because it
    was not being argued by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave and it  was  only
    if the judge was looking at it on the basis of a child being here  more
    than seven years, then she argued that the judge's  findings  regarding
    whether it was reasonable for the child to leave were not adequate.  As
    I have said above, she conceded that if the judge's reasoning regarding
    the child being a British  citizen  was  adequate,  then  she  was  not
    seeking to argue that the reasons for  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave or not had been inadequately argued.

15. In reply Mr Adetoye sought to rely upon his skeleton argument  which  I
    have fully taken account of and considered.  He argues that there is no
    material error of law in the case and seeks to  argue  that  the  judge
    gave fully adequate and proper reasons in respect of the  consideration
    of the DNA evidence and for his findings that the child was  a  British
    citizen.  He sought to argue that the Claimant in her statement had not
    in any way sought to  deceive  the  Tribunal  and  was  simply  putting
    forward an assertion that the child's passport had  been  revoked,  but
    had been incorrectly revoked on the basis that the child was a  British
    citizen, which the Claimant argued was being established on  the  basis
    of DNA evidence.

16.  Judge  Rowlands  at  paragraph  10  of  his  decision  had  noted  the
    submissions made by the Secretary  of  State's  representative  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the reasons in the  refusal  letter  being  relied
    upon and noted there was a challenge to  paternity  of  the  Claimant's
    son, and consequently to his right to British citizenship, and  to  the
    fact that it was being argued by the Secretary of State  that  the  DNA
    analysis was unreliable for various reasons, including the fact it  was
    said to be prepared by a retired person and that a clause in the report
    did not exclude others from being possible fathers.

17. However, Judge Rowlands at paragraph 14 of his decision went on to find
    that the Claimant was a competent, truthful and compelling witness.  He
    found that he had looked at the DNA report and specifically the  issues
    raised by the Respondent and found that he was not sure as to what  the
    validity of the point concerning the retired haematologist was and  the
    fact that someone was retired did not make them  any  less  capable  of
    taking the particular sample, whether they  were  responsible  for  the
    analysis or not.  Quite clearly that was a finding open to the judge on
    the evidence.  Further, the judge looked at the argument regarding  the
    question of whether or not there were other possible fathers and  noted
    the fact that the DNA report did not exclude other  male  relatives  as
    being the father, but the judge found that he had heard  evidence  from
    the Claimant who he found to be a credible witness  and  accepted  that
    she had never had sexual relations with anyone  other  than  [YM],  and
    therefore accepted that on the basis of that evidence and in the  light
    of the DNA report that [YM] was the father of the child.

18. The judge then found that there was no challenge to the fact that  [YM]
    was a British citizen, and therefore  was  satisfied  that  [A]  was  a
    qualifying child.  On that basis the  judge  when  making  his  initial
    finding that [A] was a qualifying child in terms  of  being  a  British
    citizen has looked at and relied upon the DNA evidence and  I  find  he
    has given adequate and sufficient reasons  for  his  findings  in  that
    regard.  The DNA result gave a chance of paternity of 99.994%  compared
    with a randomly selected individual  who  was  not  one  of  the  other
    potential male  relatives  of  [YM]  who  may  have  been  the  father.
    However, the judge in that regard accepted the evidence of the Claimant
    and it is not an error of law for the judge to find a Claimant to be  a
    truthful or credible witness.  It is a  matter  for  the  judge  having
    heard the evidence before him.

19. The judge went on to find that even if there were doubts about the  DNA
    test there was also evidence of the birth certificate and  he  accepted
    that a claimed father has to be present at registration  in  order  for
    his name to be put on the birth certificate or done at a later time, as
    he found happened in this case.  In this case it appears that  although
    [YM] was actually put on and named on the  birth  certificate  for  the
    child, the argument raised by the Secretary of State was the fact  that
    that had actually not occurred until  after  twelve  months  after  the
    birth, and that therefore the father's name had been incorrectly put on
    the birth certificate at that point in time, because it was outside  of
    the twelve month initial period. This, argued the Secretary  of  State,
    was what then led to the child's British passport being revoked.

20. However, the letters from June and July referred to now were not before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands and he specifically  noted  that  it
    was accepted there was no evidence that in fact the passport  had  been
    revoked and the only evidence before him were  e-mails  at  that  stage
    indicating the passport was likely to be revoked.  It is not  an  error
    of law for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to  fail  to  consider  evidence
    that was not actually placed before him.  He could  only  look  at  the
    evidence before him. In that regard I bear in mind the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State seemingly had not asked for an adjournment in  order
    for that evidence to be obtained.

21. Although within the Grounds of Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  judge
    wrongly relied upon the birth certificate and that the judge failed  to
    give weight to the  relevant  matter  of  the  fact  that  the  child's
    father's details were not correctly entered within twelve months of the
    child's birth, the situation appears to be that  the  child's  father's
    name had been entered on the birth certificate outside of  that  twelve
    month period but he was named on that birth certificate.  However,  the
    judge's primary findings in respect of the parent was  based  upon  the
    DNA evidence  and  the  acceptance  of  the  Claimant's  evidence.  The
    reference to the birth certificate was simply an additional factor, but
    was not the reason for the judge's finding.

22. Although it is argued by the Secretary of State within Ground 2 of  the
    Grounds of Appeal that the Claimant took no steps to inform  the  judge
    that the child's passport had been revoked and reliance was placed upon
    the case of R (on the application of Mohammad Shahzad Khan) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 416 he said that there was a duty of candour and there was  a  lack
    of candour from the Claimant, which is argued because all was  expected
    to be given to the Tribunal.   The case of R  (on  the  application  of
    Mohammad Shahzad Khan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 416 was in that case actually dealing with  a  judicial
    review application and was a consideration as to  whether  or  not  the
    duty of  candour  which  applied  in  applications  for  an  injunction
    extended to claimants to assist the courts for an accurate  explanation
    as to  all  factors  in  respect  of  a  judicial  review  application.
    Reference was made in the judgment to the fact  that  in  the  previous
    case of R (on the application of Bilal Mahmood) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00439 in the decision of Mr Justice
    McCloskey that the duty of candour is a duty to disclose  all  material
    facts in judicial review proceedings applies to all  parties  in  those
    proceedings.  That again was a reference to the situation of a judicial
    review application.

23. The current appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  not  a  judicial
    review case and clearly judicial review cases as  with  injunctions  do
    have special considerations applying to them, with  special  duties  on
    candour on the parties making the applications.   I  therefore  do  not
    accept that that is an authority that a duty of candour  to  that  same
    extent or nature applies to every single case  before  the  Immigration
    Tribunal of the First-tier, although quite clearly Claimants should not
    be  seeking  to  deceive  or  to  mislead   the   Tribunal   in   their
    considerations, but the extent to which every single possible  negative
    feature of a case needs to be brought out and pointed out  specifically
    to a Tribunal Judge in what is an adversarial process in respect  of  a
    statutory appeal.

24. However, in any event, when one looks at the statement of the  Claimant
    before the First-tier Tribunal, at paragraphs 12 and 13 of the  witness
    statement she concedes within that statement that the father's  details
    were not included on the birth register within twelve months of  birth,
    but goes on to argue that her son's biological father is [YM] who was a
    British citizen at the time of the birth, and  that  he  was  therefore
    born to a British citizen.  In paragraph 13 she  comments  specifically
    that although her son's British passport was, she  argues,  incorrectly
    revoked by HM Passport Office at the instance of the Respondent, on the
    basis that the father's details were not included on the birth register
    within twelve months, she asserts that subsequent DNA paternity testing
    indicates that [YM] is the father of her son.  That in that  regard  is
    effectively a submission which his also a concession that the  passport
    had been revoked, although she argues incorrectly revoked on the  basis
    that the father was actually a British citizen.

25. In light of those paragraphs I do not  find,  in  any  event  that  the
    Claimant has in any way sought to deceive  or  mislead  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in any way, or even if there was a duty of candour upon her as
    to the extent argued by the Secretary of State, I fail to see  how  any
    such duty could be breached  in  this  case  where  she  correctly  has
    conceded within her  statement  that  the  father's  details  were  not
    included on the birth certificate within twelve  months  and  that  the
    passport had been revoked as a result.  It was simply her argument that
    the revocation was incorrect, given that there was  a  British  citizen
    father.

26. In such circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, on the
    basis of the  evidence  before  him,  has  given  clear,  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons for his finding that  the  Claimant's  child  was  a
    British citizen and that [A] was a qualifying child  on  the  basis  of
    being a child of a British citizen, [YM].

27. I therefore find that there is no merit in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    first and second Grounds of Appeal and simply amounts to a disagreement
    with the conclusions reached by the Judge.

28. As quite properly conceded by Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, if I was to find that the judge properly found that
    the child was a British citizen, then it was not  being  sought  to  be
    argued by the Secretary of State that it would be reasonable to  expect
    the British child to leave.  For the reasons set out above I have found
    that the judge was entitled to find that the child is a British citizen
    and  that  was  a  finding  open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  In  such
    circumstances the third ground of  appeal  lacks  merit.  There  is  no
    material error in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands
    and I  therefore  maintain  the  decision.   I  therefore  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal against that decision.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands does not contain any
    material error of law and is maintained.

30. I make no order in respect of anonymity.  No  such  order  having  been
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and no such order  having  been  sought
    before me today.


Signed                                  Date 22nd December 2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty






