
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23667/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd December 2014                            |On 18th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MAJID ALI KHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Khan, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The Secretary of State appeals (with permission) against the decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson who, in a  determination  promulgated
   on the 28th August 2014, allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  her
   decision to refuse his application for further leave  to  remain  and  to
   remove him from the United Kingdom.



Background

2. The respondent is citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  the  23rd  June
   1978. He first entered the United Kingdom, on the  18th  September  2003,
   with leave to remain for the purpose of study. He was joined by his  wife
   and daughter on the 21st February 2009. The leave to remain that had been
   granted by the Secretary of State expired on  the  4th  March  2012.  The
   appellant's leave was nevertheless  extended  under  Section  3C  of  the
   Immigration Act 1971 pending an appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
   decision, made on the 13th July  2012,  to  refuse  his  application  for
   further leave to remain for the purpose of  post-graduate  study  at  the
   University of York. On advice, he withdrew that appeal once he had made a
   further application for leave to remain. That was in October 2012.  Since
   that time, he has been in the United Kingdom without any form of leave to
   remain. The  Secretary  of  State,  however,  rejected  his  most  recent
   application  on  the  ground  that  it  was  impermissible  to  lodge  an
   application for leave to remain whilst there was a pending appeal against
   an earlier decision.  There  then  followed  correspondence  between  the
   respondent's representatives and the Secretary of  State,  in  which  the
   representatives blamed his former advisers for incorrectly  advising  him
   that he should make his application before withdrawing his appeal, rather
   than the other way around. The Secretary of State eventually relented and
   agreed to reconsider the appellant's application  for  further  leave  to
   remain on the basis of his private and family life in the United Kingdom.
   It is the Secretary  of  State's  substantive  decision  to  refuse  that
   application, made on the 7th May 2014, which is the subject-matter of the
   instant appeal.

Analysis

3. In consider the appellant's case under Article 8  of  the  1950  European
   Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms,
   Judge Henderson directed herself in accordance with the approach outlined
   in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640
   (IAC). This in essence requires the Tribunal  to  consider  the  case  in
   three stages. Firstly to consider whether the appellant is able  to  meet
   the requirements for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE  or  Appendix
   FM of the Immigration Rules. If he is not able to do so, the Tribunal  is
   then required to consider whether there is a good arguable case for leave
   to remain outside the Rules on the  basis  of  exceptional  circumstances
   that are not sufficiently contemplated by the Rules.  This  is  sometimes
   referred to as 'the intermediate stage'. Whether it is remains  necessary
   for the Tribunal to pass through this stage in cases where  the  relevant
   Immigration Rules do not purport to  provide  a  complete  code  for  the
   Article 8 assessment is now questionable in the light of the observations
   made by the Court of Appeal in MM & Ors, R  (On  the  Application  Of)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2014] EWCA  Civ  985.
   For present purposes, however, I  shall  assume  that  it  is.  Once  the
   Tribunal is satisfied that there are "exceptional circumstances" (that is
   to say, circumstances which are over  and  above  those  contemplated  by
   Immigration Rules) it is then necessary to consider whether the  decision
   is proportionate in seeking to further one of the  legitimate  aims  that
   are exhaustively listed in Article 8(2). Save in the case of  a  decision
   to deport a foreign criminal, the legitimate  aim  will  usually  be  the
   maintenance of the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
   consistent application  of  immigration  controls.  At  that  stage,  the
   Tribunal is bound to have  regard  to  the  statutory  factors  that  are
   contained within Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
   Act 2002.

4. It is first worth noting  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  are
   predicated upon an error of law of their own.  That  error  is  contained
   within the statement that, "MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 confirms that
   the Immigration Rules are a complete code, that form the  starting  point
   for the decision-maker". That decision is in fact authority only for  the
   proposition that Part 13 of the Immigration Rules provide a complete code
   for assessing the question of whether deportation of a  foreign  criminal
   would be compatible with  his  Article  8  rights.  However,  as  I  have
   previously noted, cases involving the deportation  of  foreign  criminals
   were distinguished by the Court of  Appeal  from  those  in  the  present
   category, where it was said that the assessment under Article 8 was "more
   at large" [see paragraph 135 of MM & Ors, above]. Nevertheless, as I have
   also previously stated, I am prepared to proceed upon the basis  that  it
   was still necessary for the Tribunal to pass  through  the  'intermediate
   stage' postulated in Gulshan when considering Article 8  in  the  present
   case.

5. It is not the Secretary of State's case that Judge  Henderson  failed  to
   direct herself  in  accordance  with  the  three-stage  approach  that  I
   described at paragraph 3 (above).  Rather,  as  has  become  familiar  in
   appeals of this kind, the Secretary of  State's  complaint  is  that  the
   judge  "failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons"  for  finding  that   the
   appellant's circumstances crossed  the  threshold  of  the  'intermediate
   stage', and that it was therefore wrong  for  her  to  conclude  that  it
   qualified for a full Article 8 assessment.

6. Inadequate reasoning is pre-eminently a basis for challenging  a  finding
   of fact rather than an exercise of judgement. In  the  former  case,  the
   Upper Tribunal will readily intervene where the First-tier  Tribunal  has
   failed to explain - by reference to the evidence that was before it - how
   it had reached a particular factual conclusion. Such a failure may  truly
   be said to be one of 'inadequate reasoning'. In the latter case, however,
   the Upper Tribunal will only interfere if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
   exercised its judgement irrationally. Irrationality may  include  failing
   to take account of matters that were  plainly  material  or  taking  into
   account matters that were plainly immaterial. Thus, where  the  Secretary
   of State's challenge is to a decision that is the product of an  exercise
   of judgement, it is necessary  to  scrutinise  whether  an  assertion  of
   'inadequate reasoning' is simply a cloak for what is in  reality  nothing
   more than an expression of disagreement  with  a  decision  of  that  was
   reasonably open to the Tribunal on the facts.  I  now  turn  to  consider
   whether this is such a case.

7. Paragraph 3 of the application for permission to appeal, upon  which  Mrs
   Pettersen helpfully elaborated, essentially puts  forward  the  arguments
   for holding that there are no exceptional or compelling circumstances  in
   this particular case. It is pointed out that the appellant has known that
   his immigration status was precarious since his leave to remain  expired,
   in March 2012. It is also argued that it would be open to  the  appellant
   to continue his studies in Pakistan  or  to  seek  entry  clearance  from
   abroad.  No  doubt  these  arguments  were  also  advanced  before  Judge
   Henderson, for it is clear that she took  them  into  account.  Thus,  at
   paragraphs 37 and 38 of her determination, she makes  specific  reference
   to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  private  life  has  latterly  been
   established at  a  time  when  his  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
   precarious. In relation to  the  possibility  that  the  appellant  could
   complete his studies in  Pakistan,  however,  she  reached  the  entirely
   rational conclusion that this was not feasible. She also  concluded,  for
   good and sufficient reasons, that it would be positively harmful  to  the
   public interest if  the  appellant  was  prevented  from  completing  his
   academic research  within  the  United  Kingdom.  Thus,  she  noted  that
   Professor Brown had emphasised the importance to the University that  the
   appellant be allowed to complete his research and that the University had
   invested significant resources in the appellant  on  the  basis  that  he
   would be allowed to do so [paragraphs 37 to 39]. She also noted that  the
   appellant had never been a charge upon the public  purse  [paragraph  36]
   and the period for which he required further leave to remain in order  to
   complete his research was only 17 months  [paragraph  37].  She  reminded
   herself that Article 8 is primarily concerned with the  protection  of  a
   person's moral and physical integrity and that  it  does  not  provide  a
   general dispensing power for promising students [paragraph 40]. She noted
   the distinction between students who have  completed  their  most  recent
   course and those whose course of study has not yet ended  [paragraphs  40
   and 41] and thereafter concluded that the circumstances of this case were
   sufficiently exceptional and compelling to merit leave to remain  outside
   the Immigration Rules [paragraph 42]. That may be a conclusion with which
   the Secretary of State disagrees, but it is not one that has  been  shown
   to be based upon immaterial considerations or to be otherwise irrational.
   On the contrary, it is a conclusion  that  was  reasonably  open  to  the
   Tribunal upon the particular facts of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

8. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not ordered



Signed        Date 18th December 2014

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

