

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/23865/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 15th April 2015                           |On: 20th April 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs Eshun Adwaba Nana
                          (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:            Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:       Mr Patrick, Pillai and Jones Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana date of birth 24th November 1980.
    On the 18th December 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  her  appeal
    against a decision to remove her pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999. The Secretary of State now has permission[1] to appeal
    against that decision.


 2. The Secretary of State's decision followed  rejection  of  Mrs  Eshun's
    application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship with a person present and settled here.  Her  application,
    made outside of the Rules, had initially been made on that  basis,  and
    was rejected in January 2013. There was no right of appeal against that
    refusal since no  relevant  immigration  decision  was  taken.  Further
    representations followed which prompted the decision to remove  in  May
    2014. When the appeal came before Judge Morgan in December  2014  there
    had therefore passed some seven months.

 3. When the appeal was heard Mrs Eshun was heavily pregnant. This was  not
    a factor that the Respondent  had  previously  had  an  opportunity  to
    consider. Since Mrs Eshun had not been pregnant at the date  of  either
    the reasoned refusal letter in January 2013  or  the  decision  in  May
    2014, neither had dealt with her "condition".

 4. Judge Morgan allowed the appeal in the following terms:  "in  light  of
    the fact that  there  has  been  no  up-to-date  consideration  by  the
    respondent of the appellant's current circumstances,  namely  the  fact
    that she is heavily pregnant, I find that the  decision  to  remove  is
    unlawful".  On that basis he allowed the appeal as "not  in  accordance
    with the law".



    Error of Law

 5. The Secretary of State complains that the decision of May  2014  cannot
    rationally be said to be flawed for failure to consider the fact of Mrs
    Eshun's pregnancy, since she was not at that time pregnant.   There  is
    merit in that submission. In  this  in-country  appeal  the  Judge  was
    obliged to take the new circumstances into account, for instance in his
    assessment of Article 8 ECHR,  but the fact that they were  until  that
    point unknown to the Secretary of State was not capable of  making  the
    removal decision unlawful. There is a legal error and the  decision  is
    therefore set aside.


 6. Before me the parties agreed that the most appropriate  disposal  would
    be for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    making on Article 8 grounds. Mrs Eshun's baby has now been  born.    It
    would be helpful if  both  parties  could  come  to  the  next  hearing
    prepared to deal with all the factual issues likely to arise before the
    First-tier Tribunal. To that end I make the following directions:

        i) Mrs Eshun's representative is to send all relevant  evidence  to
           the Secretary of State (I  note  that  Ms  Holmes  was  able  to
           inspect the original birth certificate at court) within 28  days
           of this decision being received;





       ii) The Secretary of State is to consider that material and  if  she
           considers it necessary to do so,  to  issue  a  further  refusal
           letter, or alternatively to grant  whatever  form  of  leave  to
           remain she consider appropriate;


      iii) Should there be any further change in Mrs Eshun's  circumstances
           following compliance with direction (i), evidence  of  the  same
           should be filed and served as soon as practicable.




      Decisions

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 8. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-making.


 9. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I see no reason, on
    the facts before me, to make one.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     15th
                                 April 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on the
6th February 2015

