
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23694/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2017                            |On 8 September 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Yasir
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appealed to a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision of 12 June 2015 refusing to grant him
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
2.   The appellant had come to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  but  while
    here had married his cousin Fatima Begum with  whom  his  marriage  had
    been arranged by his family.  His wife has a number of health problems,
    including being registered as partially blind and  has  been  deaf  and
    dumb  since  birth.   She  also   has   type   2   diabetes   mellitus,
    hypercholesterolemia and retinitis pigmentosa.  She was  born  in  1966
    and has been in the United Kingdom  for  fifteen  years  with  her  own
    family.  The appellant claims that there are  insurmountable  obstacles
    to him and his wife returning to live in Pakistan.  The application had
    been refused under the Immigration Rules and also in respect of Article
    8 outside the Rules.

3.    The  appellant  gave  evidence  to  the  effect  that  only  his  wife
    understood him as they used a  form  of  sign  language  that  only  he
    understood.  They had been undergoing infertility treatment for about a
    year and a half.  Before he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  his  wife's
    sister communicated with her.  She had  been  in  the  care  of  Social
    Services for a short time before he came to  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    thought that that had been for seven or eight months.

4.   The judge in her findings of fact  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    clearly deceived the Entry Clearance Officer as to his  intentions,  in
    that the marriage had been arranged for him and yet he had travelled as
    a visitor.  The judge did not understand  how  the  appellant's  wife's
    relationship with her sister, the person who had taken  over  her  care
    following her own parents' demise, had broken  down  given  his  wife's
    health conditions, including being deaf and dumb and partially sighted.
     The judge also noted the appellant's previous marriage in Pakistan and
    the fact that his first marriage was dissolved only eight  days  before
    he came to the United Kingdom.  He had letters of support from  cousins
    offering to provide him with financial support.

5.   The judge noted evidence from the appellant's wife's GP,  in  which  it
    was said that she had been under the care  of  the  adult  safeguarding
    team before the appellant took care of her.  It was clear however  that
    when she left the care of her local authority she was discharged at the
    request of  her  brother-in-law  and  not  the  appellant.   The  judge
    expressed surprise  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were  seeking
    infertility treatment bearing in mind  his  wife's  age  and  her  many
    health difficulties.  She was concerned that she had no  evidence  from
    the appellant's wife or from the appellant's wife's  sister.   She  was
    troubled by the appellant's wife's inability to express her wishes  and
    feelings  and  was  troubled  by  the  letters  concerning  infertility
    treatment.

6.   The judge went on to say however that despite recording these  concerns
    the respondent did not raise any issue as to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship and she therefore proceeded to determine the appeal on the
    basis that there was a genuine relationship between the  appellant  and
    Mrs Begum.  She found that the  requirements  of  the  Rules  were  not
    satisfied, noting that although the appellant clearly did not meet  the
    eligibility requirements under paragraphs  E-ILRP  as  he  was  in  the
    United Kingdom without valid leave, he might be able  to  benefit  from
    the exceptions in EX.1.  She concluded however that he  had  not  shown
    that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life with Mrs  Begum
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  Among other  things  she  noted
    that Mrs Begum had lived in Pakistan for the first 34 years of her life
    and was only naturalised as a British national last  year.   Ostensibly
    she had no other family member in the United Kingdom who could  provide
    her with support.  The appellant had lived in Pakistan all his life and
    his family members were in Pakistan and were also related to Mrs  Begum
    in that his parents were her aunt and uncle and  therefore  she  had  a
    supportive family in  Pakistan.   Her  diabetes  could  be  treated  in
    Pakistan although she might need to pay for that treatment, her husband
    would be able to work there and presumably would be able to support her
    financially.  There were family members in the United Kingdom who  were
    prepared to support him and they could assist if necessary.

7.   The judge noted that Mrs Begum would lose out on her  benefits  in  the
    United Kingdom and the availability of treatment on the NHS and  should
    not have to lose out on those benefits, but said that one would  assume
    that when the decision was made  that  the  couple  would  marry  these
    matters would have been considered.  The judge considered that  on  the
    other hand Mrs Begum would be with a family that  cared  for  her,  she
    would not  be  dependent  on  local  authority  care  and  all  medical
    treatment that she needed would be available for her in Pakistan.   She
    would be returning to a country in which she  shared  the  culture  and
    religion.

8.   The judge went on to consider that in the alternative the couple  might
    decide it would be better for the appellant to return to  Pakistan  and
    apply for entry clearance and Mrs Begum could be cared for by the local
    authority in his absence.

9.    The  judge  went  on  then  to  consider  the  position  outside   the
    Immigration   Rules,   taking   into   account   in   particular    the
    proportionality of the disruption to family and private life that would
    be involved.  She bore  in  mind  the  public  interest  including  the
    provisions of section 117B of the Nationality, Asylum  and  Immigration
    Act 2002.  She had particular regard to the impact of  the  appellant's
    removal on his wife.  If they decided to live in Pakistan  there  would
    be an impact on her, in that she would not have access to  the  NHS  or
    benefits but would have the continued devotion of the appellant and his
    extended family.  The appeal was dismissed.

10.  In his grounds the appellant argued  that  the  judge  had  taken  into
    account irrelevant matters, in particular the issue  of  the  fertility
    treatment and not accepting the sponsor would have fallen out with  her
    family when she was cared for by the  local  authority.   It  was  also
    argued  that  there  were  internal  inconsistencies  in  the   judge's
    findings, in that on the one hand accepting the couple were involved in
    a genuine relationship yet doubting the appellant's intentions.  It was
    also argued that the respondent's policy guidance had been  overlooked.
    That guidance referred to cases where either  party  had  a  mental  or
    physical disability which could be such that in some  circumstances  it
    could lead to very  serious  hardship,  for  example  due  to  lack  of
    healthcare that amounted to an insurmountable obstacle.   It  was  also
    argued that there had been a failure properly to conduct the  balancing
    exercise under Article 8 and a failure to attach appropriate weight  to
    relevant issues, in particular  that  there  was  a  material  contrast
    between the assistance the family might give to the sponsor in Pakistan
    and the specialist and professional help she  received  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was argued that the judge had not appreciated or  in  fact
    had seriously underestimated the extent of the sponsor's  disabilities.



11.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

12.  In her submissions Ms Peterson relied upon  and  developed  the  points
    made in the grounds.  She argued that matters set out in  the  skeleton
    before the judge had  not  been  reflected  in  the  determination,  in
    particular the detailed argument about Article 8 outside the Rules  and
    the medical evidence.  The sponsor had a  complex  package  of  medical
    issues and treatment and there  was  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    involvement with the treatment.  It was not an adequate  assessment  of
    undue harshness to say that the loss of UK benefits would be set off by
    the care provided in Pakistan.  The conclusions in respect of Article 8
    were brief.  There was a failure to assess the impact on  the  wife  of
    the loss of her complex medical support in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge had relied upon irrelevant matters in coming to her  conclusions.
    Nor had she addressed the policy guidance which had been brought to her
    attention.  The requirements of Article 3 in the claim, bearing in mind
    the impact on the sponsor argued against an adverse decision.

13.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued there were no  material  errors  of
    law in the judge's decision.  She had begun by setting  out  issues  of
    concern at  paragraphs  16  to  18  with  regard  for  example  to  the
    appellant's immigration history and deception.  It  was  reasonable  to
    raise the question of the dispute with the sister and  the  infertility
    treatment.  However in any event the judge had clearly taken  the  case
    at its highest in accepting that the relationship was  genuine.   There
    had only subsequently been an adverse consideration  of  the  deception
    and the appellant's immigration history.  Therefore  consideration  had
    been given to the ability of the appellant's wife to live in  Pakistan.
    It was taken that she was estranged from her sister and had  no  family
    in the United Kingdom who could support her.  The appellant  could  pay
    for treatment in Pakistan through work.  There would be no disadvantage
    if she went with the appellant as she could only communicate with  him.
    It was a question of choice.  There was no  challenge  to  the  finding
    that she could be treated in Pakistan.

14.  Mr Clarke agreed that the judge had erred at paragraph 23  towards  the
    end in concluding that the alternative of the  appellant  returning  to
    Pakistan and the sponsor being cared for by the local authority was not
    a finding open to her.  He argued though that the  alternative  finding
    concerning the couple returning to  Pakistan  together  was  sound  and
    contained no arguable error of law.  He referred to the  guidance  from
    the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11,  at  paragraph  43  with
    regard to what was meant by "insurmountable  obstacles"  and  the  fact
    that it was a stringent test, and also at paragraph 68 with  regard  to
    the fact that even though the sponsor was a British citizen she was not
    entitled to  insist  that  her  non-national  partner  should  also  be
    entitled to live in the United Kingdom when that partner might lawfully
    be refused leave to enter or remain.  There was no obligation  to  show
    that what could be provided in Pakistan was the same as in  the  United
    Kingdom.
15.  By way of reply Ms Peterson  argued  that  the  precariousness  of  the
    relationship was  not  a  knock  out  point.   The  matter  had  to  be
    considered in the round.  It was not just a question of like  for  like
    but other elements were in play in the dependency  which  reflected  on
    undue harshness, and the Tribunal was referred to what had been said in
    the skeleton argument about the ongoing medical treatment in the United
    Kingdom.  There was a good deal of evidence,  including  statements  of
    support from the local community.  It was a question of the  impact  on
    the sponsor.  The  judge  had  not  said  enough  about  conditions  in
    Pakistan.  The Article 8 assessment was inadequate.  The sponsor was  a
    very vulnerable British citizen.  All the authorities pointed to having
    all the circumstances weighed out and it was not enough simply to point
    to negative findings about the appellant's  immigration  history.   The
    evidence had not been properly considered.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.  With regard to ground 1, though it might have been wiser for the  judge
    not to comment on what essentially  were  concluded  to  be  irrelevant
    matters, i.e. the infertility issue and  the  issue  of  the  sponsor's
    relationship with her sister, I do not consider that those matters give
    rise to errors of law.  It is clear from paragraph 19 of  the  decision
    that after consideration of these  points  the  judge  noted  that  the
    respondent did not raise any  issues  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship and proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine.  There is no indication that the earlier musings in any  sense
    coloured the judge's remarks and there  was  no  further  reference  to
    those points but only in the public interest issue on the  taking  into
    account of the appellant's disregarding of the immigration laws in  the
    United Kingdom.

18.  As regards ground 2, again to an extent here there is a reference  back
    to earlier considerations by the judge.  What was said with  regard  to
    the appellant's intentions at paragraph 18 has to be seen in the  light
    of the conclusion at paragraph 19 that the relationship was genuine.  I
    do not read the judge as having  made  findings  that  the  appellant's
    intentions towards the sponsor were a matter  of  concern,  but  rather
    part of a background consideration of matters which in the end did  not
    get in the way of the judge's conclusion that the relationship  between
    the couple was genuine.

19.  With regard to paragraph 9 of the grounds, it is accepted by Mr  Clarke
    that the judge erred towards the end of paragraph 23, as  noted  above,
    with regard to  the  ability  of  the  couple  to  separate  while  the
    appellant returned to Pakistan to make an application.   I  agree  that
    the judge did not provide adequate reasons  for  that  element  of  her
    decision, but that is essentially an alternative to the conclusion that
    the couple could return to Pakistan together.

20.  The heart of the judge's  decision  therefore  in  this  regard  is  at
    paragraph 23.  I have summarised above the matters that were  noted  by
    the judge there, including such matters as the amount of time that  the
    sponsor had lived in Pakistan, the support she would get through family
    members in Pakistan and the medical care  that  she  could  be  treated
    with, with funding from her husband working in Pakistan  and  also  the
    fact that she would be returning to a country with  whose  culture  and
    religion she was familiar.   It  is  not  a  question  of  equivalence.
    Though it is of course the case that detailed submissions were made, in
    particular in the skeleton before the judge as to the breadth and depth
    of care that the sponsor receives and the  role  of  the  appellant  in
    that, I do not consider  the  judge  can  be  said  to  have  erred  at
    paragraph 23 in coming to the conclusions she did about  the  issue  of
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  for  the  couple  together
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The test is, as was pointed out
    in Agyarko, a high one.  Clearly equally it must not  be  one  that  is
    incapable of being surmounted, but I consider it was properly  open  to
    the judge at paragraph 23 to conclude that such obstacles had not  been
    made out.  This ties in with ground 3 and the point  about  the  policy
    guidance.  The example given there was a lack of healthcare in the case
    of somebody with a  mental  or  physical  disability  amounting  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle, but there was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding that the sponsor's diabetes could be treated  in  Pakistan  and
    that otherwise she would have the same kind of support even if not  the
    equivalent support in Pakistan as  she  has  currently  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

21.  With regard to grounds 4 and 5 which are concerned with Article 8,  the
    judge clearly took into account the impact  on  the  sponsor  of  being
    denied access to NHS benefits on returning to Pakistan.  The judge  was
    entitled however to balance against that the continued devotion of  the
    appellant and his extended  family,  as  well  as  the  other  positive
    factors considered at paragraph 23.  In the end I consider the  grounds
    in this regard and elsewhere are no more than a matter of disagreement.
     It may be that a judge could  have  come  to  a  different  conclusion
    either under the Rules or in respect of Article 8.  But  the  issue  is
    whether the judge in this case in her decision came to  the  conclusion
    that could be said to be perverse  or  irrational  or  in  another  way
    infected by public law error.  In my view the judge  did  not  so  err.
    She came to conclusions that were properly open to her on the  evidence
    and no error of law in her decision has been  identified.   It  follows
    that her decision dismissing this appeal is upheld.

22.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date 1 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

