
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/23602/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 04 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 IRFAN RAUF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.   This is a slightly unusual case.  The above appellant  (the  appellant)
    is a Pakistani national who was born on 18 April 1986. He first came to
    the UK as a Tier 4 student in 2011 but his leave was curtailed in 2013.
    He claims to have begun a relationship with Renata  Bialowas,  who  was
    born on 13 April 1987 and is a Polish national  (Ms  Bialowas).   On  3
    September 2014 the  respondent  (who,  although  an  appellant  in  the
    current  proceedings  will  continue  to  be  referred   to   as   "the
    respondent") decided to remove the appellant following the  curtailment
    of leave. The appellant sought a residence card on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with Ms Bialowas, claiming that he was an extended  family
    member within the  EEA  Regulations  2006  (2006  Regulations).   Those
    Regulations of course give extended family members  certain  rights  in
    relation to  reside  within  the  UK.   Following  the  request  for  a
    residence card, which  was  refused  on  9  June  2015,  the  appellant
    appealed against that refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kainth  (the
    immigration judge) sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  14  March  2016.   His
    decision was promulgated on 31 May  2016.   He  decided,  having  heard
    appeals both by the appellant's partner Ms Bialowas, who was the  first
    appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  proceedings,  and  the
    appellant  to  allow  their  appeals.  Those   appeals,   against   the
    respondent's decision, were simply allowed.  No anonymity direction was
    made.

3.   Shortly after that decision, Mr Ockelton,  a  Vice  President  of  this
    Tribunal, sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, heard an  appeal  at
    Field House on 7 June 2015 and 7 June 2016 which concerned very similar
    facts to this case.  The panel  decided  (in  Sala  (EFMs  -  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)) that an appellant  who  is  refused  a
    residence card as an extended  family  member  (commonly  known  as  an
    "EFM") under the 2006 Regulations did not have a right of appeal to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  under  Regulation  26   of   those   Regulations.
    Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations gives a person a right of  appeal
    in certain circumstances, for example, where the person claims to be in
    a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  as  is  the  case  here.
    Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations provides that where  the  Secretary
    of State is satisfied that the person concerned is an  extended  family
    member then he must issue a residence card to that person.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal (UT)

4.   At the hearing I was referred by Mr Saeed to Sala but he said that  the
    ratio decidendi of the case (that there is no statutory right of appeal
    against the respondent's decision not to issue a  residence  card)  did
    not apply in this case.  He said in any event it was  wrongly  decided.
    The Directive 2004/38/EC (the  Citizens  Directive),  which  guarantees
    free-movement rights throughout the EEA, and the 2006  Regulations  had
    to be determined in the light of  the  obligations  on  the  respondent
    under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).
    When those obligations were taken account of it lead to the  conclusion
    that the decision of the FTT had been in accordance with the law.

5.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller pointed out that there had  been  no  decision  to
    remove in this case and that, in any event, it had been made  clear  by
    the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) [2005] EWCA Civ 1233 that Article
    8  had  been  incorporated  effectively  into  the  2006   Regulations.
    Therefore, Article 8 did not arise as a separate ground  of  appeal  in
    these cases.  She relied on the case of Sala as having  been  correctly
    decided.  She said that extended family members  were  in  a  different
    category from family members.  As it happens in this case she had  not,
    or her principal had not, sought to appeal the decision in relation  to
    the family member, that is the first appellant-Ms Bialowas.  The  error
    that I had to deal with was the fact there was in fact that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear this appeal. Accordingly,  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller invited me to find  as  a  fact  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal. In the  circumstances,  I  should
    allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal  on  the  grounds  of  want  of
    jurisdiction.  Further, or alternatively, she said that in fact it  was
    wrong of the Immigration Judge to simply allow the appeal  because  the
    extent of the jurisdiction on an appeal was to make a recommendation to
    the Secretary of State that she grants a residence card.

6.   Permission to appeal was given by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andrew on 4 October 2016.  Judge Andrew referred to the  case  of  Sala
    which had not been referred to  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Pausing
    there, I should point out that the grounds of appeal were actually just
    a day or two before that decision would have been published.   The  two
    grounds were highlighted by Judge Andrew, the first that  the  decision
    by the Secretary of State was one to refuse a residence  card,  not  to
    remove, and in those circumstances it was wrong for the judge simply to
    allow the appeal. Secondly, there was the Sala point, which  seemed  to
    be a, so to speak,  "knockout  blow"  as  far  as  appeal  rights  were
    concerned.

Conclusions

7.   I have  carefully  considered  the  arguments  for  both  sides  and  I
    conclude that, as the case of Sala is a decision of a Vice President of
    this Tribunal, it at least persuasive before the UT.  I see  no  reason
    to depart from the conclusions of the  Vice  President  in  that  case.
    Sala appears to be properly reasoned  and  involved  similar  facts  to
    those in this case. Accordingly I find that there was in fact no  right
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal by this appellant.

8.   This does not necessarily mean that the appellant has no  right  to  be
    in the UK. I have been told that the decision of the FTT  to  allow  Ms
    Bialowas' appeal against the respondent's decision to remove  her  from
    the UK, has not been challenged by any further appeal.  Since  the  FTT
    appear to have accepted the appellant's relationship with Ms  Bialowas,
    the first appellant in the hearing before the FTT, it may well be  that
    whatever the appellant's appeal rights he has a right to remain in  the
    UK. This would need to be recognised by the grant of a residence  card.
    Ms Bialowas is  an  EEA  national  from  Poland,  who  is,  presumably,
    exercising Treaty rights  in  the  UK.  It  appears  no  longer  to  be
    challenged by the respondent that she resides with the appellant.

9.   In any event, I find that the Immigration Judge erred in  his  analysis
    of the Regulations by not correctly applying Regulation 17. The correct
    direction for him to make was to allow the appeal to the extent that  a
    direction was made for the Secretary of  State  to  issue  a  residence
    card.  Of course that only arises if the appeal was one  which  he  had
    jurisdiction to deal with. Unfortunately, it appears based on the  case
    of Sala by which I feel bound to follow, that as a matter  of  law  the
    FTT had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

Notice of Decision

10.  I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  this  case.  My
    decision in this case is that I allow the respondent's  appeal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  this  appellant
    on the grounds of want of jurisdiction.  In  any  event,  I  allow  the
    respondent's appeal on grounds that there was an error of  law  in  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the  respondent's
    appeal. I substitute the decision of the UT which  is  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  No anonymity direction was made by the FTT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed                                       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appellant's appeal and therefore there can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

