

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24234/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 15 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NAV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration & Asylum
                    Practitioners Limited

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. For convenience I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   3. The appellant is an Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity who was  born
      on 3 April 1993.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  28  March  2008
      and claimed asylum.  He was then 14 years of  age.   On  25  September
      2008,  the  appellant  was   granted   discretionary   leave   as   an
      unaccompanied minor valid until 3 October 2010.  The appellant did not
      appeal against that grant of leave on the  basis  that  he  should  be
      granted asylum.

   4. On 29 September 2010, the appellant again applied for further leave on
      asylum grounds maintaining his fear on return  to  Iran.   On  1  July
      2013, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  application  for
      asylum and for leave to remain on the basis  that  his  removal  would
      breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

The First-tier Tribunal

   5. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      appeal was heard on 11 November 2013 by Judge Burnett.

   6. At that hearing, the appellant no longer relied upon a claim  to  fear
      return to Iran on the basis put forward since  his  arrival  in  March
      2008 based upon his (and his family's) political activities  in  Iran.
      Instead, the appellant relied upon  an  entirely  different  basis  to
      claim that he was at risk on return to Iran.  He relied upon  what  Mr
      McGarvey (who represented the appellant before me)  described  as  his
      "social presentation".  The essence of this is  that  the  appellant's
      appearance and lifestyle would be considered "un-Islamic" in Iran  and
      he might be perceived to be gay although the appellant maintains  (and
      has always maintained) he is not gay.  Reliance was  placed  upon  the
      appellant's appearance including  his  hairstyle  and  that  he  is  a
      hairdresser/hair stylist (including  for  women)  and  part-time  male
      stripper.  The appellant claimed that he was a "metro-sexual" man  and
      that this would put him at risk on return to Iran.  He relied upon his
      'Facebook' page which  included  photographs  (reflecting  his  social
      presentation and lifestyle).  It was argued that there was a risk that
      this material would come to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities
      given their surveillance of the internet including Facebook  accounts.



   7. It was accepted before Judge Burnett that  the  appellant's  part-time
      work as a male stripper was contrary to Islamic values and  would  not
      be tolerated.  It was also accepted that the appellant had "chosen  an
      occupational pathway as  a  hairdresser".     Judge  Burnett  cited  a
      number of paragraphs from the Country of Information Report  for  Iran
      (September 2013) in relation to the Iranian authorities' attitudes and
      action in respect of the internet and Facebook (paras  16.22-  16.39).
      Having set out a number of passages from that  report,  Judge  Burnett
      concluded that it was:

           "clear that the internet is closely  monitored  by  the  Iranian
           state.  It is possible that the  appellant's  profile  has  been
           monitored.  It was accepted by [the Presenting Officer] that the
           appellant's behaviour in the United Kingdom was un-Islamic.  Un-
           Islamic behaviour could be seen as showing a view point or  that
           an individual is anti the Iranian authorities.  I consider  that
           such [as] an imputed opinion to an individual would  engage  the
           Refugee Convention." (at para 59).

   8. Then at paras 60-62, Judge Burnett set out his findings in relation to
      the appellant's "social presentation" and whether there was a risk his
      un-Islamic behaviour would come to the attention of the authorities as
      follows:

           "60.  I accept that the appellant has grown  and  developed  his
                 personality in the United Kingdom.  I accept  the  evidence
                 of the  witnesses  that  the  appellant  is  proud  of  his
                 appearance  and  greatly  enjoys  his  occupations.   I  do
                 consider  that  these  are  the   "personal   traits"   and
                 characteristics of the  appellant  that  he  has  developed
                 whilst growing up in the United Kingdom.

             61. I also consider  that  although  there  are  matters  which
                 affect the credibility of the appellant, his account of his
                 occupations in the United Kingdom was not  challenged.   It
                 was the respondent who provided the appellant's  "Facebook"
                 account and his list of friends.  It was the respondent who
                 produced the  appellant's  profile  on  "Facebook"  in  the
                 hearing not the appellant himself.

             62. It is likely in my judgment, from a  consideration  of  the
                 background evidence, that the appellant's participation  in
                 this site would have been monitored."

   9. At paragraph 63, Judge Burnett concluded that:

           "Given the attitudes of the Iranian authorities expressed in the
           COI report and set out above, I do conclude that  the  appellant
           would be at risk of being arrested and ill-treated due to his un-
           Islamic behaviour.  He could also face the possibility of  being
           imprisoned."

  10. At para 64, Judge Burnett considered that, applying the approach in HJ
      (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31, it would not be reasonable to expect the
      appellant to change his "personal traits and characteristics" in order
      to avoid persecution, Judge Burnett said this:

           "I also consider  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  the
           appellant to readjust to life as it is  now  in  Iran.   He  has
           personality traits and characteristics which would mean he would
           come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities.   These  have
           become integral to the appellant and part  of  who  he  is.   It
           would not be reasonable now to expect such a radical  change  in
           him.  Also he would be doing this in order to avoid  persecution
           which I  consider  is  contrary  to  the  leading  authority  HJ
           (Iran)."

  11. Consequently, Judge Burnett allowed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
      grounds and also under Article 3 of the ECHR.   He  also  allowed  the
      appeal under Article 8 on the basis that that result followed from his
      findings in relation to the asylum and Article 3 claims.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  12. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  a  number  of
      grounds including that the background evidence did not establish  that
      the Iranian authorities had monitored Facebook pages from those living
      in the UK; that he would be at risk in Iran as a metro-sexual man; and
      that it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant  to  change  his
      behaviour and profession if he were returned to Iran.

  13. On 17 December 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (UTJ Renton) granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  Judge
      may have speculated whether the Iranian authorities would learn of the
      appellant's activities in the UK through his Facebook page.

  14. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal was  initially  listed  on  25  March
      2014.   Following  a  hearing,  the  Upper   Tribunal   (McCloskey   J
      (President) and Arfon-Jones V-P)  concluded  that  Judge  Burnett  had
      erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons why  the  appellant's
      participation on his Facebook  site  from  the  UK  "would  have  been
      monitored" by the Iranian authorities.  The panel also concluded  that
      the Judge's decision to allow the appeal under Article  8  could  not,
      therefore, stand.  The panel's reasons are set  out  in  full  in  its
      decision dated 31 March 2014 which I do not repeat  here.   The  panel
      set aside Judge Burnett's decision and directed  that  the  appeal  be
      relisted for a resumed hearing in order to remake the decision.

  15. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Submissions

  16. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  McGarvey  in  his  detailed  skeleton
      argument and oral submissions sought  to  put  the  appellant's  claim
      under the Refugee Convention on three bases.

  17. First, he relied upon the appellant's "social presentation"  which  he
      submitted would create a risk to the appellant on return  to  Iran  of
      being perceived as un-Islamic, pro-western  and  immoral.   Linked  to
      that would be the perception (albeit wrongly) that the appellant was a
      gay man.  Mr McGarvey submitted that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the appellant  to  change  his  social  presentation  and  that
      amounted to persecution relying on HJ (Iran) especially at  [82].   Mr
      McGarvey also relied on the appellant's Facebook activity and the risk
      this would create of similar perceptions in Iran.

  18. Secondly, he relied upon the fact that in one of the  photographs  the
      appellant was displaying the Kurdish national flag which would further
      be perceived as an unacceptable  statement  of  political  opinion  in
      Iran.

  19. In support of the appellant's case both as to the  perception  of  his
      "social presentation" in Iran and also in relation to  the  monitoring
      of the internet, including Facebook  by  the  Iranian  authorities  Mr
      McGarvey relied upon an expert report by Dr Mohamed  Kakhki  dated  24
      June 2014.   Although  this  report  was  not  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, Mr Richards on behalf of the Secretary of  State  raised  no
      objection to its admission under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

  20. Mr McGarvey also drew my attention to an extract  from  the  US  State
      Department Report on Human Rights Practices for Iran 2012 (at  page  4
      of the appellant's objective  bundle)  referring  to  the  authorities
      stopping citizens arriving at  Tehran  International  Airport,  asking
      them to log into their You Tube and Facebook  accounts,  and  in  some
      cases  forcing   them   to   delete   information   officials   deemed
      controversial or threatening.

  21. Thirdly, based upon pages 46-47 of Dr  Kakhki's  report,  Mr  McGarvey
      submitted that the appellant was at risk on return of being treated as
      a draft evader and being conscripted into the Iranian  military  which
      in itself, and in relation to how he would be treated in the military,
      amounted to persecutory treatment.

  22. Mr McGarvey relied upon Article 8 of the ECHR.  He accepted  that  the
      appellant could not meet the requirements of any  of  the  Immigration
      Rules but submitted that the  appellant's  case  was  exceptional  and
      should be considered  outside  those  Rules.   I  will  return  to  Mr
      McGarvey's submissions in relation to Article 8 below.

The Respondent's Submissions

  23. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards made a number  of  brief  and
      succinct submissions.

  24. First, as regards the appellant's  claim  based  upon  being  a  draft
      evader or subject  to  conscription,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  a
      significant amount of Dr Kakhki's report was concerned with  desertion
      which was not the appellant's situation.  Mr Richards  submitted  that
      the most that could be said was that the appellant, by being in the UK
      would be seen as a draft evader on return with a possible  prosecution
      for an offence of imprisonment for 6 months to 2 years.   Mr  Richards
      submitted that  this  could  not  be  described  as  persecution.   Mr
      Richards reminded me that the appellant did not claim that  he  was  a
      conscientious objector and there was no evidence to  persuade  me,  he
      submitted, that  his  failure  to  perform  military  service  so  far
      amounted to persecution or was contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

  25. Secondly, in relation to the principal aspect of the appellant's case,
      Mr Richards noted that the appellant was not pursuing the case on  the
      basis that he was gay.  Mr Richards accepted that the claim was  about
      perception by others. In that regard, he referred me to a letter dated
      17 January 2011 written by the appellant's (then) social worker  which
      identified the "verbal abuse and taunts" the appellant had experienced
      in the Bridgend area where he lived  in  relation  to  his  appearance
      "including taunts of 'pretty boy' and 'gay  boy'".   Recognising  this
      evidence, Mr Richards invited me (rhetorically) to consider what would
      be the reaction in Iran given the background evidence  concerning  the
      social and moral environment in Iran.

  26. Mr Richards invited me to apply the approach set out  by  the  Supreme
      Court in HJ (Iran) and to consider  whether  the  appellant's  "social
      presentation" was an aspect of the appellant's life which it would not
      be reasonable to expect him to give up in Iran.  Mr Richards indicated
      that he did not  wish  to  make  any  positive  submissions  that  the
      appellant's "social presentation" did not  come  from  his  underlying
      personality.   Mr Richards accepted that if the appellant was at  risk
      on this basis then it was for a Convention reason.

  27. Mr Richards invited me, however, not to accept Dr Kakhki's  view  that
      the appellant's Facebook site  was  likely  to  be  monitored  by  the
      Iranian authorities.

The Evidence

  28. A considerable body of evidence was  presented  in  this  appeal:   an
      appellant's  subjective   bundle;   an   objective   bundle;   and   a
      supplementary bundle.  The latter contains the  expert  report  by  Dr
      Kakhki's dated 24 June 2014.

  29. There are three witness statements from the appellant dated 21 October
      2013 (at pages 4-9 of the subjective bundle); 18 April 2014 (at  pages
      1-3 of the subjective bundle) and 30 June 2014 (at pages 48-49 of  the
      supplementary bundle).  In addition, there are a number of  supporting
      letters including a number from  the  appellant's  foster  mother  (at
      pages 23 and 24-26 of the subjective  bundle);  from  the  appellant's
      foster uncle (at pages 35 and 36-38 of the  subjective  bundle);  from
      the  appellant's  foster  sister  (at  pages  51A  and  51-53  of  the
      subjective bundle) and a friend of the appellant,  a  housemate,  "CG"
      (at pages 44-45 of the subjective bundle).

  30. In addition I heard brief oral evidence from the appellant, his foster
      uncle, his foster sister and CG.

  31. None of that evidence or the other evidence concerning the appellant's
      life in the UK since he arrived in 2008 was challenged by Mr Richards.



  32. In addition, the appellant submitted an objective bundle  although  Mr
      McGarvey referred me to a short extract from the US  State  Department
      Report on Human Rights Practices for Iran 2012  to  which  I  referred
      above.   He placed greater reliance upon Dr Kakhki's report.

The Law

  33. In relation to the appellant's asylum claim, the burden  of  proof  is
      upon the  appellant  to  establish  that  there  is  a  real  risk  or
      reasonable likelihood that if returned to Iran he would be subject  to
      persecution for a Convention reason, namely (so  far  as  relevant  in
      this appeal) as a member of a particular social group  or  because  of
      imputed political opinion.

  34. In relation to Article 3 of the ECHR, the burden is upon the appellant
      to establish that there are substantial grounds for believing that  if
      returned to Iran there is a real risk that  he  would  be  subject  to
      torture, inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the
      ECHR.

Discussion and Findings

      The "Social Presentation" Claim

  35. The primary facts are not in dispute.  The appellant came to the UK in
      March 2008 and claimed asylum.  At that time he was 14 years  of  age.
      His claim for asylum was not accepted by the Secretary  of  State  and
      the basis for that claim relying on his family's involvement with  the
      Pro-Kurdish Komala Party was not pursued  in  his  appeal.   In  those
      circumstances, like Judge Burnett in the First-tier Tribunal  at  para
      53, it cannot be accepted that the appellant's original  asylum  claim
      was  true.   I  do  not,  however,  consider  that  that  affects  any
      assessment of the veracity of the appellant's claim now based upon his
      "social presentation".

  36. First, the evidence in respect of that (new) aspect of his  claim  for
      asylum was not challenged at the hearing.  Secondly, in any event, the
      overwhelming evidence supports a positive finding in relation  to  the
      appellant on all those  aspects  of  his  claim,  namely  his  "social
      presentation".  I have the evidence of the appellant himself, evidence
      from his foster family and also from his friend, CG.  I have no reason
      to doubt what they say about the  appellant  or  what  he  says  about
      himself.  There is copious evidence in the  form  of  photographs  and
      extracts from his Facebook page which  substantiate  his  claim  based
      upon his "social presentation".  The appellant is clearly a young  man
      who takes considerable care  of  his  physical  appearance.   He  both
      dresses and adopts a hairstyle consistent with a westernised  approach
      to his appearance.  He is a hairdresser who works in  a  salon  (which
      includes female clients) and a part-time male stripper.  No doubt  the
      obvious care that the photographs show in relation to  his  appearance
      and physical stature reflect  a  "metrosexual"  outlook.   His  foster
      sister told me in her oral evidence that he, for example,  shaped  his
      eyebrows which  was,  in  any  event  apparent  from  the  appellant's
      appearance in the hearing.  The appellant's  Facebook  page  including
      the photographs reflects his social presentation  as  a  "metrosexual"
      man.

  37. What then is the risk, if any, to the appellant on the  basis  of  his
      "social presentation" in Iran?

  38. In his report, Dr Kakhki deals with the Iranian  state's  attitude  to
      lifestyle issues and morality at some length at pages 2-25.

  39. At page 2 Dr Kakhki notes that the appellant has:

           "since his arrival in the  UK...adopted  westernised  behaviours
           and characteristics that are completely different and contradict
           the Islamic values and lifestyle in Iran."

  40. Dr Kakhki notes also that:

           "freedom of expression only exists  in  so  far  as  it  is  not
           harmful to the government/country/society".

  41. Dr Kakhki continues:

           "Considering the ever-restrictive  approach  and  what  actually
           constitutes a breach of freedom of expression, as evinced by the
           general  crackdown  on  alternative   cultural   activities/non-
           conformative lifestyles including persecution of members of  the
           public for their hairstyle, clothes etc.  [The appellant]  would
           be subject to similar oppressive treatment of  policies  by  the
           Iranian authorities  if  he  returned.   His  chosen  lifestyle,
           including his effeminate behaviour  and  activities  as  a  male
           stripper,   would    place    him    at    serious    risk    of
           persecution/prosecution in a society  like  Iran's  whereby  the
           segregation of sexes  is  paramount.   Such  behaviour  will  be
           considered to be  a  severe  violation  of  the  boundaries  for
           freedom of expression under Iranian law, and would attract legal
           liabilities for the crimes against public morality and  decency.
           The relevant laws  control  any  form  of  expression  including
           hairstyle/ clothing, online blogs, social media  etc.   Anything
           that is deemed to be against the  morality  of  society  or  the
           regime's Islamic policies may result in the prosecution  of  the
           perpetrator(s)."

  42. Dr Kakhki continues at page 3:

           "With  regards  to  morality  offences,   including   hairstyle,
           tattoos, non-conformity in dress etc, it should  be  highlighted
           that Iran frequently implements crackdowns on morality standards
           to force the populace to conform to the  Islamic  standards,  in
           terms of socially acceptable behaviour  and  presentation.   Any
           individual  detected  with  blatantly  non-Islamic   appearance,
           displaying  western  cultural  influence  in  this   manner   or
           appearance or showing their  dissatisfaction  with  the  Islamic
           Regime, would be subjected to arrest and/or  harassment  by  the
           security forces."

  43. Dr Kakhki then quotes from a Sky  News  item  on  its  website  headed
      "Satanic Fashion Thugs Arrested" as follows:

           "At least 49 people have been arrested  during  a  crackdown  on
           "satanic" clothing in Iran.  Police said five barber shops  were
           also shut and 20 warned for "promoting Western hairstyles".

           The measures are the latest in a country-wide  campaign  against
           cultural influences from the West in the Islamic Republic, where
           strict dress codes are enforced.  In the past,  such  crackdowns
           have lasted a few weeks or months, but the current campaign  was
           launched in 2007 and is still continuing.

           It  includes  measures  against  men  sporting  spiky  "western"
           hairstyles or women wearing tight trousers and high boots.   The
           latest arrests took place in the northern city of Qaemshahr.

           "Police confronted rascals and  thugs  who  appeared  in  public
           wearing  satanic  fashion  and  unsuitable   clothing."   police
           commander Mahmoud Rahmani said.

           Women are supposed to wear clothing that covers their  hair  and
           disguises the shape of their bodies.

           But some, particularly in cities, wear headscarves  pushed  back
           well beyond their hairlines  and  sport  tight-fitting  outfits.
           The authorities fear such open acts of defiance  against  Iran's
           values could escalate if they go unchecked,  according  to  some
           analysts.

           "Some individuals, not knowing what culture they are  imitating,
           put on clothing  that  was  designed  by  the  enemies  of  this
           country," Mr Rahmani said.  "the enemies  of  this  country  are
           trying to divert our youth and breed them the  way they want and
           deprive them of a healthy life," he added...

           Previously Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah  Ali  Khamenei,  has
           suggested Iran's enemies may try to stage a "soft"  or  "velvet"
           revolution by infiltrating corrupt culture or ideas."

  44.  In  relation  to  the  Iranian  government's  perception  of  western
      influence, dress and presentation, Dr Kakhki continues at pages 4-6 as
      follows:

              "As  can  be  seen  from  the  above  account,  one  of   the
              government's perceptions of those wearing  Western-influenced
              dress, hairstyles and tattoos is sourced in the  belief  that
              they are  "designed  by  the  enemies  of  this  country"  to
              undermine  the   Islamic   regime.    This   highlights   the
              authorities' rationale and policy  in  detection  and  taking
              corresponding action, often persecutory in nature,  including
              acts of cutting the offending hair  in  public,  calling  the
              subjects derogatory names, physically  assaulting  them  etc.
              Such practices can be further seen in the below account:

              Iran's Fashion Crackdown Moves Beyond Headscarves

              It's an Iranian rite  of  summer:   Islamic  morality  squads
              pressure women to keep their headscarves snug  and  coverings
              in place, and after a few extra tugs for modesty's  sake  the
              crackdown inevitably fades.

              This year, however, Iran's summer fashion  offensive  appears
              bigger and more ominous, and has expanded the watch  list  to
              men's hairstyles and jewellery considered too Western....

              Nearly  two-thirds  of  Iran's  parliament  have   signed   a
              statement  supporting  the  latest  fight  against   "Western
              cultural invasion."   It's  blamed  for  such  challenges  to
              Islamic dress codes as women's headscarves  pushed  back  and
              pants cropped short to show as much leg as possible.

              Some 70,000 police officers have been deployed in Tehran this
              month to enforce the dress codes, the state news agency  IRNA
              said.

              "Confronting those who  are  not  sufficiently  veiled  is  a
              legitimate demand of the people" said  Iran's  police  chief,
              Gen. Esmaeil Ahmadi Moghadam,  who  was  added  to  the  U.S.
              sanctions list earlier this month for his alleged role in the
              political clampdowns after Ahmadinejad's disputed re-election
              in 2009.

              ...Last year, a  fashion  watchdog  group  gave  the  Culture
              Ministry a  guide  to  acceptable  men's  haircuts.   On  the
              blacklist:  ponytails, a spiked style known  locally  as  the
              "rooster," and the retro "mullet" do, with its cropped  front
              and cascading back.

           The above account further indicates that the Iranian authorities
           target non-conformist individuals in  their  efforts  to  combat
           Western influences.  Many individuals  have  been  subjected  to
           persecutory treatment, as is also shown in the below account:

              Photos  and  news  published  in   Iranian   media   describe
              continuous  crackdowns  in   Iran.    To   "increase   public
              security", the regime's  Security  Forces  have  now  started
              clamping down on "thugs" in Tehran.  The drive is a follow-up
              to the commonplace plan  that  traditionally  starts  in  the
              springtime  with  nationwide  morality  crackdowns  on  women
              labelled "bad hijab" (badly veiled).

              Authorities in Iran speak of a steadily increasing number  of
              arrests and  claim  that  "Our  decisive  confrontation  will
              continue in Tehran down to the very last thug," said the head
              of the capital's metropolitan police force, Ahmad Reza Radan,
              according to the semi-official Fars news agency.

              According to different sources, pictures taken  by  the  Fars
              news agency and reproduced by several moderate dailies showed
              a man barefoot and stripped to the waist,  with  two  plastic
              watering cans around his neck,  being  grabbed  by  a  police
              officer,  while  other  images  showed  black  balaclava-clad
              police officers beating their captives.  A number of captives
              were forced to ride a donkey as a "warning to others".

              Some scenes of  humiliation  were  so  repulsive  that  IRI's
              police chief had to admit that some officers had  overstepped
              the mark, but he emphasised that  the  parading  of  suspects
              around  neighbourhoods  had  been  carried  out  with   prior
              approval.

              Since  the  beginning  of  the  morality  crackdowns,  it  is
              believed that  thousands  of  people  have  been  arbitrarily
              arrested mostly on a range  of  "phoney  charges"  from  non-
              conformity to the Islamic  standard  dress  to  alleged  drug
              trafficking.  Many thousands of women and young men have been
              waned or forced to make a written pledge to  respect  Islamic
              standard dress.  Furthermore, a  number  of  the   "culprits"
              have been turned over to the  judicial  authorities  for  the
              alleged offence of improper dressing.

              ...Following the sporadic reactions of victims  in  Iran  and
              international pressure, a number of Islamic factions  of  the
              regime, in  order  to  play  down  the  IRI's  constitutional
              violence,  especially  against  women,  simply  accused   the
              government of undermining  the  IRI's  laws  by  beating  and
              parading the suspects.  The parade in  the  neighbourhood  is
              however permitted with prosecutors' approval. These suspects,
              not yet accused, are punished because the  punishment  indeed
              serves as a warning and intimidation to other people.

              Most people in Iran believe that such accusations are  mainly
              being used as justification for the arrest and repression  of
              political activists  and  those  perceived  to  be  potential
              threats to the security of the IRI."

  45. Dr Kakhki concludes (at page 6) in relation to the appellant that:

           "The above extract clearly highlights the persecutory manner  in
           which the  morality  police  enforce  the  government's  Islamic
           standards, ranging  from  public  humiliation  to  physical  and
           arbitrary assault.  In light of the  above  information,  in  my
           view, [the appellant] would not have any  chance  of  continuing
           his current lifestyle in Iran without  the  risk  of  attracting
           persecutory treatment from the authorities and the ensuing legal
           liability.  As shown, even non-conformist  hairstyle  and  dress
           attracts negative attention; considering the addition that  [the
           appellant] is an 'effeminate metrosexual' and a  male  stripper,
           his behaviours and mannerisms would single him out  for  adverse
           attention even if his appearance was within Islamic boundaries."

  46. Dr Kakhki then deals with a number of  further  items  relating  to  a
      crackdown in dress code observing as follows (at page 7):

           "....it is apparent that [the appellant] has chosen a very  open
           and liberal lifestyle.  If an individual  is  arrested  for  any
           morality  offences,  the  wearing  of  westernised  symbols  and
           fashions such as male jewellery, make-up, etc would normally  be
           utilised  as  contributory  and  incriminating  factors  of  the
           authorities when establishing his criminality."

  47. Dr Kakhki then concludes at page 9 of his report:

           "...Iran has been involved in a cultural 'war'  against  Western
           influences, evinced by their consistent  efforts  in  disrupting
           any source of outlet that may be used to promote Western values.
            In such an environment, it is  likely  that  [the  appellant's]
           social  activities,   in   addition   to   his   lifestyle   and
           characteristics developed whilst residing in the UK, would place
           him at risk of persecution/prosecution if returned.   Therefore,
           I concur with the  findings  of  Immigration  Judge  Burnett  at
           paragraphs 63-64 of the Determination, in that  [the  appellant]
           would be at risk of arrest, ill-treatment and even  imprisonment
           on the basis of his un-Islamic behaviour if returned to Iran."

  48. In relation to the Iranian authorities' attitudes to  the  appellant's
      lifestyle and social presentation in the UK and via his Facebook page,
      Dr Kakhki  deals  with  this  at  pages  9-25.   having  set  out  the
      provisions of the Islamic Penal Code, Dr Kakhki concludes (at page 10)
      that the appellant's:

           "...actions would therefore have to impact on the Islamic values
           of the Republic or otherwise have an impact on the moral  fabric
           of Iranian society, thereby being regarded against  the  Islamic
           Republic of Iran's policy.  In making  this  determination,  the
           authorities would look both at the nature of  the  act  and  the
           motivation behind it.  As regards to the act itself, constituted
           by publicising half naked photographs, posing with  the  Kurdish
           flag, would all,  in  my  opinion,  be  regarded  as  propaganda
           against  the  regime.   These  factors  would  be   taken   into
           consideration  when  making  a  determination  of  whether  [the
           appellant] has acted against the Islamic Republic of Iran."

  49. Dr Kakhki continues (at page 10) in relation to the activities of  the
      Iranian intelligence and security forces in monitoring  the  behaviour
      of Iranian citizens as follows:

           "With regard to the ability of Iranian intelligence and security
           forces to detect illegal  behaviour  abroad,  I  would  like  to
           highlight that to comply with its duties to  prevent  damage  to
           national  security  from  abroad,  the   Iranian   Ministry   of
           Intelligence will closely monitor all behaviour and activity  of
           Iranian citizens outside Iran.  Any action that is deemed to  be
           against  the  Islamic  regime,  its  security  or  independence,
           reported  through  various  means,   including   the   country's
           embassies, would be filed and investigated.  Please bear in mind
           that the Islamic regime of Iran claims to be a model  for  other
           Islamic States and has tried to  export  their  model  to  other
           Islamic countries since 1979.  For this reason  the  authorities
           are very  sensitive  to  any  external  negative  propaganda  or
           criticism of the regime especially if the issue  challenges  the
           Islamic values or makes direct condemnation of the behaviour and
           attitude of the regime.

           Of  relevance  to  [the  appellant's]  case  and  his   Facebook
           activities, it is evident  that  the  Iranian  authorities  have
           consistently displayed the ability to detect  and  arrest  those
           whom they perceive as a threat to Islamic society by  virtue  of
           the posts they share via social media."

  50. Dr Kakhki sets out (at page 11-12) from  the  Mirror  newspaper's  web
      page a case of a British woman who faces  20  years'  imprisonment  in
      jail for comments made on her Facebook page critical  of  the  Iranian
      state's leadership and Islam.  That matter is also set out  in  a  web
      page extract  in  the  Telegraph  newspaper  at  pages  48-49  of  the
      appellant's objective bundle.  Dr Kakhki is correct, in my view,  that
      the individual concerned, though arrested having  travelled  to  Iran,
      made the comments on her Facebook page whilst in the UK.

  51. Dr Kakhki then  sets  out  a  number  of  other  incidents  concerning
      monitoring by the Iranian authorities of internet  activity  perceived
      as insulting to Islam including internet  activity  from  abroad  (see
      especially pages 14-15) and then at page 15 concludes:

           "In my view the appellant's Facebook page is a clear example  of
           an attempt to challenge the Islamic values  promoted  throughout
           Iranian society by the regime, particularly when he made a  very
           public gesture of sharing his photographs posed with the Kurdish
           nationalism flag, which  could  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  of
           support  for  Kurdish  independence.   This  interpretation   is
           particularly  likely  in  view  of  [the  appellant's]   Kurdish
           ethnicity and background which would increase the probability of
           the act being translated as one beyond a normal Facebook post."

  52. Dr Kakhki then goes on to describe and discuss  Iran's  "sophisticated
      monitoring system to gather intelligence".   That  is,  of  course,  a
      matter dealt with in the Country of Information Report  for  Iran  for
      2013 at paras 16.22-16.39 and in particular in the passages  cited  by
      Judge Burnett at para 47 of his determination referring to paras 16.26-
      16.27 and 16.31-16.32 of that  report.   Dr  Kakhki,  based  upon  his
      assessment of the material, comments (at page 17) that:

           "...Iran utilises sophisticated technology to  track  and  trace
           internet activity, allowing  them  to  identify  what  is  being
           accessed and determine whether such access has resulted in  what
           it can term as anti-state activity.  This is not  restricted  to
           domestic users - as the account below shows Iran has implemented
           a global policy on monitoring the internet activity of  Iranians
           abroad  with  a  view  to  limiting   the   support   of   anti-
           government/Islamic groups, which have found great fervour in the
           international Iranian community."

  53. In his most recent statement dated 30 June 2014, the appellant  states
      - and this evidence was not challenged - that a Google search with his
      name produces his Facebook account as the first result.

  54. In my judgement, based upon Dr Kakhki's  report  (including  the  news
      item of a UK based individual being of interest to the authorities  on
      travelling to Iran), the appellant has established  that  there  is  a
      real risk that  his  Facebook  page  maybe  accessed  by  the  Iranian
      authorities even though it arises from his time in the UK and on  that
      page is displayed  material  which  may  be  perceived  as  un-Islamic
      because of the appellant's westernised appearance and  behaviour  that
      it  discloses.   In  addition,  one  photograph  shows  the  appellant
      displaying the Kurdistan flag which, although not the main part of the
      appellant's claim, adds to the risk that he will be of interest to the
      Iranian authorities as someone who is perceived as un-Islamic  in  his
      behaviour.

  55. I find, therefore, that there is a real risk  that  if  the  appellant
      returns to Iran his behaviour in the UK will be known to  the  Iranian
      authorities and he will be perceived as behaving in an un-Islamic way.
       I accept Dr Kakhki's view, which was not challenged, that this  would
      put him at risk of persecution and serious ill-treatment as  he  would
      be  liable  to  arrest,  detention  and  prosecution  for   un-Islamic
      behaviour.

  56.  In  any  event,  I  am  satisfied  that   the   appellant's   "social
      presentation" creates a real risk that he would be  perceived  as  un-
      Islamic and he may be perceived (albeit wrongly) to be gay in Iran.

  57. In HJ(Iran), Lord Rodger (at [82])set out the correct approach in  the
      case of an individual who claimed to be at risk because he was gay:
           "When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal must
           first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he
           is gay, or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by  potential
           persecutors in his country of nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
           on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would
           be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's   country   of
           nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
           applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
           If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
           exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by
           living "discreetly".
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
           would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it  must
           go on to ask itself why he would do so.
           If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
           live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
           wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g,  not  wanting
           to distress his parents  or  embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
           application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do
           not amount to persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer
           protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded  fear
           of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with
           any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt  a  way  of
           life which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
           because he is gay.
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
           reason for the applicant living discreetly on his  return  would
           be a fear of the persecution which would follow if  he  were  to
           live openly as a gay man, then, other things  being  equal,  his
           application should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded
           fear of persecution. To reject his  application  on  the  ground
           that he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would
           be to defeat the very  right  which  the  Convention  exists  to
           protect - his right to live freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man
           without fear of persecution. By  admitting  him  to  asylum  and
           allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear
           of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to  that  right
           by affording the applicant a surrogate for the  protection  from
           persecution  which  his  country  of  nationality  should   have
           afforded him."

  58. Substituting "social presentation" for  "gay",  that  is  the  correct
      approach in this appeal.

  59. First, I accept the evidence of the appellant's "social presentation".
       I have already referred to the evidence, which  I  accept,  from  the
      appellant's  (then)  social  worker  that  the   appellant's   "social
      presentation" has led to that perception in the UK  and  it  would  be
      even more likely, in my judgement, that he would be  so  perceived  in
      Iran.  All the witnesses, including the appellant himself in his  oral
      evidence before me, spoke to the genuineness of the appellant's social
      presentation.  The appellant accepted that he would not be able to  be
      a hairdresser (at least for women in Iran) nor would he be able to  be
      a male stripper.  He told me that he had grown up in this country  and
      his personality and dress (which would not be  allowed  in  Iran)  was
      something that he could not give up.  He told me that it was "just the
      way I am" and that he would "not fit in Iran".  The appellant's foster
      sister told me that the appellant had a "very flamboyant  personality"
      and that he was a "natural born hairdresser".  She  told  me  that  he
      "loves going to the gym" and that "everything about his lifestyle"  is
      him.  She told me that she did not know what he would do if  he  could
      not be a hairdresser as that was his  career.   She  told  me  in  her
      evidence that by "flamboyant" she meant that he likes  looking  "good"
      and loves going to the gym and has an outgoing personality, liking  to
      look his best.  She also confirmed that he liked nice clothes.  He did
      not, to her knowledge wear make-up but he did shape his eyebrows.

  60. Secondly, I am satisfied (and it was not argued to the contrary)  that
      if  the  appellant  continued  to  give  expression  to  his   "social
      presentation" as in the UK  he  would  be  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
      treatment or persecution in Iran because he will be perceived  as  un-
      Islamic and subject to arrest, detention and prosecution.

  61. Thirdly, whilst I accept that the appellant has no right to  carry  on
      his employment as a hairdresser (at least for women) or male stripper,
      neither of which he could do in Iran, I am satisfied that his  "social
      presentation" derives not from a fad or the  following  of  a  current
      fashion trend but derives from how the appellant perceives himself  as
      a person.  The latter may give rise to a claim for asylum  whilst  the
      former will not. The appellant's "social presentation" is as  much  an
      aspect of his personality  and  inner-self  as  would  be  his  sexual
      orientation such that, following HJ (Iran), it would not be reasonable
      to expect the appellant to suppress that  aspect  of  his  personality
      and, if he did, on return to Iran that would only be because he  would
      fear  the  consequences.   Mr  Richards  did  not  make  any  positive
      submissions to the contrary.

  62. For those reasons, applying the approach  set  out  in  [82]  of  Lord
      Roger's judgement in HJ (Iran), I am satisfied that,  in  addition  to
      the risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment that he  faces  as  a
      result of his perceived  un-Islamic  behaviour  through  his  Facebook
      page, the appellant would also be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      serious ill treatment because of  his  "social  presentation"  and  he
      cannot reasonably be expected to change and suppress  that  expression
      of his inner personality on return to Iran.  If he did so  that  would
      only be out of a fear of persecution at the  hands  of,  or  with  the
      condonement of, the Iranian state.

  63. That fear of persecution is by reason of a Convention  reason,  namely
      his imputed political opinion or because, as Mr Richards acknowledged,
      a westernised individual perceived  as  un-Islamic  forms  part  of  a
      particular social group in Iran.

  64. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant  has  established
      that there is a real risk that he will be subject to persecution for a
      Convention reason or serious ill-treatment contrary to  Article  3  of
      the ECHR if he returns to Iran.

  65. Consequently, for these reasons the appellant's appeal is  allowed  on
      asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

      The Military Service Claim

  66. In  the  light  of  those  findings,  I  can  deal  briefly  with  the
      alternative basis upon which Mr McGarvey put  the  appellant's  asylum
      claim.  That was on the basis that he  had  avoided  military  service
      since the age of 18 as he had been in  the  UK.   This  has  not  been
      previously relied upon by the appellant and arises wholly  out  of  Dr
      Kakhki's report of 24 June 2014.

  67. This is dealt with at pages  45-47  of  Dr  Kakhki's  report.   As  Mr
      Richards observed, a significant part of Dr Kakhki's  report  on  this
      aspect of the appellant's claim relates  to  "deserters".   I  see  no
      basis upon which the appellant could (or would) be  perceived  by  the
      Iranian authorities as a deserter given that on  return  it  would  be
      palpably clear that he had been in the UK since he  was  14  years  of
      age.  I also agree with Mr Richards that even if  the  appellant  were
      considered to be a draft evader,  notwithstanding  that  he  had  been
      outside Iran since the age of 14, the penalty, if he  were  prosecuted
      and convicted, consists of an extra 2 to 6 months service.  The  usual
      period of conscription being reduced in 2008, in general, from 2 years
      to 20 months.  I do not  accept  that,  even  if  the  appellant  were
      required to do this  extra  service,  that  it  can  be  described  as
      persecution in the sense of  entailing  serious  harm  to  him  or  be
      sufficiently serious to constitute a severe  violation  of  his  basic
      human rights (see Article 9  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC).   Dr
      Kakhki  refers  to  the  possibility  that  military   officials   may
      "integrate  persecutory  treatment  when  allocating  tasks"  to   the
      appellant such as "forced labour  and  serving  in  deprived,  hostile
      areas, particular due to his Kurdish ethnicity".  Dr Kakhki  cited  no
      background evidence to support that possibility and, in any event,  it
      is in my judgement wholly speculative both as to whether the appellant
      would be subjected to any "additional" burden and that  those  burdens
      could rise to the required level of impact  upon  him  to  qualify  as
      "persecution" or "serious  harm"  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
      Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.

  68. Therefore, I would reject this basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
      asylum and under Article 3 on the basis that he has not established  a
      real risk of persecutory treatment  or  serious  harm  falling  within
      Article 3 of the ECHR based upon him being a potential draft evader.

Article 8

  69. In relation to  Article  8,  it  follows  from  my  finding  that  the
      appellant faces a real risk of persecution or serious harm  on  return
      to Iran that his claim also succeeds  under  Article  8.   His  return
      would amount to a sufficiently serious interference with  his  private
      life  to  engage  Article  8.1  and  it  could  not  be  said  to   be
      proportionate to expose the appellant to that risk of  persecution  or
      serious harm  in  furtherance  of  the  legitimate  aim  of  effective
      immigration control.

  70. Nevertheless, I will consider the appellant's claim  under  Article  8
      based upon the effect upon his private and family life in the  UK  and
      the consequences to him in Iran if he  is  returned  to  Iran  in  the
      absence of that real risk but taking into account the  constraints  he
      will face in relation to his lifestyle and  "social  presentation"  in
      Iran.

  71. Mr McGarvey accepted that the appellant could not meet the Immigration
      Rules.  However he submitted that the appellant's  circumstances  were
      exceptional or compelling such that  he  should  succeed  outside  the
      Rules.  He relied upon the fact that the appellant had lived in the UK
      since 2008 and that the 7 years of his life (he is now only 21) was  a
      long time.  He had a foster family in the UK with whom  he  had  lived
      when he came to the UK and he had developed  close  friendships  here.
      Mr  McGarvey  relied  upon  the  copious  evidence  dealing  with  the
      appellant's development of private life in the UK both with his foster
      family and friends and in his work and education until he left school.
       He also relied upon the fact that the Secretary of State had  delayed
      2 years and 10 months between September 2010 (when the appellant  made
      his renewed application for leave) and 1 July 2013 when eventually the
      Secretary of State made her decision.

  72. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to  establish  that  he  has
      private and family life which will be sufficiently severely interfered
      with if he is returned to Iran so as to  engage  Article  8.1  of  the
      ECHR.  Thereafter, it is for the Secretary of State to establish  that
      any such interference is justified  under  Article  8.2  as  being  in
      accordance with the law, for a legitimate aim  and  is  proportionate.
      That is the well known approach set out the speech of Lord Bingham  of
      Cornhill in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].

  73. In considering Article 8, given that the appellant cannot meet any  of
      the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  only  if  there   are
      exceptional or compelling circumstances such that the  appellant  will
      suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences can he succeed in establishing
      that he should be granted leave under Article 8 outside the Rules (see
      R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin); MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192 and Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules -  Correct  Approach)
      [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)).

  74. I accept on the evidence that the appellant has established  a  strong
      and substantial private life in the UK since his arrival in 2008  when
      he was 14 years old.  He has been educated in the UK and has worked as
      a hairdresser and part-time male stripper since he finished school  in
      July 2009.  Between 2008 and 2011, he lived with his foster  family  -
      his foster mother and two  other  foster  children.   Thereafter,  the
      appellant moved out from his foster home and has lived  independently.
      He shared accommodation with his friend CG when  he  turned  18.  More
      recently, CG has changed his address and no longer shares a house with
      the appellant. However he has known him for 6 years  and  he  told  me
      about an incident  in  which  CG  (because  of  his  profession  as  a
      policeman) was subject to an attack one  night  whilst  out  with  the
      appellant and the appellant helped protect CG from his attackers.   He
      told me that the appellant had been subject to racial  abuse  on  that
      occasion and the assailants pleaded guilty in the  Magistrates'  Court
      to offences  committed  against  them  both.   CG  told  me  that  the
      appellant was a very good friend, they remained  in  regular  contact,
      they went out together and he looked upon the appellant as  a  brother
      and one of his best friends.  He said that he would be  sorely  missed
      and that he would be "gutted" if the appellant was removed.

  75. The appellant's foster sister also gave evidence and spoke  about  how
      close he was to her - like a real brother - and that she saw him about
      once a week.  She usually saw him at her  mother's  when  he  visited.
      She would be devastated if the appellant had to return to  Iran.   She
      told me that he was fairly quiet when he first arrived and had learned
      English and had developed an interest in hairdressing for which he had
      a real talent.  She said the appellant was a lovely, lovely person.

  76. The appellant's foster uncle told me that he had known  the  appellant
      since he arrived.  He had learned to communicate in English and he had
      obviously changed since  he  had  been  here.   The  appellant  was  a
      presentable and kind individual.  He said that he would  be  extremely
      disappointed if the appellant had to return to Iran and that he  could
      not see any reason why the appellant should not stay.  He told me that
      the appellant saw his sister (the  appellant's  foster  mother)  on  a
      regular basis and that he went on family outings.

  77. Although the appellant's foster mother did not give any oral evidence,
      her letters of support are at pages 22 and 24-26  of  the  appellant's
      subjective bundle.  Those  letters  speak  to  the  closeness  of  the
      appellant both to his foster mother and  other  family  members.   She
      states that the appellant has  no  contact  or  ties  with  his  birth
      parents.  He sent her cards and flowers  and  he  is  a  part  of  her
      family.  He went on family holidays with them; he comes  to  lunch  on
      Sundays and  he  enjoys  Christmas  with  them.   She  says  that  the
      appellant integrated well into school and worked hard.

  78. All the witnesses speak to the  appellant  studying  hairdressing  and
      gaining an apprenticeship in a salon and is now a qualified stylist in
      a salon in South Wales.  She says that the appellant  has  "completely
      westernised and feels no affinity with Iranian life".

  79. I am satisfied that the appellant has established a rich private  life
      in the UK.  However, since 2011 he  has  not  lived  with  his  foster
      mother and family.  He now lives independently although  he  maintains
      strong social ties with his foster  mother  and  family.   Whilst  the
      appellant may well, at the time he was living with his foster  family,
      have established "family life" for the purposes of Article 8 that has,
      in my judgement, dwindled and come to an end as a result of his moving
      out and living an independent life as a young  working  man.   Indeed,
      the latter is a central aspect of his claim before me to remain in the
      UK.  The evidence does  not  establish  any  financial  dependency  or
      emotional dependency other than that  which  would  exist  between  an
      adult child and his mother (in this  case  foster  mother)  and  other
      family members.  Nevertheless, there is a strong private life  element
      to the family relationships which the appellant enjoys in the  UK.   I
      also accept the evidence that  the  appellant  has  ceased  to  be  in
      contact with his family in Iran.  That has, in my judgement,  occurred
      gradually and over time as the appellant has become more integrated in
      society in the UK and developed a western approach  to  his  lifestyle
      and, it is fair to say, his ambitions.    Whilst  I  accept  that  the
      appellant would have family in Iran if he returned, and  could  regain
      contact  with  them,  he  would  lose  contact  (other  than   through
      electronic means) with his friends and foster family in the UK.   More
      importantly,  however,  the  appellant's  lifestyle  would   have   to
      radically change in Iran. He would no longer be able to  work  in  his
      chosen vocation of hairdressing or to act as  a  male  stripper.   His
      appearance would have to change dramatically if  he  were  not  to  be
      perceived as a westernised male with  the  consequences  that  I  have
      already set out.  He would, in effect, be  forced  to  conform  to  an
      Islamic way of life contrary to his development over the last 6  or  7
      years since he came to the UK aged 14.

  80. For these reasons, I am  satisfied  that  there  would  be  a  serious
      interference with the appellant's private life if he were returned  to
      Iran and Article 8.1 is engaged.

  81. I accept that the appellant's removal would be in accordance with  the
      law and for a legitimate aim, namely the economic well  being  of  the
      country (or effective immigration control).

  82. The crucial issue is, in my judgement, whether that interference would
      be  proportionate.   That  assessment  requires  a  balancing  of  the
      interests of the individual against the public interest  reflected  in
      effective immigration control and, in particular  that  the  appellant
      cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

  83. In assessing  proportionality,  I  take  into  account  the  following
      factors:

         . The appellant arrived in the UK aged 14;

         . He has lived in the UK for just over 6 years;

         . The appellant has no lawful basis  to  be  in  the  UK  now,  in
           particular his asylum claim has no basis;

         . However, the appellant has leave as an unaccompanied minor;

         . The appellant has established a strong private life  in  the  UK
           and his return to Iran will prevent him following the  lifestyle
           and social presentation which has become an integral part of his
           personality would be impossible to follow in Iran;

         . The appellant's removal would have a significant effect  on  his
           foster family and also his close friend if he were removed;

         . There was a delay of almost 3 years in the  Secretary  of  State
           determining the appellant's most recent application during which
           time the appellant became an adult  continuing  his  integration
           into life in the UK by developing his interest  in  hairdressing
           as a vocation and, as an adult expressing his personality in his
           social presentation.;

         . The appellant would not  be  able  to  express  his  personality
           through his "social presentation" and work as a hairdresser  (at
           least for women) or a male stripper in Iran.

  84. In assessing whether the appellant's removal would be proportionate, I
      weigh  in  the  balance  all  these  factors.   In  my  judgement,  of
      particular significance in this appeal is the  appellant's  very  real
      integration into UK life and the expression of his personality through
      his social presentation which  would  be  impossible  in  Iran.   That
      factor weighs, in my judgement, heavily in the balance.

  85. Giving due weight to the public interest reflected in  the  fact  that
      the appellant cannot meet any of the requirements of  the  Immigration
      Rules, I am satisfied that there  are  compelling  circumstances  such
      that the appellant's removal would be unjustifiably harsh so that  the
      public interest is outweighed by the interference with the appellant's
      private life if he were removed.  I am satisfied that the  appellant's
      removal would be disproportionate in these circumstances.

  86. For these reasons, the appeal is also allowed under Article 8  of  the
      ECHR.

Decision

  87. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 8 of the ECHR involved  the
      making of an error of law.  The decision is set aside.

  88. I remake the decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds and  under
      Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
