
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24294/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 June 2017                      |On 27 July 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    [F b]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal,  purporting  to  dismiss   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse him  refugee  protection,  humanitarian
    protection or leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds, on the basis that there is no risk to the appellant in  Egypt,
    his country of origin.

 2. The applicant had not made an  international  protection  claim.   This
    appeal was a  human  rights  appeal  only.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision as to risk at [29] is expressed as consideration of  the  risk
    to him on return to Kabul, Afghanistan and not to Egypt.  That  signals
    a failure to apply anxious scrutiny to the appeal.

 3. For the respondent, Mr Clarke argued that the error was  not  material,
    as there was no protection or humanitarian protection claim before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but that is not curative of the  anxious  scrutiny
    point.  Furthermore, if the Judge considered that she was seised  of  a
    protection claim, she was under a duty to deal  properly  with  it  and
    apply anxious scrutiny to the basis of that claim, and  in  particular,
    the country to which the applicant would be returned.

 4. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  lacks  anxious  scrutiny  and
    cannot stand: the appeal is therefore allowed and will be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appellant appeared in person today but he tells me that he has  new
    solicitors.  I observe, for the record, that it would be  advisable  on
    receipt of this decision for his new solicitors to seek to clarify  the
    claim which the appellant wishes to make, and whether  it  is  properly
    reflected in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.    If  a
    protection claim is to be advanced, the applicant will need to make any
    such application in person; if that  has  already  been  done,  further
    submissions will need to be made under paragraph 353 of the Immigration
    Rules HC395 (as amended).

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a
date to be  fixed,  to  be  heard  afresh,  with  no  findings  of  fact  or
credibility preserved.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        26 July 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson










