

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24386/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th May 2014                              |On 08th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     AND

                         miss Annette Chioma Atulobi
                                                                  Respondent

NO ANONYMITY ORDER


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  This matter comes before me for remaking following a  decision  dated
      28.5.2014. in which I found  that  the  decision  promulgated  on  8th
      January 2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  CM  Jones  contained  a
      material error of law.

2. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this matter but  for  ease  of
reference I shall  refer  to  Ms  Atulobi  as  "the  claimant"  and  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent, reflecting their positions before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

3. The claimant, whose date of birth is 25 August  1971,  is  a  citizen  of
Nigeria.

4.  There has been a procedural  irregularity  in  this  matter.  Directions
were issued on 9th  June  2014  requesting  written  submissions  from  both
parties to be filed and served within 10  days  of  the  date  of  issue.  I
received  no  written  submissions  within  the  given  time  limit  and  my
determination  dated  2.7.2014  was  promulgated.  I  subsequently  received
notification that written submissions  were  received  from  the  claimant's
representatives on 18th June 2014. The submissions  failed  to  come  to  my
attention owing to administrative error.  Accordingly I consider it  in  the
interests of justice to set aside my determination pursuant to Rule  43  (1)
and 43 (2)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

5.  I  remake  the  decision  having  read  the  written  submissions  dated
18.6.2014 together with the previous materials that were before me.

6. As indicated above, in  a  decision  dated  28.5.2014  I  set  aside  the
determination of the First-tier Tribunal having found a material   error  of
law arising from a failure to follow guidance in Gulshan,  no  weight  being
placed on the failure to meet the immigration rules  and  the  finding  that
the appellant was trafficked not being open to the Judge.

7.   I rely on the  unchallenged  findings  of  fact  as  to  the  date  the
appellant entered the UK,  the  nature  of  her  entry,  details  of  former
partnership, her illegal status in the UK,  her  work  as  a  carer,  having
established a social network and the death of  her British partner in  2012.
It is common ground before me that the appellant has not shown that she  has
a family life in the UK. It is accepted that  the  appellant  established  a
private life between 1994 and 2010 but during that time she  had  no  lawful
leave in the UK.  The basis of her discretionary leave granted in  2010  was
her relationship with her British partner.  As in my error of law  decision,
there is insufficient evidence to show that  the  appellant  was  trafficked
when she came to the UK. It is not in dispute that she  cannot  qualify  for
leave under any of the provisions of the Immigration Rules.

8. The claimant wished to be able to remain in the UK in order  to  tend  to
her deceased partner's grave  and  to  continue  close  relations  with  his
family. Whilst I accept  the  desire  to  continue  relationships  with  her
partner's family, there is no evidence to show that those relationships  are
strong and/or significant.  Relations can  be  maintained  by  communication
and visits between countries. The claimant can tend to her  partner's  grave
on  the  occasion  by  visiting  the  UK.   Her  circumstances   cannot   be
characterized as exceptional as a result.

9.  In addition, the claimant has an elderly mother  in  Nigeria  with  whom
she is in contact and she would return to some family life.  She has  skills
that she can utilise in Nigeria, having worked in the UK as a carer.

10. The appellant has clearly been in the UK  for  an  extensive  amount  of
time but her status throughout that period was highly precarious as she  was
here illegally. Sad  though  the  death  of  her  British  partner  is,  the
circumstances set out above do not show that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
expect her to return to Nigeria or that the decision  to  refuse  leave  was
disproportionate.  The appeal under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  must  therefore
fail.

DECISION

11.  The Upper Tribunal determination dated  2.7.2014  is  set  aside  under
    Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and  this
    determination replaces that dated 2.7.2014.

12.  I remake the decision by refusing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Dated  7.8.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

     No anonymity order made.
        As I have dismissed the appeal there is no fee award made.


Signed                                  Dated 7.8.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge GA Black

