
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24263/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 February 2014                            |On 20 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MISS RIDDHI MOHAN VAGHERA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent did not attend and was not
represented


                            NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT



1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.   I
    will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.   The  respondent  is  a
    citizen of India who was born on 10 December 1985.  I will refer to her
    as the claimant.  The Secretary of State has been granted permission to
    appeal the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  K  Lawrence
    who allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 6 June 2013 to refuse to grant her further leave to  remain
    in the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system and for a biometric residence permit.

2.   The claimant appealed and the judge heard her  appeal  on  22  November
    2013.  Both parties were represented and the claimant attended and gave
    oral evidence.  The judge allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which was granted.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal
    argue that the judge erred in law in concluding that the evidence  from
    DCB Bank was adequate and  acceptable  in  the  light  of  the  precise
    wording  of  the  relevant  section  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    statement by the judge that the DCB letter  could  not  have  indicated
    whether the funds were available  for  the  claimant  was  inadequately
    reasoned and it was not clear on what basis the judge believed that the
    defects in the letter from Mr Patel had been remedied.

4.   Subsequent to the grant of  permission  to  appeal  and  prior  to  the
    hearing before me there have been two letters, one  from  the  claimant
    and the other from her representatives dated  respectively  23  and  24
    January 2014.  In her letter the claimant states  that  she  wishes  to
    abandon her appeal and that she has contacted UKBA "for withdrawal  and
    return of documents".  The representatives state that the claimant does
    not wish to pursue her appeal and is asking for  her  documents  to  be
    returned so that she can return to India.  Both  requests  were  denied
    and the appellant and  her  representatives  were  informed  that  they
    should attend the hearing.

5.   At the hearing before me neither the claimant nor  her  representatives
    attended and there has been no further communication.

6.   At my request Ms Everett checked the Home Office records  and  reported
    back with the following information.  There  is  a  note  on  the  Home
    Office computer dated 25 January 2014 which states that the  claimant's
    case has been referred to the travel desk.  The subject  attended  EHRC
    (which I am told refers to Eaton House Reporting Centre) today  with  a
    return flight ticket booked to India  for  3  February  2014  departing
    London Heathrow at 10.05am.

7.   I treat this as sufficiently reliable information to indicate that  the
    appellant has left the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 17A of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  applies.   In  this  case  the
    claimant's appeal was brought under Section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  104(4A)  of  the  same  Act
    provides that such an appeal brought by a person whilst  he/she  is  in
    the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if the claimant leaves
    the United Kingdom.  I find that  the  claimant  has  left  the  United
    Kingdom and  in  the  circumstances  the  appeal  must  be  treated  as
    abandoned and notice of this must be given to the parties.





8.   Whilst in his determination the judge  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    that is not the final determination of the Tribunal.  The Secretary  of
    State's appeal against that decision has not  been  determined  because
    the  claimant's  appeal  must  be  treated  as   abandoned.    In   the
    circumstances it does not mean that there was a final determination  in
    her favour.




.............................................

Signed                                  Date          February 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

