
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24973/2014
                                                               IA/24978/2014
                                                               IA/24980/2014
                                                               IA/24982/2014
                                                               IA/24984/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                         MRS ADERONKE KUDIRAT OLAIDE
                           MR SEMIU OLAIDE SALAWU
                          MISS AISHA YATUNDE OLAIDE
                          MISS AIRET ADEBOLA OLAIDE
                           MR AWWAL ABIOLA OLAIDE
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Stevenson, McGill & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1) These appeals are brought with permission against the decision of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal David  Clapham  dismissing  the  appeals  on
    human rights grounds.

 2) The appellants are all members of the same family and are  of  Nigerian
    nationality.  The first two appellants are a husband and wife  and  the
    remaining three appellants are their children, with dates of  birth  in
    2005, 2007 and 2003.  The appeals were brought against decisions of the
    respondent refusing to vary leave on grounds arising under Article 8.

 3) The father has been residing in the UK for  a  considerable  period  of
    time.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that the  father
    came to the UK in 2004.  The mother  came  to  the  UK  in  July  2006,
    accompanied by the two older children, who are both  girls.   To  begin
    with the father had leave as a student but in 2010 his  status  changed
    to that of post-study work.  His leave in relation to this  expired  in
    2012.  When his family arrived they did so as visitors but  were  given
    leave as student dependents from February 2007.  The youngest child,  a
    boy, was born in the UK.

 4) He suffers from asthma and has been admitted to hospital on around  six
    occasions.  His asthma is treated with inhalers.

 5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered the best  interests  of
    the children, having regard to the cases of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  and
    Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197.  In relation  to  education  the  judge
    looked at the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in  relation
    to the best interests of the children  and  their  involvement  in  the
    education system in Scotland.

 6) The judge accepted that the family would wish the children to  continue
    to be educated in the UK.  The  judge  considered  the  health  of  the
    children.  Not only does the youngest child suffer from asthma but  the
    oldest child suffered from seizures in Nigeria before coming to the UK.
     The judge accepted that  treatment  for  asthma,  including  inhalers,
    would be available in Nigeria.  There was no medical evidence  relating
    to the seizures.

 7) The judge found that the best interests of the  children  would  be  to
    remain with their parents.  The desirability of being educated  in  the
    UK did not outweigh the benefit of the children  remaining  with  their
    parents.   If the parents were removed then it was reasonable to expect
    the children to go with them.  As the  family  would  be  returning  to
    Nigeria together there would  be  no  interference  with  family  life.
    There would be interference with their private life but  removal  would
    be proportionate.

 8) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had failed
    to have regard to section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  &
    Asylum Act 2002, as amended.  This applies to all appeals heard  on  or
    after 28 July 2014.  Under  this  sub-section  the  starting  point  is
    whether it is reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the  UK.
    At least one of the children was a qualifying child and the  judge  had
    not taken this into account.  This amounted to  an  arguable  error  of
    law.

Submissions

 9) At the hearing before me Mr Stevenson  pointed  out  that  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal took place on 14 August 2014 but nowhere
    had the judge mentioned section 177 of  the  2002  Act.   Mr  Stevenson
    referred to the cases of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090  and  AM
    (s 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260.

10) The question was raised of whether there was any  material  fact  which
    the judge had failed to have regard.  In response Mr Stevenson referred
    to paragraphs 47-49 of the decision, where the  judge  referred  to  EV
    (Philippines) and Zoumbas.  In Zoumbas the residence  by  the  children
    was for less than seven years and the parents were being  removed.   Mr
    Stevenson further submitted that in the present appeal the  father  now
    had 10 years continuous residence in the UK, although he did  not  have
    this at the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   All
    the family's passports were with the Home Office and were not available
    for the hearing.

11) For  the  respondent,  Mrs  O'Brien  acknowledged  that  there  was  no
    reference to section 117B in the decision.   The  judge  had,  however,
    given full consideration to the children and considered the question of
    reasonableness.  It was not clear that reference to section 117B  would
    have made a difference.  The children had not been  in  the  UK  for  7
    years at the date of the applications, which were made  in  July  2012.
    It was not clear what difference would be made had the judge considered
    section 117B.  The judge looked at the integration of the children  and
    the medical circumstances.  He considered  all  the  relevant  factors.
    Even if the decision was re-made with reference to section 117 the same
    conclusion would be reached.

12)  In  response  Mr  Stevenson  submitted  that  the  7  year  rule   was
    significant.  What  was  the  purpose  of  this  rule  if  it  made  no
    difference by comparison  with  the  circumstances  of  the  family  in
    Zoumbas, where the family had been here for only four years and  had  a
    very poor immigration history?

Discussion

13) The omission by the judge in not referring to section 117B of the  2002
    Act would not necessarily constitute an error of law provided the judge
    has had regard  to  all  the  relevant  factors  in  carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise under Article 8.  This point was made by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM (s 117B) Malawi.  In that case the  judge  had  assessed
    the reasonableness of a qualifying child leaving the UK  in  accordance
    with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) but not under  s  117B(6).   The  Tribunal
    found the test was the same under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  as  it  was
    under section 117B(6).

14) The present appeals are different.  The  judge  did  not  consider  the
    appeals under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and was not required  to  do  so.
    This was because paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) applies only where a child has
    lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years at the  date  of  the
    application.  In these appeals the children had not lived in the UK for
    at least 7 years by the date of the applications, which  were  made  in
    July 2012.  They had however completed 7 years residence by the date of
    the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  August  2014.   Unlike
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), section 117B(6) applies where  the  child  has
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of 7 years or more at the  date
    of the hearing.  This is the effect of section 117A(1), which  requires
    a court or tribunal to have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    section 117B in determining an appeal on or after the commencement date
    of 28 July 2014, and the effect of  the  definition  of  a  "qualifying
    child" in section 117D(1), which requires that the child  is  either  a
    British citizen or has lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  7
    years or more.  In terms of section 117B(6), in the case  of  a  person
    who is not liable to deportation, the public interest does not  require
    the person's removal where -

      a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         a qualifying child, and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
         Kingdom.

15) It is not disputed in this appeal that the  parents  have  genuine  and
    subsisting relationships with their three children.   The  question  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.



16) It was pointed out by Mrs O'Brien that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to the issue of reasonableness at paragraph 48 of his
    decision.

17) The reasoning related to this is, however, at best scanty.  As  already
    explained, the reference to reasonableness at paragraph 48 was not made
    in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and was, of course, not  made
    with reference to section 117B(6).

18) The considerations which the judge had  in  mind  at  paragraph  48  in
    referring to reasonableness are not entirely clear.  The  judge  states
    that none of the family were British citizens, which is  not  disputed.
    He then states that none has the right to remain in the country.   This
    finding is, of course, made without reference to  section  117B(6)  and
    therefore the reasoning in this regard cannot be  considered  adequate.
    The judge then says if the parents are  removed  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the children to go with them.  This is putting the  cart  before
    the horse.  The argument for the parents under section 117B(6) is  that
    they should not be removed because it is not reasonable to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK.   The  judge  has  effectively  reversed  the
    question in section 117B(6) by assuming the parents should  be  removed
    and then considering whether the children should be removed with  them.



19) The judge then refers to the words of Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines) to
    the effect that the British state was under no  obligation  to  provide
    education for citizens from other parts of the world.  This  may  be  a
    relevant observation in deciding whether it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the UK but it should be considered in  the
    context of the correct question, on the basis  that  the  children  are
    qualifying children within the terms of section 117B(6).

20) The judge  rightly  considered,  as  stated  at  paragraph  53  of  the
    decision, that the  family  could  not  remain  in  the  UK  merely  by
    preference.  The test, however, is not one of  preference  but  one  of
    reasonableness, having regard to the best interests  of  the  children,
    the length of time which they have resided in the UK, and their  degree
    of integration.

21) The judge went on to find, at paragraph 54,  that  there  would  be  no
    interference with family life if the family returned to  Nigeria  as  a
    unit.  This is a conclusion the judge was only entitled to reach having
    properly considered the question of  the  reasonableness  of  expecting
    qualified children to leave the UK, in accordance either with paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) or  section  117B(6).   Indeed  the  purpose  of  section
    117B(6) is to recognise the existence of family life between  a  parent
    and a qualifying child where it would not be reasonable to expect  that
    child to leave the UK.

22) This brief analysis of the judge's decision exposes the  flaws  in  his
    reasoning as a result of not having considered the proper  question  in
    terms of section 117B(6).  As a result of the inadequacy  in  reasoning
    the judge erred in law and his decision under Article 8 is set aside.

23) In this appeal I do not consider it necessary to have  another  hearing
    for the purpose of considering further evidence.  The evidence heard by
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is not significantly  disputed  so
    far as the children are concerned.  The oldest child  was  3  when  she
    came to the UK and the middle child was a year old.  The youngest child
    was born here in May  2007.   The  children  all  attend  school  here.
    According to her mother the eldest daughter, who is now 11, has a close
    network of friends.  She has a good  record  at  school.   She  attends
    music classes and enjoys skiing.  The middle child,  now  9,  has  been
    attending school in the UK.  She too has a good network of friends  and
    enjoys reading and gymnastics.  The youngest child is attending primary
    school  in  Edinburgh.   All  the  children  are  integrated  into  the
    community in Scotland.  The youngest child has no experience of  living
    in Nigeria and the 2 older children have little or no memory  of  doing
    so.

24) The evidence for the appellant includes school reports and letters from
    the school attended  by  the  children.   These  support  the  mother's
    evidence.  For example, in a letter dated 25 June 2014 the depute  head
    teacher writes of the children's awareness of only British culture.

25) I am satisfied that when the  position  of  the  children  is  properly
    considered, having regard to their best interests  and  the  length  of
    time for which they have been  living  in  the  UK,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  As the parents have
    genuine and subsisting  parental  relationships  with  them,  then  the
    public interest will not require their removal.  On  this  basis  these
    appeals will succeed under Article 8 with regard to section 117B(6).

26) Having made this finding it is not  necessary  to  consider  the  other
    factors listed in section 117B but I will mention  them  briefly.   The
    family speak English and the children do not speak any other  language.
    Both parents are capable of working and supporting the family  so  they
    should not be a burden on taxpayers.  The family's residence in the  UK
    has been lawful but has been precarious, in the sense described  in  AM
    (s 117B) Malawi, in that their leave has only ever been for  a  limited
    period.  This means that in terms  of  section  117B(5)  little  weight
    should be given to their private life.  This, however,  is  subject  to
    section 117B(6).  Although section 117B(1) states that the  maintenance
    of effective immigration controls is in the  public  interest,  section
    117B(6) makes it clear that the public  interest  does  not  require  a
    person's removal where the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  This is precisely the finding I made
    in respect of this family and accordingly their  appeals  will  succeed
    under Article 8.

Conclusions

27) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

28) I set aside the decision.

29) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

30) The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  because  of  the
    involvement of children in the  appeals.   However,  as  this  decision
    contains very little personal information  relating  to  the  children,
    apart from their names, I do not consider it is necessary  to  continue
    with this order and I therefore lift it.

Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination

Although the appeals are allowed I do not consider it appropriate to make  a
fee award.  In 2013, when the decisions were made against which the  appeals
were brought, section 117B(6) was not  in  force,  although  the  underlying
principles were acknowledged in case law.  It is only since  this  provision
came fully into force that the balancing exercise under Article 8  has  been
expressed by statute in this form.


Signed      Date
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Deans
