

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 24976-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   18.03.2014|
|on    10.03.2014                              |sent out:   20.03.2014       |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               Rushana UMAROVA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Koforowola Anifowoshe  (counsel instructed by Elkettas
& Associates)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Esther Lagunju), sitting at Birmingham  on  5  November
    2013, to  an EEA family member appeal by a citizen of Uzbekistan,  born
    19 June 1988, and married to a citizen of Lithuania (the sponsor).  The
    appellant had been refused a residence card, as, following a  visit  to
    their claimed matrimonial home, the Home Office regarded  theirs  as  a
    marriage  of  marriage  of   convenience.   Permission   was   granted,
    incidentally on the numerous points of fact raised, but mainly  on  the
    legal basis, not raised at all in the grounds, that the burden of proof
    lay on the respondent in cases such as this.



 2. It was agreed before us that the law is not quite so  simple  as  that,
    and is as set out in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)
    [2012] UKUT (IAC) 38:

       i) There is no burden at the outset of an application on  a  claimant
       to demonstrate that a marriage to an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
       convenience.

       ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31  establishes
       only that there is an evidential burden on the  claimant  to  address
       evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered
       into for the predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

 3. It is also quite clear in this case that, following  the  visit,  there
    was evidence justifying such a suspicion; so there  was  an  evidential
    burden on the appellant to address that  evidence,  but  no  more.  The
    evidence, as set out in the refusal letter, was as follows:

       A female not the target, offered to show the targets  [sic]  room  to
       the team, but it was not the targets room. It was clear that the room
       was only occupied by a female, there were  no  male  clothes  in  the
       room, and no evidence that any male stayed in that  room.  A  British
       male who stated he was only visiting and does not live at the address
       stated that a female lived in  the  room  alone,  and  her  boyfriend
       worked abroad.

 4. Unsatisfactory as such a short report  may  be,  it  does  give  enough
    information for it to be answered: a complaint by Miss Anifowoshe about
    its being hearsay is misconceived in this field,  where  there  are  no
    formal rules of evidence. The appellant's remedy was, in advance of the
    first-tier hearing, either to ask for the disclosure of the immigration
    officers' notes, or for witness summonses directed to them.

 5. Miss Anifowoshe's main complaint, however, was that, though  the  judge
    had dealt (at paragraphs 11 - 13) with the appellant and the  sponsor's
    answers to the evidence about the visit, and (at 9 - 10) with  specific
    discrepancies between them about when he left for work in the mornings,
    and the payment of the rent and other bills, she hadn't  dealt  with  a
    considerable volume of positive evidence they  had  given  about  their
    relationship. The permission judge dealt with  this  in  the  following
    terms "It is averred that the evidence of the witnesses took place  for
    more than one hour during which some 90% of their answers matched  each
    other".

 6. If permission were to be given on this basis in the  first  place,  the
    permission judge needed to give directions, through his resident  judge
    and the hearing judge's, for a typed transcript  of  the  evidence,  so
    that this Tribunal could form its own independent view of what had been
    said. However, in this case it is clear that a considerable  amount  of
    evidence was given, and it may be inferred that what the appellant  and
    the sponsor said was at least intended to be in her favour.

 7. Taken together with the judge's mistake  about  the  burden  of  proof,
    which she placed on the appellant throughout to prove she satisfied the
    requirements of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 [the EEA Regulations], I regard her failure to deal with  what  is
    more likely than not to have been positive evidence about the


    relationship of the appellant and the sponsor as making her decision as
    a whole less than satisfactory, though there was nothing wrong with her
    treatment of the evidence about the visit. The result will be  a  fresh
    hearing before another first-tier judge.

Appeal
Decision to be re-made on fresh hearing in  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
Cross, not before Judge Lagunju



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



