
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24158/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 April 2017                               |On 8 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                               MD Robiul Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Graves)  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision of 12 June 2015 refusing  him  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 September 1989.   As
    the judge commented the appellant's immigration history is not entirely
    clear from the appeal papers but on his own account he arrived  in  the
    UK on 9 September 2009 with leave to enter under Tier 4 and  subsequent
    extensions were obtained in the  same  capacity.   The  decision  under
    appeal refers to the appellant applying for further leave to remain  on
    20  December  2013  but  the   judge   noted   that   the   appellant's
    representatives gave differing dates of application, 30  December  2013
    or 14 June 2014.

3.   However, the precise  dates  of  the  appellant's  arrival  or  of  the
    application leading to the  decision  under  appeal  have  no  material
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.  It is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant's application was refused on 12 June 2015  for  two  reasons.
    Firstly, the CAS checking service revealed on 5 June 2015 that the  CAS
    with the appellant's reference had been  cancelled  and  secondly,  the
    respondent was satisfied that a bank statement submitted in support  of
    the application was false and accordingly the appellant failed to  meet
    the requirements of para 245ZX(a) and para 322(1A).

4.   The appellant appealed against this decision by grounds dated  23  June
    2015.  The grounds  focused  on  the  respondent's  decision  that  the
    appellant had submitted a false bank account, asserting at para 15 that
    there was essentially  a  single  issue  in  the  appeal,  whether  the
    respondent's    conclusions    in    respect    of    deception    were
    unlawful/unreasonable in the circumstances.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The appeal was heard on the basis of the  documentary  evidence  on  30
    July 2016.  The judge reviewed the evidence, or perhaps more accurately
    in her view, the lack of evidence,  about  whether  the  appellant  had
    submitted a false bank statement and found that the respondent had  not
    discharged the burden of proof of demonstrating that the appellant  had
    exercised deception [19].  However, she said that this did  not  assist
    the appellant as he had not demonstrated that he had sponsorship and so
    he could not meet the requirements under Tier  4  in  any  event.   The
    burden of proof fell upon the appellant and he had  not  discharged  it
    nor even disputed that he did not have a valid  CAS  [19].   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and then  went  on  to
    consider article 8 but for the reasons she gave, she was not  satisfied
    that  the  article  was  engaged  and,  in  any  event,  found  in  the
    alternative that the respondent's decision to  refuse  the  application
    was proportionate to a legitimate public aim.

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal  against  this  decision
    but his application  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision dated 2 December 2016.  On 17  January  2017  he  renewed  the
    application to the Upper Tribunal arguing in the grounds that  his  CAS
    had been cancelled due to his  then  sponsor's  licence  being  revoked
    while  his  application  was  outstanding  and  that  pursuant  to  the
    respondent's own policy guidance, he should have been granted a  60-day
    letter to find a new sponsor before his application was considered.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal.  When  granting
    permission, UTJ Coker commented as follows:

         "3.  It is arguable that the appellant should have benefitted  from
             the respondent's policy and guidance but that any challenge to
             a failure on the part of the respondent  to  comply  with  her
             policy in these circumstances should be  by  way  of  judicial
             review.  However, the findings of fact made by the  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge in connection with deception may not have  been
             able to  be  made  in  judicial  review  proceedings.   It  is
             arguable that  although  private  life  may  not  normally  be
             engaged, in circumstances such as this,  the  interference  in
             the appellant's private life given  the  lack  of  the  60-day
             period is sufficient to be a breach in the  right  to  respect
             although it is difficult to see on what basis the loss of  the
             60-day   period   could   arguably   be   a   disproportionate
             interference given that it seems  unlikely  that  there  is  a
             human right to a 60-day period.  It may  be  that  the  proper
             course in such a case would be  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge to make a declaration as  regards  compliance  with  the
             rules/policy whilst dismissing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
             grounds."

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Bhuiyan submitted that the  inference  that
    should be drawn from the wording used to describe the  cancellation  of
    the CAS was that the licence had been revoked because the  college  had
    lost its licence.  He submitted that the  respondent  should  in  these
    circumstances have followed her policy of granting a 60-day  period  to
    enable the appellant to find another college.  In respect of article  8
    he submitted that the judge was entitled to take into account issues of
    fairness as the appellant would have been treated unfairly  if  he  was
    wrongly deprived of the benefit of the policy.

9.   Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  phraseology  used  in  the  notice  of
    decision was that the CAS "had been cancelled" and this was  consistent
    with the college cancelling or withdrawing  the  appellant's  CAS.   He
    argued that the judge had considered all relevant issues and reached  a
    decision properly open to her both  under  the  Rules  and  article  8.
    Further, the policy had  not  been  relied  on  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and no reference had  been  made  to  it  in  the  appellant's
    original grounds of appeal.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

10.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    its decision should be set aside.  I am not satisfied  that  the  judge
    did so err for the following reasons.  Firstly, the appellant seeks  to
    rely on an issue which was not raised in the grounds of appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is clear from the appellant's grounds that  no
    reliance was placed on the respondent's 60-day policy  and  also  there
    was no reference to it in the appellant's witness  statement  dated  15
    April 2016 which was before the judge.  The fact that  the  appellant's
    CAS had been cancelled was clearly raised in the respondent's  decision
    and, if the appellant had sought to raise issues about the cancellation
    of the CAS, he should have done so in his grounds or at the very  least
    in the documents submitted in support of the appeal. So far  as  I  can
    see from the appeal file,  the  policy  relied  on  was  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal on 17 January 2017 the same date as,  and  in  all  likelihood
    together with, the application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I am not satisfied that it was  open  to  the  appellant  to
    raise this ground at this stage of the proceedings.  If  the  appellant
    wished to rely on this policy, he should have raised it in his original
    grounds of appeal and produced a copy of the policy for  the  judge  at
    the hearing.

11.  In any event, the judge was aware of the issue  relating  to  the  CAS.
    She said at [3] that the respondent had checked the sponsorship  system
    on 5 June 2015 and the  appellant's  CAS  had  been  cancelled  by  the
    sponsor.  The judge dealt further with this ground of refusal in  [18]-
    [20].  The judge repeated that the respondent said  that  the  CAS  had
    been cancelled or withdrawn by the sponsor and in [19]  said  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that he had sponsorship and so could not
    meet the requirements of the Rules and that the burden of proof in this
    regard fell upon the appellant and he had not discharged  it  nor  even
    disputed that he did not have a valid CAS.

12.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to take this view.  Further,
    there was nothing before the First-tier Tribunal to clarify whether the
    CAS had been cancelled by the college or whether the college  had  lost
    its sponsorship licence.  There is still no  such  evidence.   This  is
    important as the policy only applies where the  college's  licence  has
    been revoked leaving students in the position where they have  to  look
    for another course at a different college.  Therefore,  in  any  event,
    the appellant failed to show that he could  bring  himself  within  the
    terms of the policy and  this  is  not  a  case  where  there  was  any
    obligation on the judge to take the matter any  further.   She  had  to
    determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence before her.

13.  Finally, it is argued that the judge erred in  her  assessment  of  the
    appeal under article 8 and that issues of fairness in relation  to  the
    application of the policy should have  been  taken  into  account  when
    assessing the extent of his private life and the proportionality of the
    decision.  However, as I have already indicated, the appellant did  not
    pursue the policy issue before the judge and there was no  evidence  to
    support a finding that the appellant could  bring  himself  within  the
    policy. The judge's findings on whether article 8 was engaged  and,  if
    so, whether the decision was proportionate were properly  open  to  her
    for the reasons she has given in [21]-[24]. Accordingly,  the  concerns
    expressed by UTJ Coker, when granting permission to appeal do not arise
    in the circumstances of this appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    err in law and this appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.  No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 3 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
