
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24179/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2018                      |On 19 January 2018                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                     QS
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Himself
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of QS, a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  [  ]  1986,
       against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 3  March  2017,
       dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his human  rights  claim
       of 15 June 2015. As he has made an application for anonymity  in  his
       grounds of appeal which was  unopposed  by  the  Respondent,  I  have
       granted that application, simply out of an abundance of  caution,  on
       the basis that it would be undesirable,  given  he  has  not  so  far
       considered  it  necessary  to  claim  asylum,  for   some   publicity
       inadvertently given to his  appeal  to  create  risks  not  otherwise
       present.


    2. The immigration history supplied by the Respondent is that QS entered
       the UK on 4 June 2012 with leave as a student until,  ultimately,  30
       March 2015, at which point he made the application  leading  to  this
       appeal.


    3. The  present  application,  of  27  March  2015,  was  based  on  his
       relationship with PH, his unmarried partner; they had  been  together
       for five months.


    4. The application was refused because the couple did  not  satisfy  the
       definition for partners: they had not cohabited for two years  as  at
       the date of decision. Given the short duration of their relationship,
       it was not accepted that he was in a  genuine  parental  relationship
       with her son, born in 1998. It  was  not  accepted  there  were  very
       significant obstacles to his future integration  in  Pakistan,  where
       his mother and five  siblings  still  resided,  given  he  spoke  the
       language and had lived there most of his life.


    5. By the time of the appeal hearing,  the  Appellant  had  married  PH.
       Before the Tribunal,  he  put  his  case  on  the  basis  that  their
       relationship was genuine and they would face insurmountable obstacles
       to relocation to Pakistan. In his  grounds  of  appeal,  he  did  not
       mention this issue, but by the time of the hearing, he  had  produced
       further evidence, including his own witness  statement,  setting  out
       the problems he would have on a return to Pakistan given his family's
       reaction to his wife's religion.


    6. The First-tier Tribunal found that there  were  not  necessarily  any
       compelling reasons justifying considering the case outside the Rules:
       an  Appellant  seeking  such  an  outcome  should  make   a   further
       application. However, in fact it went on  to  consider  all  relevant
       considerations in any event. It considered the  evidence  before  it,
       and found that the claimed marital relationship  was  not  a  genuine
       one, because it decided that the elements  of  consistency  in  their
       evidence as to their relationship was outweighed by the discrepancies
       in significant aspects of their evidence, such as the date they began
       cohabiting and when they became engaged.


    7. Both claimed that the Appellant proposed on  Ms  PH's  birthday,  but
       gave differing dates. The Appellant said this was 1 November 2014; PH
       said this was 12 March 2015. Her real birth date was 12  March  1975,
       whereas the date given by the Appellant coincided with that  on  PS's
       passport, which was in fact incorrect. The  Tribunal  concluded  that
       they had agreed to give evidence that they had become engaged on  the
       Sponsor's birthday, but that their plans ran aground as the Appellant
       was not aware of the different date of birth given on her passport.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal also rejected the Appellant's evidence  given
       about threats from the  Appellant's  family.  His  skeleton  argument
       stated that he had lied to his family about his  partner's  religion,
       saying she was willing to convert to Islam; his  family  had  shunned
       him since learning that his partner was a Buddhist.  In  his  witness
       statement he wrote that he received a warning letter from his brother
       threatening his life and his wife's  safety,  shunning  him  for  the
       humiliation he had brought his family. The letter stated that he  had
       lied to his family: he had first told them that she was  a  Christian
       and  was  willing  to  convert.  Each  articulation  of  the  account
       therefore showed that the letter was sent after the  couple  married.
       However, at the hearing, he said that he had told them ahead  of  the
       wedding that she was a Buddhist, to gauge their  reaction,  some  two
       months before the marriage.


    9. Furthermore, he had stated that  he  had  a  troubled  upbringing  in
       Pakistan because his family were extremist in outlook: accordingly it
       was extraordinary that he would have expected any reaction other than
       that which he asserted eventuated. Furthermore, the letter  from  the
       family was essentially self-serving, and it was not  proven  to  have
       been posted in Pakistan.


   10. In any event  the  couple  were  resourceful  and  resilient,  having
       migrated successfully to the UK, and could  reasonably be expected to
       return to Pakistan, and even if Article 8 ECHR was engaged, and  less
       weight was to be afforded their relationship  given  the  Appellant's
       precarious immigration status at the time it was formed.


   11. The Appellant lodged grounds of appeal, again  representing  himself.
       The grounds are extraordinarily long and repetitive and cite a  great
       deal of legal authority which is not material to the basis  on  which
       the appeal failed. As the Appellant is not represented, I  have  done
       my best to distil them down to ensure  that  his  case  receives  the
       appropriate close scrutiny. Essentially the case put is that

        1) He lacked legal representation and accordingly was now providing
           "other situations, facts and information which was not described
           before" with only limited legal assistance from a friend;


        2) The Appellant's wife lacked confidence for numerous reasons  and
           was not comfortable  in  a  formal  interview  setting,  and  he
           himself suffered from depression and insomnia, and  neither  had
           attended a court hearing previously;


        3) In reality the Appellant and his wife were both perfectly  aware
           of the date of  her  birthday  and  the  date  of  the  proposed
           engagement and would have given  consistent  evidence  had  they
           been less nervous, as was shown by a number of  anecdotes  about
           their family life together - indeed, had  they  intended  to  be
           dishonest, surely they would have rehearsed  their  evidence  to
           ensure its consistency;


        4)  The  Appellant's  English  language  proficiency  was  limited,
           leading to an  imperfection  of  expression  when  he  tried  to
           explain how he had always sought to retain a  relationship  with
           his parents if reasonably possible, which had included informing
           them of the truth as to his betrothed's true religion  so  close
           to the  actual  time  of  marriage  that  there  was  scope  for
           confusion as to whether, from their  perspective,  the  marriage
           had taken place or not;


        5) He had been very upset to hear of his mother's extremely serious
           illness;


        6) The fact he had decided  not  to  try  and  become  a  Jehovah's
           Witness in order to  procure  refugee  status  demonstrated  his
           honesty;


        7) His previous solicitors had "misguided" him  on  many  occasions
           which had contributed to an earlier adjournment  of  his  appeal
           hearing;


        8) The Appellant would be in danger on a return to  Pakistan  as  a
           moderate Muslim particularly given the circumstances around  his
           marriage to his wife;


        9) Applying the five-stage  Razgar  approach  to  the  private  and
           family life of him and his wife,  it  should  be  accepted  that
           their return to  Pakistan  would  represent  a  disproportionate
           interference with their Article 8 rights.

   12. Judge Coker gave permission to appeal on 30 October 2017, noting that
       the grounds of appeal were lengthy and  sought  to  re-argue  factual
       issues, but that nevertheless it was arguable inadequate reasons were
       given for the Tribunal's conclusions, which might be perverse.


   13. In a Rule 24 response of 16 November 2017,  the  Secretary  of  State
       argued that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  take  the  view
       that the relationship relied upon was one of convenience,  given  the
       evidence before it at the oral hearing.


   14. Before me  the  Appellant  relied  on  his  grounds  of  appeal  -  I
       emphasised that he was free to add further  information,  but  should
       not repeat material which  I  had  already  read,  and  I  sought  to
       summarise his grounds of appeal in order for him to appreciate that I
       understood the principal points he relied upon.


   15. Mr Kotas submitted in response that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was a reasonable one and there was no misdirection  of  law;
       the Judge had been entitled to come to the conclusions he reached. He
       pointed out that the appeal had  previously  been  adjourned  for  an
       asylum claim to be made if the Appellant sought to do  so,  but  that
       opportunity had not been taken. Accordingly the  First-tier  Tribunal
       was perfectly correct to treat the Appellant's problems simply as  an
       "insurmountable obstacles" case relevant to  the  assessment  of  the
       proportionality of the interference with family life.

  Findings and reasons


   16. Notwithstanding the vast quantity of documents and pleadings provided
       by the Appellant, the issues in this appeal are very simple.  As  his
       case could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, as at the date of
       application he was not a "partner" having lived  with  her  for  less
       than two years, he had no access to the Partner route under  Appendix
       FM. That left consideration of his case outside the Rules, and  as  a
       person who had married a settled person when his own residence in the
       UK  was  short-term  and  thus  precarious,  he  had   to   establish
       insurmountable obstacles to relocation to Pakistan. He sought  to  do
       so via his account of his family's reaction to the revelation of  his
       wife's true religion.


   17. I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  make
       the findings that it did regarding the genuineness of  the  marriage.
       Given  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented  and  the  issue   of   the
       relationship's genuineness arose only at the hearing (one can see  it
       being raised in the submissions of the Home Office  advocate  below),
       some caution was appropriate before the matter was  resolved  against
       him. It may well be true that the matter arose at the hearing because
       of the content of evidence, including the  witness  statements,  that
       were put before the First-tier Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  himself.
       However he and his wife had nevertheless put  forward  a  significant
       volume of material that was potentially corroborative of the  reality
       of their relationship, such as the witness statements of friends.


   18. Although the evidence of the Appellant and his wife  differed  as  to
       details of two significant aspects of their relationship's history, I
       do not think that should have been treated as determinative of  their
       credibility absent express consideration of the material which was in
       their favour, which went beyond the fact that much of  their  account
       was in fact consistent, a matter which was expressly mentioned by the
       First-tier Tribunal. So I consider that it was an error  of  law,  by
       way of failing to take account of relevant considerations, for  their
       relationship to be treated as a sham.


   19. If this was the only relevant issue in the appeal, it  would  require
       that  the  matter  be  re-heard.  However,  whether  or   not   their
       relationship is genuine, the couple would  still  have  to  establish
       insurmountable obstacles  (or  exceptional  circumstances)  to  their
       relocation to Bangladesh for their appeal to be viable.


   20. As to the finding on  "insurmountable  obstacles",  the  difficulties
       that the Appellant would suffer at  the  hands  of  his  family  were
       predicated on him establishing the truth of  their  reaction  to  the
       news of his marriage to a non-Muslim. As his account of the timing of
       the revelation as to his wife's religious belief was central to  that
       case, it was perfectly appropriate for  the  Tribunal  to  critically
       examine it. It found his explanation wanting. His grounds  of  appeal
       and oral submissions identified no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that suggested his family might have come  to  know  of  any
       difficulties before the moment of the marriage itself. Accordingly it
       seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal was  perfectly  entitled  to
       rely on the significant discrepancy that it identified regarding  the
       timing of this revelation.


   21. Furthermore, it is difficult to  see  that  the  finding  as  to  his
       family's reaction to the marriage was essential to the outcome of the
       appeal in any event. The Appellant had chosen not  to  claim  asylum,
       which would the normal course to take for a person asserting  a  fear
       of serious harm against which their national  authorities  would  not
       protect  them  and  where  internal  relocation  was  not  available.
       Instead, he has  essentially  sought  to  argue  such  a  case  as  a
       dimension of his Article 8 claim. In so  doing,  he  put  forward  no
       cogent objective evidence as to how it would be that his family would
       be  able  to  track  him  down  anywhere  in  Pakistan,  or  why  the
       authorities would not protect him if they did, or why life  elsewhere
       would pose insurmountable obstacles to the couple even if  they  were
       free from risks of serious harm.


   22. Given he is an educated man with the advantage of having  studied  in
       the UK for some time and having achieved a degree of  proficiency  in
       the English language, it would be surprising if he and his wife would
       face serious difficulties in Pakistan.


   23. The grounds of  appeal  put  forward  by  the  Appellant,  even  when
       distilled down as sympathetically as is reasonably possible in  order
       to turn them  into  a  case  fit  for  analysis  on  appeal,  do  not
       demonstrate that any material error of law.  They  simply  amount  to
       attempts  to  contest  the  factual  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal without identifying any error  of  principle  in  the  fact-
       finding it carried out. They mostly amount to a  reiteration  of  the
       case put previously, admittedly relying on elements of  post-decision
       evidence which are not differentiated  from  the  material  that  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal. Arguments that  the  honesty  of  the
       couple is clearly shown by the fact that they did not engage in  more
       elaborate exercises in deceit  than  that  to  which  the  First-tier
       Tribunal attributed to them are highly unpersuasive: a  witness  must
       be assessed on the material they actively put forward,  not  credited
       for  declining  to  connive  to   mislead   this   country's   public
       authorities.


   24. I do not accept that the Appellant was let down by his previous legal
       advisors. He has not evidenced any  complaint  that  he  has  pursued
       against them. As to  any  concerns  he  may  have  arising  from  his
       religious beliefs or his marriage to his wife beyond those dealt with
       so far arising from his family,  there  is  no  reliable  independent
       objective evidence to suggest that persons in  their  position  would
       face serious  discrimination  or  other  harm  if  they  relocate  to
       Pakistan.


   25. I accordingly find that the appeal fails as the grounds establish  no
       material error of law.

Decision


   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was lawful and I dismiss  the
       appeal.

Signed                                       Date 3 January 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
