
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24946/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2016                     |On 20 October 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               MD. Nurul Alam
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 December 1984.  On 5
    December 2010 he entered with leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student which
    was extended and expired on 30 October 2014.  In time,  on  28  October
    2014 he applied for a Residence Card as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
    with Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  This  was
    on the basis of his marriage to Nusrat Jashim, a citizen of  Bangladesh
    born on 13 October 1994, the holder of a Residence Card issued pursuant
    to Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations as the dependant of her  father
    Md. Jashim Uddin who is a Portuguese national.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 22 June 2015 the Respondent refused the  application  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter of 22 June 2015 stated:-

         Even if we did not accept your marriage and consequent relationship
         with  your  father-in-law,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  you  are
         genuinely dependent  on  your  Sponsor,  in  line  with  Regulation
         7(1)(c) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, to be treated as
         a family member of an EEA national you must  be  "dependent  direct
         relatives in his/her ascending line or that of his or her spouse or
         civil partner".

 3. On 3 July 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert the genuineness of the marriage and deny
    the conclusions  the  Respondent  reached  as  to  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's marriage following a visit to the home  of  the  Appellant,
    his wife and her family.  They also raise a claim under  Article  8  of
    the European Convention that the removal of the  Appellant  will  place
    the State in breach of its  obligations  to  respect  his  private  and
    family life protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. The original decision of 22 June 2015 does not contain  any  directions
    for the Appellant's removal and consequently it  is  not  necessary  to
    consider any claim under Article 8: see  Amirteymour  and  Others  (EEA
    appeals: human rights) [2015] UKUT 00455 (IAC).

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 5. By a decision promulgated on  4  July  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal L K Gibbs found the Appellant did not fall within the scope of
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations.  She found that the Appellant and
    his wife had given broadly consistent evidence but  that  the  evidence
    about the visit of  the  Respondent's  officers  to  the  home  of  the
    Appellant and his wife and her family contained  inconsistencies.   She
    recorded that the Appellant accepted he could not meet the requirements
    of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regs and  was  not  pursuing  the  argument
    based on Article 8 of the European Convention.

 6. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  on  25  July  2016
    Resident Judge Martin refused.  The application was renewed on the same
    basis and on 5 September 2016 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable Judge L K  Gibbs
    had erred in  law  by  incorrectly  placing  the  burden  of  proof  in
    establishing that an EEA marriage is not one of convenience.  This  was
    the first ground of appeal.  She also found it arguable that the  Judge
    had erred by placing no weight on the evidence given by the brother  of
    the Appellant's wife by reason of his youth  and  relationship  to  the
    Appellant.  This was identified as Ground 4.  In relation to the  other
    grounds, Grounds 2 and 3 she considered they had less  force  but  also
    granted permission on these grounds.  Ground 2 is based on the apparent
    ambiguity in the Judge's finding of inconsistencies in the evidence  at
    paragraph 14 of her decision but  then  at  paragraph  19  finding  the
    evidence to be broadly consistent.  Ground  3  challenged  the  Judge's
    finding it implausible that if the Appellant was married  to  his  wife
    and was in bed with her that he would have been fully dressed as stated
    in the report of the visit made by the Respondent's agents.

 7. The Appellant, his wife and her parents and her  brother  attended  the
    hearing although save for the Appellant confirming his address, none of
    them took any part.  I explained  the  procedure  and  purpose  of  the
    hearing.   Mr  Staunton  handed  up  the  Respondent's  response  under
    Procedural Rule 24.  The representatives for  each  party  acknowledged
    that any issue of the relevance or application of Regulation 8  of  the
    2006 Regulations was not applicable and such an issue  was  not  before
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Submissions

 8. Mr Malik made submissions in respect of each of the  five  grounds  for
    appeal submitting that each one was free-standing.  The first ground is
    that the Judge made a material error in respect of where the burden  of
    proof lay.  She had correctly set out the burden and standard of  proof
    by reference to the decision in Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of
    convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT  00038  (IAC).    The   failure   to
    distinguish between the legal and evidential burden  of  proof  was  an
    error but not  in  itself  sufficient  to  be  material.   However,  at
    paragraph 19 the Judge had found the oral evidence of the Appellant and
    his wife broadly consistent.  She had gone on to say that she  did  not
    find such "consistency is in itself sufficient to discharge the  burden
    of proof that is on the Appellant to persuade me that his  marriage  is
    more probably than not a genuine marriage".  This was a clear error  of
    law.  He submitted that paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Respondent's response
    of 26 September 2016 under Procedural Rule 24  were  couched  in  terms
    which in some way are accepting of the Judge's transferring the  burden
    of proof to the Appellant.

 9. Turning to Ground 2 that the Judge had made  inconsistent  findings  in
    relation to the evidence of the Appellant and his wife and so had  made
    a material error.  Mr Malik referred to paragraphs 14  and  19  of  the
    Judge's decision.  At 14 she had found the evidence  of  the  Appellant
    and his wife inconsistent and at 19 had found that the oral evidence of
    the Appellant and his wife was broadly consistent.  No reason was given
    to explain the finding of broad consistency given what  the  Judge  had
    said in paragraph 14.  This went to  undermine  the  soundness  of  the
    decision.

10. Ground 3 asserted that the decision and the  Judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence was  perverse.   Mr  Malik  accepted  that  the  threshold  to
    establish perversity  was  high  but  nevertheless  he  considered  the
    Appellant had good reason to rely on this  allegation.   There  was  no
    challenge that the Judge had given a proper and correct summary of  the
    evidence before her at paragraph 5 of her decision.  Given this she had
    not  adequately  explained  her  conclusions  at  paragraph  18.    The
    reasoning of paragraph 18 was perverse in the context that it was  used
    to establish  that  the  Appellant  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The fact  that  the  Appellant  was  fully  dressed,  was
    wearing jeans and a T-Shirt while asleep in bed with his wife could not
    by any stretch of the imagination be good evidence to conclude that  it
    was a marriage of convenience.  At paragraph 15 the Judge had  referred
    to evidence that the Appellant had a few items of his property  in  the
    bedroom he shared with his wife but in the next paragraph  having  seen
    photographs to show there was ample space in the wife's bedroom for the
    Appellant to store a suitcase which was kept elsewhere, in a  box  room
    in the house, again was not evidence to show that the marriage was  one
    of  convenience.   The  Judge  had  further  compounded  the  issue  by
    referring in paragraph 19 to the oral evidence of the Appellant and his
    wife being broadly consistent.  He asked that the decision be set aside
    because of these perverse findings.

11. Turning to the fourth ground for appeal that the  Judge  had  erred  in
    placing no  weight  on  the  evidence  given  by  the  brother  of  the
    Appellant's wife who was aged 14.  He submitted that the witness's  age
    was not in itself a reason to attach no weight to his evidence and that
    in the Immigration and Asylum jurisdiction the  evidence  of  relatives
    was frequently the only other  evidence  available  and  was  similarly
    frequently relied on and accepted.  Consequently, the rejection of  the
    evidence for reasons of age and relationship were legally  flawed.   He
    added that  if  the  Appellant's  marriage  was  found  to  be  one  of
    convenience then  it  could  not  be  said  that  the  brother  of  the
    Appellant's "wife" was  related  to  him.   And  so  the  reasoning  in
    paragraph 17 of the decision was circular.

12. Addressing  the  fifth  ground  for  appeal  Mr  Malik  submitted  that
    paragraphs 3 and 4 of the  Respondent's  Rule  24  response  were  mis-
    conceived essentially because the Appellant did meet the  criteria  for
    treatment as a family member contained in  Regulation  7(1)(c)  of  the
    2006 Regulations, namely that he was a dependent direct relative in his
    wife's ascending  line  of  his  wife,  namely  her  father  who  is  a
    Portuguese national.

13. I inquired if there was any evidence of the immigration status  of  the
    Appellant's wife and was shown her Bangladeshi passport giving her date
    of birth as 13 October 1994 and  containing  a  Residence  Card  issued
    pursuant to Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations  expiring  on  4  June
    2018.







The Respondent's Submissions

14. Mr Staunton accepted that if the Appellant's marriage was  not  one  of
    convenience for the purposes of Regulation 2 of  the  2006  Regulations
    then the Appellant's case would fall to be allowed under Regulation  7.



15. He addressed the submissions in respect of each of the submissions made
    for the Appellant in respect of each of the grounds  for  appeal.   The
    Judge's findings at paragraph 12 of her decision, referring to the  gap
    of five weeks between the Appellant's religious marriage and his  civil
    marriage, the Appellant's failure to provide  documentary  evidence  of
    his cohabitation at the time he made his application and  the  findings
    contained in the report of the visit to the  Appellant's  home  by  the
    Respondent's agents were in themselves sufficient for the Respondent to
    have discharged the burden of proof upon her.  At that point the burden
    shifted to the Appellant and the Judge had for sound reasons found  the
    Appellant had failed to discharge it.

16. Paragraph 19 of the decision acknowledging the Respondent's reasons for
    refusal and noting the Respondent's reasons for refusal showed that the
    Judge had in mind that the Respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof on her so as to shift it onto the Appellant.

17. Referring to the second ground,  the  Judge  at  paragraph  14  of  her
    decision had  been  clear  that  although  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his wife was broadly consistent she took into account the
    other reasons which  had  led  the  Respondent  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's marriage was one of  convenience.   Paragraph  14  set  out
    those inconsistencies in the oral and written  testimonies  upon  which
    the Judge relied.

18. Referring to the third ground for appeal Mr Staunton noted that a  high
    threshold was required to show perversity.  The Judge  had  found  that
    the Appellant had not "plausibly" explained why he  was  wearing  jeans
    and a T-Shirt in bed with his wife or indeed why his father-in-law  had
    stalled so as to have taken a long time to show the Respondent's agents
    upstairs to where the Appellant was.  This was dealt with at  paragraph
    5 of the decision.  The Judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  an  adverse
    conclusion in respect of this evidence.

19. Turning to the fourth ground relating to the evidence of the brother of
    the Appellant's wife Mr Staunton accepted that the paragraph could have
    been better worded but the point was obvious.

20. The Appellant's wife's brother did not give oral  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  His statement in the file amounts to  four  brief
    sentences none of which relate to the visit by Immigration Officers and
    of which one of them contains the  assertion  that  the  Appellant  had
    always slept in the box room in the house since he had been  living  at
    the property.  I noted this was  the  room  in  which  the  Appellant's
    suitcase had been found.

21. Mr Staunton  accepted  that  the  fifth  ground  would  stand  or  fall
    depending on the determination whether the Appellant's marriage was one
    of convenience.

The Response for the Appellant

22. Mr Malik gave brief responses in relation to each of the five  grounds.
    On Ground 1 he accepted that at paragraph 12 of her decision the  Judge
    had described matters for concern, matters which  might  give  rise  to
    concern  (justified  or  otherwise)  of  the   Respondent   about   the
    Appellant's marriage but having concerns was  not  sufficient  for  the
    Respondent to discharge the burden of  proof  in  accordance  with  the
    principles approved by the Court of Appeal in Rosa v SSHD [23016]  EWCA
    Civ.14.

23. It was not possible to reconcile the differences between what the Judge
    had said about the oral and written evidence in paragraph  14  and  her
    finding at paragraph 19 of her decision that the oral evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his wife was broadly consistent.

24. The evidence referred to in paragraphs 15, 16 and 18 (dealing with  the
    visit by Immigration Officers) were in fact the only reasons  given  to
    support the claim the Appellant's marriage was one of  convenience  and
    they were insufficient to show the Respondent had discharged the burden
    of proof.

25. The submissions made for the Respondent in relation to Ground 4 did not
    amount to a  response  to  the  points  he  had  originally  made.   He
    acknowledged that the submissions  for  the  Respondent  on  the  fifth
    ground had the merit of being realistic.

26. I reserved my decision.

Consideration and Conclusion

27. I shall take each  ground  for  appeal  in  order.   The  first  ground
    concerns where the burden of proof lies.  Paragraph 6  of  the  grounds
    refers to Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ. 1198 and in particular paragraph
    13.  In this paragraph  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  referring  to  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Agho IA/05994/2013  which  relied  on
    the jurisprudence in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]  UKAIT
    31.  Where the burden of proof lies does not form part of the ratio  of
    Agho  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  save  for  its  affirmation  of   the
    jurisprudence in Papajorgji.  However  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rosa
    considered the decision in IS at some length at paragraphs 12-16 of its
    only reasoned judgment.  At paragraph 29 of the judgment  in  Rosa  the
    Court found the decision in IS to have been seriously confused.  On the
    burden of proof the Court concluded at the end of paragraph 29:-

         The legal burden of proof lies on the Secretary of State throughout
         but the evidential burden can shift, as  explained  in  Papajorgji.
         ... that is the correct analysis.

    At paragraph 25 of Rosa the Court noted:-

         Although the Directive (2004/38/EC)  is  silent  as  to  burden  of
         proof, the Commission's guidance ... ... provides the  key  to  the
         correct approach under it.  Article 35 of  the  Directive  provides
         that the  rights  otherwise  conferred  by  the  Directive  may  be
         refused, terminated or withdrawn in the case of abuse of rights  or
         fraud, such as marriages of convenience.  As a  matter  of  general
         principle, one would expect that the  burden  of  proving  that  an
         exception applies should lie on the authorities of the Member State
         seeking to restrict rights conferred by the  Directive -  in  this
         case, that it should lie on the Secretary of State when seeking  to
         rely on the existence of a marriage of convenience as a reason  for
         refusing a Residence Card  to  which  the  applicant  is  otherwise
         entitled.  That is the approach set out clearly in the Commission's
         guidance, and there is no reason to doubt the  correctness  of  the
         guidance on the point.

    The issue before me is whether the  Judge  applied  the  correct  legal
    burden of proof.

28. At paragraphs 12-16 the Judge set  out  the  evidence  upon  which  the
    Respondent was relying to reach the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    marriage was one of convenience.  Of note at this point is paragraph 15
    recording that none of the witnesses disputed the Respondent's evidence
    that the Appellant only had a few items in the  bedroom  which  he  was
    said to share with his wife and that there was a wardrobe in  the  room
    used by the wife's parents.  There was no challenge by the Appellant to
    the fact that he was in jeans and a T-Shirt when he was in bed with his
    wife.  I am satisfied that this  evidence  and  crucially  the  Judge's
    findings at paragraph 17 of her decision are sufficient  to  show  that
    the Respondent did not decide to refuse the Appellant's application for
    a Residence Card on "reasonable suspicion" but that  she  had  built  a
    sufficient case to discharge the legal burden on the Respondent and  to
    shift the evidential burden to the Appellant because the Respondent had
    shown with sufficient evidence that the inference the marriage was  not
    genuine was justified: see paragraph 13 of Agho.  It was  an  error  of
    law for the Judge not to have explicitly stated that the Respondent had
    satisfied the legal burden of  proof  and  the  evidential  burden  had
    shifted to the Appellant but that this was the case is evident from  my
    reading of the structure of paragraphs 12-19 of the Judge's decision.

29. At paragraph 19 the Judge found that the oral evidence of the Appellant
    and his wife was broadly consistent.  At paragraph  14  she  challenged
    the explanations given by each of them why the  Appellant  was  wearing
    jeans and a T-Shirt in bed.  Nobody disputed that the Appellant was  in
    bed with his wife at the time  the  Immigration  Officers  reached  the
    bedroom or that he was dressed in jeans and a T-Shirt.   That  part  of
    the evidence was consistent.  Where the Appellant and his wife differed
    was in the explanation each  of  them  gave  for  the  Appellant  being
    dressed as he was.  It may have been that the Judge could have put  the
    point more clearly but I am satisfied that a careful  consideration  of
    the relevant parts of the Judge's decision supports this  construction.



30. I turn to the third ground for appeal.  It is correct  that  the  Judge
    made an adverse finding that the Appellant had entered  a  marriage  of
    convenience on the basis that he was found in bed with his  wife  while
    fully dressed together with the reason  that  the  Appellant's  clothes
    were in a different room from his wife's bedroom.  But this  submission
    for the Appellant does not properly  take  into  account  the  lack  of
    explanation for a set of circumstances which on the face  of  it  would
    raise questions in any situation involving an  analysis  of  a  marital
    relationship.  It was for the Judge to look at the evidence  which  the
    Respondent  had  advanced  in  the  round  to  ascertain  whether   the
    Respondent had discharged the legal burden of proof.   I  am  satisfied
    that on this basis together with the other evidence she  was  justified
    in finding the legal burden and sufficient of the evidential burden had
    been discharged so as to shift to the Appellant in accordance with  the
    jurisprudence already outlined.

31. The fourth ground for appeal challenges the Judge's  treatment  of  the
    statement of the evidence (comprising a brief statement) signed by  the
    brother of the Appellant's wife.  I have already referred to  this  and
    explained  why  I  find  that  even  absent  the  issues  of  age   and
    relationship, it adds extraordinarily little to the  Appellant's  case.
    It comprises brief bald assertions with a remarkable absence of  detail
    even allowing for the witness's age.

32. Both parties agreed that the fifth ground for  appeal  challenging  the
    Judge's finding that the Appellant did not fall  within  the  scope  of
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations was in error.  It was also  agreed
    that if the fifth ground for appeal was the only ground  on  which  the
    Appellant succeeded then I could proceed without further submissions to
    a substantive consideration of the appeal but that if it  succeeded  on
    any other grounds then the appeal would have to  be  heard  afresh  and
    that it would be appropriate for it to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal

33. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant would succeed on  the  fifth
    ground.  I heard no argument on this particular point and  so  make  no
    comment whether the parties'  understanding  of  the  relevant  law  is
    correct.

34. For the reasons given I find that the Appellant has not shown that  the
    Judge made any error of law sufficiently material to set aside  all  or
    part of her decision.  I find that the Judge was entitled to  draw  the
    conclusion she did from what was effectively an agreed summary  of  the
    factual evidence, namely the evidence did not point to the  parties  to
    the marriage having intended at the date of the marriage to enter  into
    a marriage which was not one of convenience.

35. There was no request for leave to submit further evidence made  by  the
    Appellant in accordance with Procedural Rule 15(2A)  specified  in  the
    fifth paragraph of the Tribunal's directions of 14 September 2016.   On
    the evidence which was before the Judge I  find  that  no  other  Judge
    would have been likely to reach any other decision.  Consequently,  the
    issue whether  the  Appellant  satisfies  the  criteria  of  Regulation
    7(1)(c) of the 2006 Regulations does not actually fall  to  be  decided
    because even if he does satisfy the restrictions of the requirements he
    is excluded by Regulation (2) of the  2006  Regulations.  Therefore,  I
    find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any
    error or errors  of  law  which  alone  or  together  are  sufficiently
    material to justify setting it aside in whole or in part.



Anonymity

36. There was no request for an anonymity order and having heard the appeal
    consider none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    such that it should be set aside.  Therefore, it shall stand.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
19. X. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







