

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/24511/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2017                             | On 06 June 2017               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                MISS C G E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who applied on 2 March 2013  for
    a residence card as confirmation of a  derivative  right  of  residence
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the
    EEA Regulations"). The respondent refused her application  on  23  June
    2015. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I Ross  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 October 2016.

 2. Given my references to the child of the appellant, I make an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    24 April 2017. Thus the appeal has come before me.

Submissions

 4. Ms Reid, for the appellant, submitted the FTTJ's findings were perverse
    in the light of the evidence, there was no evidence the  appellant  was
    not the sole carer for her daughter. The FTTJ had  placed  unreasonable
    expectations on the appellant to establish that her  daughter's  father
    was not involved in her care. It was incorrect to state  the  appellant
    had  accepted  she  had  seen  her  child's  father  after  making  the
    declaration of sole responsibility. The FTTJ had failed to give reasons
    for finding the appellant not credible. He had failed to give weight to
    the evidence of  the  second  witness,  Miss  Amvouna,  without  giving
    reasons for this.   The  FTTJ  had  incorrectly  cited  Regulation  18A
    indicating a lack of care in the drafting of the decision. The FTTJ had
    erred in failing to  make  findings  about  a  material  issue,  namely
    whether the appellant's daughter was living in the UK, addressing  only
    the issues of whether the appellant was the sole carer for her daughter
    and whether her daughter could remain in the UK  without  her.  It  was
    also submitted that the FTTJ had failed to consider the best  interests
    of  the  child  pursuant  to  s55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009. She said there was no  finding  in  the  decision
    that the relationship between the appellant and her former partner  was
    subsisting.

 5. Mr Nath, for the respondent, submitted that the FTTJ had been  entitled
    to agree with the respondent's assessment that the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated she was no longer in a relationship with the father of the
    child. The findings of the FTTJ were open to him on the evidence and he
    had reasoned his findings adequately, albeit briefly. Mr Nath submitted
    that the existence of contact between  the  appellant  and  her  former
    partner after the  signing  of  the  declaration  was  relevant  to  an
    assessment of the credibility of the appellant's evidence.

Analysis - Error of Law

 6. The FTTJ referred to  Regulation  18A  at  [12]  of  his  decision.  He
    paraphrased Regulation 18A but, whilst there is room for  criticism  in
    his summary (in that  the  respondent  would  be  obliged  to  issue  a
    derivative residence card to an non-EEA national if they fulfilled  the
    relevant criteria), this is not a material error  of  law  because  the
    FTTJ then goes on to consider the appeal by reference to  the  criteria
    in Regulation 15A. In fairness  to  Ms  Reid,  she  conceded  as  much,
    notwithstanding the grounds of appeal to this tribunal.

 7. It is implicit from the FTTJ's determination  that  he  considered  the
    appellant's child to be in the UK; there was no need for him to make  a
    specific finding on the issue.  He  makes  it  clear  at  [12]  of  his
    decision that "the only issues in the appeal are whether the  appellant
    has shown that she is the sole carer of her child and  that  the  child
    could not remain in the United Kingdom without her". This reflects  the
    requirements in Regulation 15A(4)(a) and (c).

 8. The grounds of appeal suggest there was no basis for the finding at [8]
    that "the appellant accepted that she had seen the child's father after
    she had made that declaration".  A copy of the notes of evidence of  Ms
    Nizami, counsel for the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, have been
    produced. She has also provided a witness  statement  to  support  this
    appeal.  I showed Ms Reid and Mr Nath the FTTJ's record of the evidence
    of the  appellant.   Counsel's  note  is  ambiguous  in  that  she  has
    summarised two questions put to the appellant  by  the  FTTJ.  Opposite
    these questions there is a question mark which  appears  to  relate  to
    both questions, with the word "no".  Ms Nizami says  in  her  statement
    that her "recollection is that  [the  appellant]  was  clear  that  her
    relationship with the father of her baby ended suddenly at the  end  of
    February 2015. My note indicates that [the appellant] said that she had
    not seen him after she made the Declaration  of  Sole  Responsibility".
    In contrast, the FTTJ's note records that the appellant told him "I saw
    him after I swore that declaration".  Ms Nizami's  note  and  statement
    are inconclusive as to the evidence of the appellant  whereas  that  of
    the FTTJ is conclusive. Ms Nizami says only that her  client  confirmed
    "her relationship" ended at the end of February 2015. Ms  Nizami  makes
    no reference in her statement as to whether the appellant had said  she
    had seen the  father  of  her  child  after  signing  the  declaration.
    Furthermore, Ms Nizami's note of the question posed by the FTTJ and the
    answer given to it by her client is incomplete and contains a  question
    mark which suggests she did not record it accurately.  I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant did indeed tell the  FTTJ  that  she  had  seen  the
    father  of  her  child  after   signing   the   declaration   of   sole
    responsibility on 25 February 2015. It was  therefore  appropriate  for
    him to make a finding to that effect.  That said, for the reasons I set
    out below, this finding  has  little  impact  on  the  outcome  of  the
    hearing.

 9. The FTTJ's findings are said to  be  perverse  in  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the tribunal that the appellant was not the sole  carer
    of  the  child.  The  FTTJ  was  said  to  have   placed   unreasonable
    expectations on the appellant to establish that her  daughter's  father
    was not involved in her care and the child's birth certificate was  not
    indicative of her father taking responsibility or care for her.  It  is
    also submitted that the FTTJ had failed to give reasons for finding the
    appellant's evidence not credible. He had, it is said, failed  to  give
    any reasoning for the finding that the child's father, being a  traffic
    warden, would be "easy to trace". Nor, it is  submitted  had  the  FTTJ
    given any weight to the evidence of Ms Amvouna or reasons  for  failing
    to do so.

10. The FTTJ's decision is brief in terms of reasoning. It is right that he
    has not referred at all to the evidence of Ms Avmouna in his  findings.
    She attended the hearing in support of  the  appellant  and  gave  oral
    evidence. Her evidence is noted at [9] of the decision. At paragraph 49
    of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that "Where a tribunal  has
    referred to considering all the evidence, a reviewing  body  should  be
    very slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked some factor, simply
    because the factor is not explicitly referred to in  the  determination
    concerned".  While  the  FTTJ  has  not   specifically   referring   to
    considering all the evidence in this case, that is  implicit  from  his
    summary of Ms Avmouna's evidence at [9]. Her witness statement contains
    only one sentence of relevance to the issues of whether  the  appellant
    was the sole carer and whether the child would have to  leave  the  UK.
    She says "[the appellant] is a single mother and I have  made  attempts
    to enable the father of her child to play an active role in her life in
    vain".  This is extremely vague and lacks detail. Her oral evidence was
    in a similar vein save that she  added  that  the  child's  father  was
    around for a couple of months. She also  corroborated  the  appellant's
    evidence about attempting to look for the father.  That is evidence  to
    which the FTTJ referred in his decision at [13].

11. The FTTJ did not find the appellant to be a truthful witness.   Insofar
    as the two sole issues are concerned, her evidence is sparse.   In  her
    witness statement, she refers to the birth of the child on  9  December
    2014. The only other relevant evidence in her statement is as follows:

         "7. After 3 months of giving birth to baby ..., I notice  that  the
         accommodation was overcrowded and suggested to [the child's father]
         that I would like to move  to  his  accommodation  with  the  baby.
         Initially, he seemed to be ok with it.  As I was now planning  when
         to move to his place, his behaviour changed. The frequency  of  his
         visits became far and in-between. The  financial  support  was  not
         forthcoming. My calls were not returned as before.  It  became  one
         excuses to another. Finally, he braked [sic] the news that  he  was
         in fact a married man."

         ...

         "12. I wish to state that I am the primary carer of  baby  ...  She
         lives with me full-time at ... I make sure that she is kept  clean,
         feed, taken to the GP as and when need be and I decide which church
         she attends and I will decide on the school she would  attend  when
         she is of school age.

         13. [The child's father] works full-time  and  is  married.  In  my
         view, it is not in baby ... (British) best interest to be separated
         from me her natural mother that  she  is  used  to.  Relocation  to
         Cameroon with baby ... will make her miss her only known family  in
         the UK ..."

12. There is no reference in that  witness  statement  to  the  appellant's
    attempting to find the child's father by going to  his  property;  this
    was new evidence given at the hearing.  The FTTJ was entitled to  treat
    this new evidence  with  some  scepticism  given  the  failure  of  the
    appellant and her aunt to refer to it in their appeal statements.   The
    FTTJ has taken  into  account  the  appellant's  visit  to  her  former
    partner's property but notes she has "produced no evidence from anybody
    at her partner's address that he is no longer there  and  left".   Such
    evidence would not have  been  difficult  to  obtain  and  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the FTTJ to consider the lack of  such  evidence  when
    assessing the reliability of the evidence before him.

13. The grounds of appeal refer to there  being  "no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal" that "the Appellant is not the sole carer for her  daughter".
    That is to reverse the burden of proof: the burden is on the  appellant
    to demonstrate her entitlement to a derivative residence card and  that
    she fulfils the criteria in Regulation  15A(4).   It  is  not  for  the
    respondent to adduce evidence that the appellant is not the sole carer.
     It was for the appellant to demonstrate she was the  sole  carer.  The
    appellant claimed (albeit in limited terms)  to  be  the  child's  sole
    carer.  The FTTJ was entitled to assess the evidence in support of that
    claim.  The FTTJ noted  at  [14]  that  the  letter  from  the  medical
    practice did not confirm the appellant was her daughter's primary carer
    nor did the letter to the  parent/guardian.   Thus  the  only  relevant
    evidence was that of the appellant and her aunt.

14. I agree that the reasoning of the FTTJ is sparse but it  is  sufficient
    and based on the evidence. In any event, even if it were  so  deficient
    as to amount to an error of law it is not  a  material  error  for  the
    following reasons.   The  child  was  born  on  9  December  2014;  the
    appellant's evidence in her statement is that three  months  after  her
    birth she discussed with the father their  accommodation  arrangements.
    This must have been in early March 2015. She refers to the frequency of
    his visits becoming few and far between. By inference,  this  reduction
    in the number of visits must have occurred over  at  least  two  weeks,
    i.e. to mid-March 2015. In the meantime, the  child's  father  attended
    the registry office with the appellant to register the child's birth on
    7 January 2015; the child's passport was issued on 3 February 2015; the
    relationship was said to have ended in February 2015 and the  appellant
    swore the declaration of sole responsibility on 25 February 2015.   The
    latter was prior to the date on which the appellant says she  discussed
    accommodation with the child's father, three months  after  the  birth,
    and therefore at a time when they were still in a relationship, on  the
    appellant's own evidence.  Furthermore, the  appellant  told  the  FTTJ
    that she had seen the child's father after signing that declaration  on
    25 February. Whilst that contact may not have been in the context of an
    ongoing relationship it does call into question the reliability of  the
    timeline in the appellant's evidence: that contact is  consistent  with
    their still being in a relationship  and  discussing  accommodation  in
    early March 2015  (according  to  timing  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement).  Furthermore, the appellant says in her declaration of sole
    parental responsibility that, as at 25 February 2015, that "I have been
    and still the sole guardian of [her child] since birth".  This  is  not
    consistent with her  witness  statement  which  infers  that  financial
    support stopped three months  after  the  birth  (paragraph  7  of  her
    statement).

15. Whilst I have a concern as to whether  the  FTTJ's  finding  that  "the
    appellant's partner would have been easily traceable, given his job  as
    a traffic warden" is sustainable, this does not amount  to  a  material
    error of law given the significant  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence.  Even if the FTTJ's reasoning were  inadequate,  such  as  to
    amount to an error of law, the appeal could not have been successful on
    the evidence before the FTTJ. The only possible outcome of  the  appeal
    was dismissal on the grounds that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  not
    credible.  The evidence did not support a finding  that  the  appellant
    was, at the date of hearing, the sole carer of her child and  that  the
    child would be unable to  reside  in  the  UK  if  the  appellant  were
    required to leave.

16. It was also submitted that the FTTJ had failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child pursuant to s55.  The appellant had applied  for
    confirmation  of  an  EU  law  right,  namely  a  derivative  right  of
    residence. The EEA Regulations set out specific criteria to be met  for
    the applicant to be issued a residence card pursuant to Regulation  18.
    The applicant either  has  a  right  of  residence  or  she  does  not.
    Regulation 2(1) sets out definitions of terms used in the  Regulations.
    It states that an "EEA decision" means  a  decision  that  concerns  "a
    person's entitlement to be issued with ... a ...  derivative  residence
    card".

17. As Sales LJ says at [26] of Amirteymour v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 353

         "A right of appeal under regulation 26(1) is only a right to appeal
         "against an EEA decision". Regulation 26(1)  creates  no  right  of
         appeal against any other kind of decision. In particular,  it  does
         not create a right of appeal in relation to a claim  for  leave  to
         enter or remain under the Immigration Rules or by exercise  of  the
         Secretary of State's discretion by reference to  Article  8.  Where
         the Secretary of State makes a relevant decision  by  reference  to
         the Immigration  Rules  or  Article  8,  that  is  an  "immigration
         decision" with a separate right of appeal under section 82(1).

         27. In my judgment, the natural meaning of the phrase  "may  appeal
         under these Regulations  against  an  EEA  decision",  as  used  in
         regulation 26(1), is that the appeal right thereby  created  is  in
         respect of an EEA decision  and  is  to  proceed  by  reference  to
         grounds of claim and grounds of appeal  of  a  kind  recognised  as
         creating entitlements under the Regulations themselves (reflecting,
         as they do, entitlements under EU law). This  interpretation  means
         that it was not within the jurisdiction of the FTT in this case  to
         allow the appellant to introduce in his appeal under regulation  26
         a claim directed to  the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         discretionary powers under the 1971 Act and based upon Article 8. "



18. While  Amirteymour  is  a  case  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    considering the entitlement of an individual to  introduce  a  distinct
    human rights claim for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  by
    analogy that reasoning must apply to the duty under s55. The only issue
    before the First-tier Tribunal was whether or not the appellant met the
    requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's daughter were not  a  relevant  consideration.  There  was,
    therefore, no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

19.  For these reasons, there is no material error of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision and reasons.

Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

21. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed           A M Black                         Date  2 June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed           A M Black                         Date  2 June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
