
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/24731/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 June 2017                        |    On 16 June 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                               Shoaib Muhammad
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Telford promulgated on 4 October 2016 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    dated 23 June 2015 to refuse to issue a residence card pursuant to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 6 November 1991.  On  27
    November  2014  he  made  an  application  for  a  residence  card   as
    confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was made on the  basis  of  his  marriage  to  Ms  Deimante
    Jaseckyte, a citizen of Lithuania born on 8 March 1992.  The  Appellant
    and Ms Jaseckyte were married on 15 October 2014.  Ms Jaseckyte  has  a
    son from a previous relationship (d.o.b. 20 June 2010), the  father  of
    whom is said to be in Lithuania.


3.   In the course of the application the Home Office made a  visit  to  the
    Appellant's address on 22 May 2015.  The Immigration Officers attending
    on that occasion formed the view that the Appellant  and  Ms  Jaseckyte
    were not  sharing  the  same  room.   In  due  course  the  Appellant's
    application was refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') dated 23 June  2015.   The  Respondent  concluded  with
    reference to regulation 2 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 that the marriage was "one of convenience for the sole
    purpose of you remaining here in the United Kingdom".   The  Respondent
    was also  not  satisfied  that  Ms  Jaseckyte  was  exercising  'Treaty
    Rights', and therefore was not a qualified person within the meaning of
    regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.


4.   The RFRL articulated reasons in these terms:

         "Jaseckyte stated she met you on Facebook while she  was  still  in
         Lithuania and met you in person in June 2014 when she came over  to
         the UK with her son... but could not remember the exact date.   She
         stated [you] started living together since.


         When asked when you both got married Jaseckyte was unable  to  give
         the officers any date and stated it was in 2014.  She  also  stated
         you married in an Ilford office. Jaseckyte  stated  that  you  also
         sleep in the same room.  However officers only seen one double  bed
         which was shared by Jaseckyte and her son and there was hardly  any
         room for a third person to sleep in that bed.  When asked for  your
         belongings Jaseckyte opened a cupboard and told officers  all  your
         clothes were there.


         Seen were three shirts (two inside and one was hanging at the door)
         and the rest of them were female clothes.  She then stated you were
         keeping your clothes in the suitcase underneath the  bed.   No  men
         toiletries were seen in the room. Also although you had two sisters
         living in the UK, in Manchester, Jaseckyte had never met  them  and
         they didn't even attend the wedding.  When asked  Jaseckyte  stated
         they couldn't come because they have children.


         Although you were encountered at the address you failed to convince
         the officers that you were both sharing the same room."


5.   In  respect  of  the  issue  under  regulation  6  with  regard  to  Ms
    Jaseckyte's exercise of Treaty rights, the RFRL records that an attempt
    was made to contact the alleged employer, who  was  uncooperative  with
    the enquiries being made by the Home Office.


6.   The Appellant appealed the refusal to grant a  residence  card  to  the
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.   His  grounds  of  appeal  -   when
    standardised  pleadings  and  trite  padding  are   whittled   away   -
    essentially amount to an assertion that the Respondent had  placed  too
    much  weight  on  what  were  said  to  "minor"  discrepancies  in  the
    interviews conducted at the time of the home  visit.   The  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not otherwise address  the  issue
    in respect of regulation 6.


7.   The Appellant and Ms Jaseckyte attended the appeal hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and were supported by  two  further  witnesses.   A
    bundle of materials in support of the appeal was also  filed  with  the
    Tribunal.  There was  no  Presenting  Officer  present  at  the  appeal
    hearing.  The Appellant was represented by Counsel (not Ms Jones).


8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his Decision.


9.   The Appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  which  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 2 May 2017.  Judge  Kelly
    granted permission to appeal in respect of the  following  matters  (as
    summarised in the permission decision):


         "The grounds assert that  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  (a)  is
         infected by error due to it being promulgated some six months after
         the  date  of  the  hearing,  and  (b)  does   not   identify   the
         "inconsistencies" in the evidence of  the  witnesses  to  which  it
         refers at paragraph 8.  Those grounds are arguable."


10.  Judge Kelly also gave consideration to a  challenge  to  some  specific
    credibility findings but determined  that  those  were  essentially  "a
    quarrel with the findings of  the  Tribunal"  and  permission  was  not
    granted on that particular ground.


11.  However, Judge Kelly also identified two further matters that  had  not
    been pleaded by  the  Appellant.   At  paragraph  3  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal the following is stated:

         "In addition to the grounds identified in the  application,  it  is
         arguable  that  the  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  by   (a)
         identifying the issue in the appeal as being whether the  Appellant
         and the Sponsor were in a marriage that was genuine and  subsisting
         at the date of the hearing rather than whether it had been  one  of
         convenience at its inception (see the third sentences of paragraphs
         1 and 7), and (b) making  contradictory  and  confusing  statements
         about whether the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  was  found  to  be
         credible (see the first sentence of paragraph 7)."


12.  In respect of the issue of delay, the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took place on 26 April 2016 and not - as erroneously specified
    on the face of the Decision and Reasons itself - on 26 May  2016.   The
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is signed 19 September  2016,
    but it was not promulgated until 4 October 2016.  It follows that there
    was a delay between the hearing and  the  conclusion  of  the  Decision
    and/or the promulgation of the Decision of just under or just over five
    months depending on whether one focuses on the date  the  Decision  was
    signed or the date of its promulgation.


13.  It is to be noted that the grounds to the Upper Tribunal as pleaded  do
    not seek to place determinative weight on the delay per se.   Paragraph
    11 of the grounds is in these terms: "While not  a  ground  in  and  of
    itself, in the absence of any other factor, it is a matter which causes
    concern, and  makes  other  challenges  to  credibility  stronger,  the
    Appellant submits." This is consistent with the established authorities
    in this area, in particular Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868, which essentially requires  that  a
    nexus be established between any undue delay  and  any  defect  in  the
    evaluation process.  Inevitably this shifts the focus of the  challenge
    to the other grounds raised by the  Appellant  and  in  particular  the
    allegation that the Judge  did  not  identify  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence.


14.  I should pause to note in this context that it is the case  that  there
    is a contemporaneous Record of  Proceedings  on  file,  and  indeed  at
    paragraph 7 of the Decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  expressly
    states: "I took a note of the questions and answers."


15.  In this context it is also to be observed that nothing in  the  grounds
    of appeal or the submissions before me seeks to identify expressly  any
    error in  any  of  the  factual  matters  recorded  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The challenge does not rest upon  the  suggestion  that  the
    Judge has misunderstood, misrecorded or omitted any  relevant  evidence
    so much that he has failed adequately to explain his reasons.


16.  Yet further in this context, for completeness I note that  the  grounds
    of appeal refer to counsel's note in respect of the hearing in which it
    is said that counsel "did not note any particular discrepancies in  her
    note of the evidence", see paragraph 14 of the  grounds.   However,  no
    such counsel's note has been produced before the Tribunal.


17.  As I say, the focus of the  challenge  is  really  in  respect  of  the
    reasonings, and in this regard paragraph 8 of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    identify the Judge's reference at   paragraph  8  of  the  Decision  to
    aspects of the  evidence  that  were  characterised  as  'oddities'  or
    'inconsistencies'.  At paragraph 12 of the grounds it  is  argued  that
    the inconsistencies were not identified by the  Judge,  and  indeed  at
    paragraph 13 whilst it is acknowledged  that  not  every  inconsistency
    needs to be identified it is  pleaded  that  the  Judge  identified  no
    inconsistencies properly or clearly.


18.  It may be seen that in essence the core of the challenge  is  that  the
    Judge, whilst stating that he found that there were problems in respect
    of the Appellant's and Ms  Jaseckyte's  respective  accounts  of  their
    relationship, did not support  such  an  assertion  with  any  adequate
    reasoning.  I turn to this fundamental matter in the challenge in a few
    moments, but first consider it convenient  to  address  the  additional
    matters raised by Judge Kelly in the grant of permission to appeal.


19.  At paragraph 7 of the Judge's decision the opening sentence states:  "I
    found the evidence of the Appellant credible."  Judge Kelly  identifies
    this as being contradictory when measured against the remainder of  the
    decision.  Indeed, it may be seen in the immediately preceding sentence
    at the end of paragraph 6 the Judge said this: "The Appellant  and  his
    witnesses were incredible in all aspects relating to the issues in this
    case"; further the whole tenor of the decision is one where  the  Judge
    is clearly and plainly rejecting the evidence presented to him.


20.  Ms Jones realistically indicates that she does not seek  to  place  any
    particular weight  on  the  first  sentence  at  paragraph  7.   In  my
    judgment, that is an entirely sensible approach to adopt.  I find  that
    it is absolutely clear that this amounts to no more than a slip on  the
    part of the Judge. Moreover, consistent with the approach adopted today
    by Ms Jones it would appear that the Appellant and his advisers did not
    consider it worthy of raising as a ground of challenge in  the  grounds
    of appeal submitted in support of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, no doubt in recognition of it being so obviously an  immaterial
    'slip'.


21.  The other matter identified by Judge Kelly  relates  to  the  issue  of
    'marriage of convenience'.


22.  It is clear that the Respondent, with reference to regulation 2 of  the
    2006 Regulations, raised the issue of marriage of  convenience  in  the
    RFRL.  A marriage of convenience is of course a distinct  concept  from
    the  question  of  whether  or  not  a  relationship  is  'genuine  and
    subsisting' at any particular point in time.


23.  In such circumstances it is at the  very  least  unfortunate  that  the
    Judge does not express the issue accurately in his opening  paragraphs.
    In many ways this is, sadly, a poorly written Decision:  not  only  are
    there such inaccuracies as those to which I am about to refer, but  the
    'flow' of the Decision and the structuring of the  reasons  offered  in
    support of the conclusion, do not read easily or well.  Be that  as  it
    may, those matters are not inevitably fatal to the decision if  at  the
    core of it there is adequate reasoning - to which I will  turn  in  due
    course.


24.  The Judge opens the Decision by saying that the Appellant claims  "that
    he has a right to enter and remain in the UK indefinitely as a spouse".
     That was not the basis of the Appellant's application.   What  he  was
    requesting was a Residence Card as a recognition of his  present  right
    to be in the United Kingdom: it was not an application  for  indefinite
    leave to enter or remain.


25.  The Judge continues at paragraph 1 to state:  "The  issue  was  whether
    there was a valid genuine and subsisting marriage and whether there was
    a real case that the spouse was exercising Treaty Rights as an employed
    person."  Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary of State does  not  seek
    to suggest that the Judge's reference  to  a  'genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage' was an appropriate or correct identification  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge of the core issue  in  the  appeal.   However,  the
    Secretary of State through Mr Tarlow today - and indeed in the Rule  24
    response dated 24 May 2017 - pleads that in substance it was clear that
    the Judge did indeed address his mind to the question  of  whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience from its outset.


26.  In this context it is to be noted that at two points  in  the  decision
    the Judge does refer to 'convenience'.  At paragraph 8 he states:  "The
    marriage was plainly one of convenience  to  my  eyes."   Similarly  at
    paragraph 11 the Judge states "a marriage which was,  I  found,  simply
    for the convenience of both parties and not a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marital relationship".  Whilst I acknowledge that there appears  to  be
    some elision of the two  concepts  of  'marriage  of  convenience'  and
    'genuine and subsisting relationship' in that  latter  quotation,  such
    matters should not be looked at in isolation.  As may be  seen  in  the
    explanation that follows in respect of  the  adequacy  of  reasons,  it
    seems to  me  abundantly  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    completely rejected the notion that  there  had  ever  been  a  genuine
    relationship between the Appellant and the Ms Jaseckyte and found their
    relationship and marriage essentially to be a contrivance - that is  to
    say, the marriage had been contrived for immigration purposes.


27.  Which brings me to a consideration of the 'reasons' challenge.


28.  I have already referred to the Judge stating  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    Decision that  he  did  not  find  the  Appellant  and  the  supporting
    witnesses credible in all aspects relating to the issues in  the  case.
    At paragraph 8 the Judge goes on to say this:

         "There were a number  of  discrepancies  in  the  evidence.   These
         related to the kind of oddities which had occurred in the  parties'
         relationship - their meeting, marrying and living together  was  at
         odds with what might reasonably be expected.  The couple  were  not
         ad idem in the evidence today and  there  were  inconsistencies  of
         understand, approach and on matters  of  fact.   The  vagaries  and
         implausibilities and inconsistencies undermined the claimed  status
         of a genuine and subsisting marriage.  The marriage was plainly one
         of convenience to my eyes.  The claimed  levels  of  earnings  from
         genuine tax and national insurance compliant work were not made out
         on the balance of probabilities."


29.  The Judge continues at paragraph 9 in these terms:

         "The home visit by officials in 2014  exposed  a  large  number  of
         discrepancies between the couple.  These were not properly answered
         by today.  The statements given to me were easily exposed as either
         incomplete and missing details which undermined the account or were
         inconsistent with other evidence so that at the end  of  today  the
         evidence as a whole compounded  rather  than  answered  the  issues
         facing the Appellant."


    That is essentially a summary of the reasons reached by the Judge as to
    why he did  not  accept  the  Appellant's  case,  and  found  that  the
    Appellant had failed to answer the concerns legitimately raised by  the
    Respondent in respect  of  the  nature  of  his  relationship  with  Ms
    Jaseckyte.




30.  The Appellant seeks to suggest that the Judge  has  simply  stated  his
    conclusions in these paragraphs but has failed to reason  them,  either
    at all or adequately.  The focus in the grounds of appeal,  and  indeed
    in in the submissions initially presented on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    today, skip over the second half of paragraph 9, and paragraphs 10  and
    11,  but  instead  goes  directly  paragraph  12  and  aspects  of   Ms
    Jaseckyte's pregnancy at the time of the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This focus on one particular issue in the appeal seems to me
    to ignore what is a substantial set of reasons advanced by the Judge in
    support of the conclusions summarised in the paragraphs I have  already
    quoted. Moreover, reasons continue to be offered by the Judge  for  his
    conclusions, in particular at the end of paragraph 12 and in  paragraph
    15.


31.  I set out such reasons to  demonstrate  the  extent  of  them  and  the
    issues that they cover.  They are as follows:

    (i)  "Here we have a meeting on marriage straight away.  Even  if  that
         sometimes but rarely happens the evidence of their  following  life
         together undermines the reality claimed of a genuine and subsisting
         marriage."  (paragraph 11).


    (ii) "The lack of proper explanation as to why no family  members  were
         at the wedding was incredible."  (paragraph 10).


    (iii)    "The mother of the spouse claimed health  issues  that  forced
         her away from the wedding, in fact two weddings - one civil in late
         2014 and one religious in 2015.  She claimed to be ill in bed  with
         a bad back for one of the events but she was able to travel in June
         2015 to meet up with the daughter.  Apart from  normal  medications
         which she bought she had no medical evidence of being  too  ill  or
         having a bad back at any time preventing her from attending  either
         marriage - civil or religious at  six  months  apart."   (paragraph
         15).


    (iv) "The lack of forethought or involvement of the spouse in regard to
         her child, her family in Lithuania and the son's father's potential
         for involvement in the child was not credible."  (paragraph 11).


    (v)  "The lack of clear understanding either Appellant or spouse of the
         role of the Appellant's or spouse's different family  religion  and
         culture in their lives in  the  future  was  also  revealing  of  a
         marriage which was, I found, simply for  the  convenience  of  both
         parties and not a genuine  and  subsisting  marital  relationship."
         (paragraph 11).


    (vi) "The lack of evidence of the involvement  of  families  when  both
         would apparently have very loving involved families undermines this
         claim."  (paragraph 11).


    (viii)   "The evidence of the spouse was seriously at odds  today  with
         the Appellant in regard to the sequence of events in the officials'
         visit to their home, the belongings in the room, the bag  -  or  no
         bag - that held clothes and where it was - under the bed  or  in  a
         cupboard."  (paragraph 10).


    (viii)   "It was plain when visited that any cohabitation  was  not  in
         the sense of a married couple but for convenience  the  claim  that
         the had toiletries packed away in a suitcase  due  to  an  imminent
         move was wholly undermined by evidence that the move was not for at
         least another month."  (paragraph 12).


    (ix) "The explanations given by  the  Appellant  in  particular  as  to
         sleeping with the child, having another bed and not having  another
         bed for the child and lack of explanation as to  what  happened  to
         the bed bedding and belongings which should have been there if  the
         couple were genuinely living together  as  a  family  were  frankly
         risible."  (paragraph 9).


    (x)  "The photographs produced do not enhance this claim.  They  appear
         staged to me."  (paragraph 11).




32.  I have reordered those passages slightly in order to fit them  together
    in terms of the areas they cover, and to allow them  to  'flow'  better
    than perhaps they flow in the decision itself. However, it seems to  me
    abundantly clear that all such matters  constitute  the  "vagaries  and
    implausibilities  and  inconsistencies"  that  the  Judge   stated   at
    paragraph 8 undermined the claimed status of the marriage and supported
    his conclusion that it was plainly one of convenience from the  outset.
    The passages I have quoted do indeed  in  part  cover  "their  meeting,
    marrying and living together" and offer explanations for why the  Judge
    considered this "at odds with what might reasonably be expected" - e.g.
    see paragraphs (i)-(vi) above. The  passages  in  part  relate  to  the
    finding that "the couple were not ad idem in their  evidence  today"  -
    e.g. see (viii). In combination the passages offer adequate explanation
    for the Judge's rejection of their narrative in all material respects.


33.  Further to this it is plain that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    regard to  the  supporting  evidence  of  witnesses,  for  example  see
    paragraph 15.  It is also clear that the Judge had  regard  to  the  Ms
    Jaseckyte's explanation with regard to her answers at the time  of  the
    visit by the Immigration Officers, but rejected the explanation: he did
    not accept that English skills would explain the discrepancies or  that
    the account was inconsistent with what  might  reasonably  be  expected
    from a genuine couple bearing in mind, as he  identifies  at  paragraph
    14, that it was apparent that an interpreter had attended the visit.


34.  Whilst it may well  be  the  case  that  the  Judge's  expectations  in
    respect of the production of DNA evidence for a yet  unborn  child  was
    unrealistic and misplaced, in the overall context of this case it seems
    to me that the Judge has adequately explained in some length and detail
    his reasons for rejecting the accounts of both the Appellant and the Ms
    Jaseckyte.


35.  In all those  circumstances  I  reject  the  challenge  raised  by  the
    Appellant before the Upper Tribunal.


36.  Even if it were otherwise, in  order  to  establish  entitlement  to  a
    Residence Card the Appellant would still need to show that his  partner
    was exercising Treaty rights and was thereby a qualified person  within
    the meaning of regulation 6.  The Judge concluded against the Appellant
    and the Ms Jaseckyte in this regard: see paragraphs 7, 14 and 16.  Just
    as the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not address the
    issue of regulation 6, neither has it been the subject of  any  express
    challenge in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal but rather  is  subsumed
    in the general grounds as to 'delay' and 'reasons'.  Indeed, before  me
    today Ms Jones did not seek to identify any particular  error  in  that
    regard but suggested no more than that the Judge's evaluation would  be
    tainted if it were the case that his  approach  to  the  issue  of  the
    relationship was in error. However, in my judgement  the  reasoning  at
    paragraph 16 is essentially 'free-standing', and does not rely upon the
    adverse assessment in respect of relationship and marriage.


37.  In all the circumstances I find no error of law,  and  accordingly  the
    decision of Judge Telford stands.


38.  For completeness I should add that it has been drawn  to  my  attention
    that the Appellant has made an application to admit further evidence in
    the light of a finding of  error  of  law.   That  application  at  the
    present time unfortunately has not yet reached the file that is  before
    me, but I am told that it comprises evidence to  demonstrate  that  the
    child with whom Ms Jaseckyte was pregnant at the time  of  the  hearing
    before Judge Telford has since been born (in July 2016), and  that  DNA
    evidence establishes the paternity of the Appellant.  Such evidence  is
    not 'before me' in the context of error of law.


39.  It is of course open to the  Appellant  to  advance  such  evidence  in
    support of a further application for a Residence Card.  It  would  then
    be a matter for the Secretary of State to make what she  will  of  such
    evidence.  It will still be necessary for the Appellant to address  the
    issue of regulation 6, and in  that  regard  it  may  be  necessary  to
    consider the position of somebody who for some of the time is  pregnant
    or is otherwise a new mother and therefore might not be expected to  be
    in employment. However, these are matters for another time and are  not
    matters that I have any jurisdiction to evaluate.


Notice of Decision

40.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


41.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing



Signed:                                 Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
