
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24228/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent          |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2017                                  |On 12 June 2017            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Surjit Singh
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, instructed by City Immigration Law Ltd
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Surjit Singh, date of birth 11.4.88,  is  a  citizen  of
    India.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swinnerton promulgated 9.11.16, dismissing on all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  15.5.15,  to
    refuse his application made for LTR as the partner of a person  settled
    in the UK.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 26.10.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Campbell  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    5.4.17.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 5.6.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Swinnerton to be set aside.

 7. The appellant entered the UK in 2010 as a Tier 4 student  migrant  with
    leave until 31.7.14. However, that leave was subsequently curtailed  to
    27.8.12.

 8. He applied for LTR as the  partner  of  Ranjeet  Kaur.  As  the  length
    relationship did not meet the eligibility requirements of 2 years,  the
    appellant could not qualify under Appendix FM. The application was also
    refused under paragraph 276ADE, on the basis that there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in India.

 9. The Secretary of State took into account that the  appellant's  partner
    has a child from a previous relationship, then aged 8, who is an Indian
    citizen with ILR, but the appellant does not  meet  the  definition  of
    parent within the Rules.

10. The grounds of appeal complain that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in failing to assess the position as at the date of the hearing. It was
    submitted that had this been done, it would have  been  found  that  by
    then the relationship has lasted for more than  2  years.  However,  as
    Judge Campbell noted, there was little merit in this ground as  by  the
    Rules the judge was required to assess the relationship as at the  date
    of application.

11. The grounds also contend that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    apply s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which provides that the public interest
    does not require the removal of a person with a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, where it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect  that  child  to  leave  the  UK.  Judge  Campbell
    considered it arguable that the judge erred in this respect,  as  there
    were no clear findings as to whether the child would  be  a  qualifying
    child, or whether the appellant had  a  genuine  parental  relationship
    with her, or any consideration of reasonableness of expecting the child
    to leave the UK.

12. The Rule 24 reply, dated 20.4.17, submits that  the  onus  was  on  the
    appellant to show that 117B(6) was met, but it does not appear to  have
    been pursued at the First-tier Tribunal appeal.  There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that  the  child  is  a  qualifying  child.  On  the  partner's
    immigration history and status, it would be difficult to  see  how  any
    different outcome could have been reached.

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Nadeem accepted that consideration of  the
    relationship with the partner  had  to  be  made  as  at  the  date  of
    application.

14. However, whilst it was not raised with the Tribunal at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing, Mr  Nadeem  submitted  that  the  child  is  a
    qualifying child as she is a British citizen.

15. I was informed that the child was born in India in 2008 and came to the
    UK in 2012. She has not been in the UK for a  period  of  7  years.  Mr
    McVeety accepted that the child has ILR, but this is not settled status
    in the UK. It was not accepted that the child is a British citizen  and
    no evidence to prove that assertion was submitted to the  Tribunal.  Mr
    McVeety pointed out that it would be  peculiar  for  the  child  to  be
    granted ILR if a British citizen, as a British citizen does not require
    leave to remain.

16. None of this was raised with the First-tier Tribunal and even now there
    is no evidence to demonstrate that the  child  is  a  qualifying  child
    under 117B(6).

17. In the circumstances, there was no error of law in the alleged  failure
    of the First-tier Tribunal to consider 117B(6) outside the  Rules.  The
    outcome of the appeal was inevitably a dismissal.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        28 July 2017


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        28 July 2017

