
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24895/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 6th June 2013                                |On 10th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                               cem mansuroglu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Ishewood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the Appellant from a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Callow) who  dismissed  his  appeal   against  the
    decision of the Respondent to refuse him a permanent residence card  in
    accordance with the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey who was born on 28th  July  1975.
    The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 9th November  2006
    as a student having been granted entry clearance from 20th  October  to
    31st May 2007.

 3.  On 26th January  2008  he  married  Asli  Ulusoy  (a  French  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom) and they lived together
    as husband and wife until their marriage broke down.   On  21st  August
    2008 the Appellant was issued with a residence card  valid  until  21st
    August 2013 as a family member of an EEA national.  Having  resided  in
    the UK as an EEA national for over five years, the Appellant's wife was
    naturalised as a British citizen on 16th September 2009.  On  25th  May
    2012, a decree of divorce was made  absolute  by  the  Edmonton  County
    Court.  It is said that since June 2012 the Appellant's former wife had
    been living and working in France, but frequently visiting  the  United
    Kingdom and since the divorce the Appellant's former wife had not  been
    absent from the UK for two years  or  more.   On  14th  June  2012  the
    Appellant made an  application  for  permanent  residence.   Since  his
    divorce, the Appellant has been in full-time employment.

 4. In a notice of immigration decision dated 29th May 2012 the  Respondent
    refused  the  application  under  Regulation  15(1)(f)  of   the   2006
    Regulations.  The basis for the refusal was that the Appellant had  not
    completed five years' residency in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Regulations and thus it was stated that he  had  no  basis  of
    stay.


 5.   The accompanying reasons  for  refusal  letter   gave  the  following
    reasons by reference to Regulation 10(5) of the 2006  Regulations.   It
    was noted that in accordance with those Regulations, the Appellant  was
    required to produce evidence of the EEA  former  spouse  as  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom at the  time  of  the  divorce  and
    evidence that the marriage lasted for at least  three  years  and  that
    they had lived together in the UK for at  least  one  year  during  the
    marriage.  Furthermore evidence  was  required  to  show  that  he  was
    currently  in  employment,  self-employment   or   economically   self-
    sufficient as if he were an EEA national.  In addition, he  would  have
    to demonstrate that he had resided in accordance with  the  Regulations
    for a continuous five  year  period  which  would  mean  that  the  EEA
    national former spouse continuously exercised treaty rights up  to  the
    point of divorce and that he had been employed, self-employed  or  self
    sufficient since the divorce.  Collectively the evidence must  cover  a
    continuous five year period to  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15(1)(f).


 6. The refusal letter looked at the factual chronology set out earlier  in
    the determination noting that any evidence of  the  former  EEA  family
    exercising treaty rights could only be taken from the date of marriage,
    that is 20th January 2008.  The letter also looked at the evidence that
    had been produced concerning the EEA family  member  exercising  treaty
    rights and noted that evidence had been submitted until April 2010  but
    there was nothing from April 2010 to the date of divorce which is  25th
    May 2012.  Therefore the Appellant had failed  to  show  that  his  EEA
    national former spouse continuously exercised treaty rights up  to  the
    point of divorce.


 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Callow) on 14th March
    2013.  It is clear from the Record of Proceedings and  the  Appellant's
    bundle that was produced  for  that  hearing  that  the  Appellant  was
    present at the hearing as was his former wife who had produced evidence
    concerning her self-employed status and evidence  to  demonstrate  that
    she was in self-employment from April 2010 to the date of  the  divorce
    of 25th May 2012 and before that  date.   There  was  also  documentary
    evidence within the  Appellant's  bundle  relating  to  his  own  self-
    employment for the requisite period.


 8. In a determination promulgated on 2nd April  2013,  the  judge  in  his
    findings of fact accepted the history that was given  earlier  in  this
    determination.  The judge at paragraph 5 found that the  Appellant  had
    been in full-time employment.  In respect of the  issue  identified  in
    the refusal letter concerning evidence  of  the  former  EEA  Sponsor's
    employment from April 2010 to the date of divorce on 25th May 2012, the
    judge found it a fact at paragraph 13 of the determination that at  all
    times whilst residing in the UK until their divorce the spouse was self-
    employed.  The judge described this in the following way "It is  common
    cause in this appeal that at all times whilst residing in the UK  until
    their divorce the spouse was self-employed."  In the Grounds of  Appeal
    subsequently provided on behalf of the Appellant,  it  was  made  clear
    that at the hearing the Presenting Officer, having had time to consider
    all the documentary evidence made a concession that  the  evidence  did
    demonstrate that the former spouse had  been  self-employed  throughout
    that period of time hence the judge's comment that it was "common cause
    in the appeal".  The Judge went on  to  state  that  the  parties  were
    resident in the UK as spouses married to one another for  a  period  of
    four years and four months.  In making this finding he took the  period
    of time from 26th January 2008 (date of the marriage)  until  25th  May
    2012 (date of divorce).  The judge stated that:


         "This period is obviously not a continuous period  of  five  years'
         residence  and  therefore  the  Appellant  fails  to  satisfy   the
         requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f) of the Regulations.  He was not
         a family member who has retained a right of residence at  the  date
         of his divorce."


    Thus he dismissed the appeal.


      The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on the  basis
    that the judge had made a material misdirection in law in applying  the
    2006 Regulations.  The Appellant relied upon the law as it  was  stated
    originally in the Respondent's  refusal  letter  noting  that  for  the
    Appellant to qualify  for  a  permanent  residence  he  would  have  to
    establish that he met the requirements and the conditions in Regulation
    10(5) and (6) and that having retained his right of residence he  would
    have to  demonstrate  that  he  had  resided  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous five year period, which  would  mean  that
    the EEA national former spouse continuously exercised treaty rights  up
    to the point of divorce and that the Appellant had been employed, self-
    employed or  self-sufficient  since  the  divorce.   Collectively  this
    evidence  must  cover  a  continuous  five  year  period  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f).


     Thus it was submitted that the issue  that  had  been  raised  in  the
    refusal letter  upon  which  the  permanent  residence  card  had  been
    refused, namely, that one of the conditions in Regulation  10  was  not
    satisfied was that the Appellant had not demonstrated that  the  former
    spouse was exercising treaty rights up until the time of  divorce,  had
    in fact been resolved in favour of the Appellant.  Furthermore  it  had
    further been resolved in favour of the Appellant that he  had  been  in
    employment since the divorce.  On the basis of  the  findings  of  fact
    made by the judge, and taking into account that he  had  been  able  to
    satisfy Regulation 10(5) and (6) it demonstrated that he  was  able  to
    show a five year continuous period made up firstly, of the EEA national
    former spouse continuously exercising treaty rights up to the point  of
    divorce and that since that time the Appellant had  been  employed  and
    that the period of time was for a period  of  five  years.   Where  the
    judge fell into error was to find that the couple had not been  married
    and resided together as a couple for five years.   The  date  that  was
    important was the five year period which had elapsed from the  date  of
    their marriage namely 26th January 2008 until 26th January  2013  which
    was the five year point and which was prior to the hearing but post the
    decision in the appeal.  In those circumstances, it was submitted  that
    there was an error of law.


 9. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  was
    assisted by a McKenzie friend Mr Cecil Decker who had also  accompanied
    and assisted  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Upon
    enquiry, he was recognised as a McKenzie friend as he  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and he confirmed that he understood his role as  he
    had done before the First-tier Tribunal.


10.   The Appellant confirmed that the grounds as  drafted  were  full  and
    complete grounds and further confirmed what had been written  in  those
    grounds concerning the concession made on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State which had been referred to by the judge at paragraph  13  of  the
    determination relating to the Appellant's former  spouse  demonstrating
    from evidence that had been produced that she was  self-employed  until
    their divorce.  Furthermore  that  he  had  also  produced  documentary
    evidence to demonstrate his full-time employment which had  been  found
    as a fact at paragraph 5 of the determination.


11. I heard Ms Ishewoood on behalf of the Secretary of State.   She  stated
    that it had not been clear from the use of the terminology by the judge
    that the Secretary of State had made a concession concerning  the  real
    issue that had been set out in the refusal letter.  She confirmed  that
    the findings of fact made by the judge had not been challenged but  had
    not read paragraph 13 to mean that  was  a  concession.   However,  the
    documentation had been served on behalf of the Appellant in respect  of
    his former wife's self-employment in the  form  of  documents  from  HM
    Revenue and Customs and including  information  from  her  accountants.
    There was no reason to believe that what the Appellant had said was  in
    any way inconsistent with what the judge had set out at  paragraph  13.
    In those circumstances, she accepted that on the  facts  found  by  the
    judge  she  would  be  in  difficulty  in  the  case  to   uphold   the
    determination.


Conclusion


12. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error  of
    law in this appeal.  It is clear from the refusal letter and the notice
    of immigration decision that the relevant Regulations  were  Regulation
    10(5) and (6) read with Regulation 15(1)(f).  The issue  identified  in
    the refusal letter was that in order to qualify for a retained right of
    residence following the divorce from an  EEA  national,  in  accordance
    with Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 Regulations, the Appellant would have
    to demonstrate that the EEA former spouse was exercising treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom at the time of the divorce.  It is clear from the
    findings of fact made by the judge that he was so satisfied.  I  should
    observe at this stage that whilst Ms Ishewoood had not appreciated that
    a concession had been made by the Presenting  Officer  concerning  that
    issue (which was the main issue set out in the refusal  letter)  it  is
    clear from paragraph 13 of the determination and the documentation that
    was produced that it was agreed between the parties that at  all  times
    whilst residing in the UK until their divorce  the  Appellant's  former
    spouse was self-employed.  The use of the words "common cause  in  this
    appeal" was another way of saying that it was common ground between the
    parties, and that refers back to the  concession  that  was  made.   It
    would have been preferable to use the terminology of a concession but I
    am satisfied having considered the documentation, the Grounds of Appeal
    and its contents and the determination at paragraph 13 that that was in
    fact a finding made by the judge.  Thus the main issue  in  the  appeal
    was satisfied.


13.  The Appellant would also have to show that the marriage lasted for  at
    least three years and that they had resided in the United  Kingdom  for
    at least one year during the marriage.  There was no  issue  concerning
    that as it was set out in the refusal letter  that  it  was  recognised
    that they had lived together for at least one year and had been married
    for at least three years.  The third element that was  required  to  be
    satisfied was that the Appellant was in employment as if he were an EEA
    national.  The finding of fact made by the judge  at  paragraph  5  was
    that he had been in full-time employment.


14. As this was an application for permanent residence, the Appellant would
    have to  demonstrate  that  he  had  resided  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous five year period which would mean that his
    EEA national former spouse continuously exercised treaty rights  up  to
    the point of divorce and that the Appellant would  have  to  have  been
    employed (or self-employed or  self-sufficient)  since  their  divorce.
    Collectively, the evidence must cover a continuous five year period  to
    meet the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f).


15.   It is clear from the determination the judge found in favour  of  the
    Appellant and it was common ground that the EEA national former  spouse
    was exercising treaty rights up until the point of divorce.  It is also
    clear that he had been employed  since  the  divorce.   The  issue  was
    whether or not collectively that evidence  covered  a  continuous  five
    year period.  It was here that the judge made the  error  of  law.   He
    considered the five year period to stretch from 26th January 2008 which
    was the date of the marriage until 25th May 2012 which was the date  of
    divorce.  He found that not to be a continuous period  of  five  years'
    residence.  However it is clear from the timeline that  the  five  year
    period that the  judge  was  required  to  consider  started  from  the
    marriage date on 26th January 2008 and the five year period which ended
    on  26th  January  2013.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  difficulty  in
    calculating the five year period arose  because  at  the  date  of  the
    decision in this case  that was before the five year period had elapsed
    and thus in effect the Appellant  had  applied  before  the  five  year
    period and could not show at that point a continuous five year  period.
    However at the date of the hearing  which  was  14th  March  2013  that
    postdated the five year point of 26th January 2013 by  which  stage  he
    could show under the Regulations that collectively the evidence covered
    a continuous five year period being made up from  the  period  of  time
    where the former spouse was  exercising  treaty  rights  and  then  the
    Appellant himself exercising treaty  rights  being  employed  or  self-
    employed or self-sufficient since the divorce.  It is  clear  that  the
    Regulations  require  that  collectively  the  evidence  must  cover  a
    continuous five year period and this would include evidence up  to  the
    date of the hearing.


16. In those circumstances, as acknowledged by Ms Ishewoood the judge  fell
    into error and on the facts of this case and on the  findings  of  fact
    that he made which was supported by the  evidence,  the  Appellant  did
    indeed satisfy the 2006 Regulations.  For those reasons, the First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law, I consequently set  aside  the  decision
    and re-make the decision allowing the appeal.


Decision


The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law.

The decision is set aside and remade as follows:- the appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date 7th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


