
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24852/2014
     IA/24854/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2015                      |On 9 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                             MS MAGESWARY RAMAN
                        MISS THANUJA SRISATHKUNATHAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants have been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the reasons given by Judge Juliet  Grant-Hutchison  on  19
    March 2015:

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission out of time to appeal against a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley) promulgated
             on 21 January,  2015  whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellants'
             appeals against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse
             the Appellants leave to remain as the post flight  spouse  and
             child of a Sri Lankan national who has status to remain in the
             UK as an asylum seeker and currently holds a  travel  document
             permitting him to travel anywhere other than to Sri Lanka.   I
             am  satisfied  that  there  are  special   circumstances   and
             accordingly I extend time and admit the application.

         2.   It is arguable that the Judge erred  in  law  by  misdirecting
             himself (a) in his assessment of whether the first Appellant's
             husband could accompany them to Malaysia as the  spouse  of  a
             Malaysian national for although he may hold a  Refugee  Travel
             Document he does not have a Sri  Lankan  passport  and  it  is
             unclear whether the Malaysian  authorities  would  permit  him
             entry or any entitlement to work or to remain in  Malaysia  on
             such a basis when the Judge; (b) in not considering  the  best
             interests  of  the  child  should  the  second  Appellant   be
             separated from her father should she be required to leave  and
             (c) in  not  considering  the  interests  of  the  Appellants'
             husband/father in terms of Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  39
             should the Appellants be required to leave."

The Background

2.   The appellants are both nationals of Malaysia.  The first appellant  is
    the mother of the second appellant, whose date of birth is 26  February
    2009.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and
    I do not consider that the appellants require to be accorded  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.  As the first appellant is
    the main appellant, I shall  hereafter  refer  to  her  simply  as  the
    appellant, save where the context otherwise requires.

3.   The appellant, whose date of birth is 12 January 1982, is  recorded  as
    having entered the UK some time prior to 14 August 2004.  On  that  day
    she made an application for leave to  remain  as  a  student,  and  was
    granted leave in that capacity from 30  November  2004  to  31  October
    2005.  On 12 November 2005 the appellant was granted  an  extension  of
    stay as a student until 31 October 2006.  On 28  August  2006  she  was
    refused leave to enter as a returning  student  following  a  visit  to
    Malaysia.  She was granted temporary admission, and directed to  report
    to the UK Immigration Service on 4 September 2006.   In  the  meantime,
    her Malaysian passport was retained  by  the  Immigration  Officer  who
    refused her leave to enter.  The appellant failed  to  report  because,
    she says, she became very ill before the reporting date.  She also says
    that she subsequently requested her then solicitors to write to the  UK
    Immigration Service requesting the  return  of  her  passport,  as  she
    wished to undertake a voluntary return to Malaysia.  But there  was  no
    response to this request from UKIS, according to her then solicitors.

4.   She then began a relationship with a Sri Lankan national  by  the  name
    of Krishna Pillai Srisatkunathas, and so did not  continue  to  contact
    her solicitors for news about her passport.  They lived  together,  and
    eventually had a traditional wedding on 19 January 2008.   Their  child
    (the second appellant) was born on 26 February 2009.

5.   Mr Srisatkunathas was born in Sri Lanka on 18 April  1975.   He  is  an
    ethnic Tamil from Jaffna.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  with  the
    assistance of an agent on 31 December 2000  and  claimed  asylum.   The
    asylum application was refused on 22  February  2001,  and  his  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 28 April 2003.  He became appeal
    rights exhausted on 16 July 2003.  On 5 May 2006 Mr Srisatkunathas  was
    arrested while trying to board a plane for Canada, and was found to  be
    in possession of a forged British passport.  He was convicted of  using
    a false instrument on 6 May 2006, and on 4 July 2006 he  was  sentenced
    to six months' imprisonment with a recommendation for deportation.   He
    appealed against a subsequent decision  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him, but his appeal against that decision was dismissed.  On  6
    March 2007 a deportation order was signed against him,  and  served  on
    him on 26 March 2007.

6.   On 11 August 2010 he attended the  UKBA  Further  Submissions  Unit  to
    make further representations as to why he should not  be  removed  from
    the United Kingdom pursuant to the legacy programme.  He relied on  the
    fact that he was now in a relationship with the appellant  and  on  the
    fact that they had had a child together.

7.   On 21 February 2011 the then Secretary of State refused to  revoke  the
    deportation order which had been made against him.   Mr  Srisatkunathas
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, arguing that the refusal to revoke
    the deportation order was contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
    under both the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Convention.

8.   Mr Srisatkunathas' appeal came before a panel chaired by Judge  Rintoul
    sitting  at  Dorking  Magistrates'  Court  on  29   March   2011.    Mr
    Srisatkunathas was represented by Mr Waheed of Counsel.

9.   Mr Srisatkunathas' case under Article 8 was that  his  wife  could  not
    accompany him to Malaysia, as her passport was still being held by  the
    UK Immigration Service.  He could not return to Sri Lanka with his wife
    and child due to the problems he faced there and because his wife would
    not be given entry clearance to join him with their daughter.

10.  The respondent  accepted  that  Mr  Srisatkunathas  had  established  a
    family life with his wife and daughter.  But  his  wife  had  no  legal
    basis to remain in the United Kingdom, a fact of which she should  have
    been aware, and the child also had no right to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as neither of her parents had permission to be here.  There was
    no reason why the family  could  not  relocate  as  a  unit  either  to
    Malaysia or Sri Lanka.  Given Mr Srisatkunathas'  immigration  history,
    the immigration history of his wife  and  Mr  Srisatkunathas'  criminal
    conviction, any interference with his rights, or those of his wife  and
    child, was proportionate to the need to  maintain  immigration  control
    and the prevention of crime and disorder.

11.  On appeal, it was argued on Mr Srisatkunathas'  behalf  that  he  would
    not be permitted to settle in Malaysia due to immigration controls, and
    as a result the child would be separated from one parent or the other.

12.  At the appeal hearing, Mr Waheed sought an adjournment  inter  alia  on
    the ground that the  appeal  ought  not  to  be  determined  until  his
    instructing solicitors had completed enquiries with both the Sri Lankan
    and Malaysian High Commission in London to determine what  requirements
    would need to be met before Mr Srisatkunathas and his wife could settle
    together in either country.

13.  The Tribunal refused to adjourn the hearing.  They  noted  that  copies
    of the questions that had been put to the various High Commissions were
    before them, and there was no indication of when if at all there  would
    be any reply forthcoming.

14.  In his evidence, as recorded by the Tribunal,  Mr  Srisatkunathas  said
    that he knew after April 2007 that he and his partner had no status  to
    be here.  He had made some enquiries about getting a visa, but had  not
    contacted the embassy.  He and his partner had discussed going to  live
    in Malaysia, but he was not sure that he would be able to  get  a  visa
    and even then he would have to hide  away  from  his  in-laws  who  had
    threatened him, although there was nothing in writing.  He did not know
    why there was no mention of threats from the  in-laws  in  his  witness
    statement.   He  had  not  worked  in  the   United   Kingdom,   except
    occasionally to assist with painting and cleaning,  as  he  was  in  no
    position to work legally.

15.  The appellant was called as a witness, and  was  asked  whether,  apart
    from a lack of formal permission, there was any reason why  they  could
    not go to Malaysia.  She said it was a Muslim dominated country and she
    was a Hindu.  She said they had not registered as husband and wife,  by
    which she meant that they had no legal document to show that they  were
    married.   She had returned to the UK  in  2006  to  be  with  her  now
    husband, and prior to that she had been studying at West End College in
    Whitechapel.  She had not been able to finish the course as her parents
    did not approve of her marriage, and refused to support her any longer.
     As her parents did not approve of the marriage, they did not  talk  to
    him, they only talked to her.

16.  In their  subsequent  decision,  the  Tribunal  allowed  the  husband's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  They considered there was a significant risk
    of Mr Srisatkunathas  being  detained  and  ill-treated  on  return  on
    account of his membership of the LTTE.  As they allowed the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, they  said  it  was  unnecessary  to  consider  whether
    removing him from the United Kingdom would be in breach of  his  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR.

17.  Following his successful appeal, the appellant's  husband  was  granted
    limited leave to remain as a refugee.  On 22 August 2012 the appellants
    applied for leave to remain as the  dependants  of  Mr  Srisatkunathas.
    The application was refused with no right of appeal on 11  April  2013.
    The appellants applied for judicial review,  and  the  judicial  review
    proceedings were compromised by a consent order whereby the  respondent
    agreed to reconsider the application and to set removal  directions  if
    the decision was to be maintained.

18.  On 28 May 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  maintaining
    the  refusal  decisions,  and  for  setting  removal  directions.   The
    appellant and her daughter and her partner could return to Malaysia  as
    a family unit and continue to enjoy their family life  together  there.
    It was accepted that the partner/father of the  family  unit  had  been
    granted asylum, and that he was a Sri Lankan national.  But  there  was
    nothing to suggest he could not reside in Malaysia with his partner and
    child and adapt to life there.  Whilst this might involve a  degree  of
    disruption to the appellants' private lives, this was considered to the
    proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   maintaining   effective
    immigration control and was in accordance with the Secretary of State's
    Section 55 duties.

19.  Consideration had been given to paragraph 353B.  Regard  had  been  had
    to the appellant's compliance.  She was refused leave to  enter  on  28
    August 2006 as a returning student, following a visit to Malaysia,  and
    she absconded  from  reporting  restrictions.   Her  personal  history,
    character,  conduct  and  employment  record  were   not   sufficiently
    compelling to justify allowing her to remain here.  After she absconded
    from reporting restrictions, she did not lodge an application for leave
    to remain to regularise her stay until 22 August 2012.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

20.  The appellants' appeals came before  Judge  Oakley  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 15 January 2015.  Both parties were
    legally represented.  Miss Anzani of Counsel appeared on behalf of  the
    appellants.  The judge received oral evidence from  the  appellant  and
    her husband, and he said in his subsequent decision that he  had  taken
    into account the documents in the respective bundles.

21.  In his subsequent decision, he found that the  appellant  had  remained
    illegally in the United Kingdom from October 2006 and had done  nothing
    to regularise her position until making her application in  2012.   Her
    husband had status to remain in the United Kingdom, and currently  held
    a travel document permitting him to travel anywhere other than  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Their child Thanuja was in year 1 at school.  The appellant was
    currently pregnant, and according to her GP, the due date for the birth
    of the child was 20 August 2015.  The appellant also had a second child
    who was not the subject of the application, and he had been born on  12
    February 2014.

22.  At paragraph [18] of his decision,  the  judge  set  out  the  evidence
    relied  on  by  the  appellant  as   establishing   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles  to  her  husband  accompanying  her  and  the
    children to Malaysia.  The judge continued:

         "20. I have considered the relevant document submitted but I am not
             in  agreement  with  that  conclusion   of   the   Appellants'
             Representative.

         21.  It is specifically stated that  an  entry  permit  (EP)  is  a
             permit issued to foreigners who are not citizens  of  Malaysia
             entering to reside in the country, those who have been  issued
             with EP are exempted from  applying  from  any  type  of  pass
             either for employment or other purposes and there are  certain
             conditions laid down which I have referred to above and  which
             in the aggregate total three.

         22.  What is significant is that the paragraph in  question  states
             that they are only exempt if they have  got  an  EP  pass  but
             clearly  they  could  apply  for  another  type  of  pass  for
             employment or other purpose.

         23.  There  has  been  no  evidence  whatsoever  adduced  from  the
             Malaysian immigration authorities or from any  lawyer  dealing
             with Malaysian Immigration practice to state  that  the  First
             Appellant's husband would not be in a  position  to  accompany
             the First Appellant and her children back to Malaysia.

         24.  I accept that this is not something that might  happen  easily
             and clearly there would be conditions attached but for example
             if  the  First  Appellant's  husband  obtains  an   offer   of
             employment in Malaysia I cannot see that there should  be  any
             reason why a permit would not then be granted by the Malaysian
             authorities and this would be the type of  situation  envisage
             in the website document that has been produced which refers to
             applying for 'any type of pass.'

         25.  I have considered the First Appellant's  husband's  status  in
             the United Kingdom as an asylum seeker  at  present  but  that
             status will be capable of being converted subject  to  certain
             conditions being satisfied to British citizenship which  would
             afford the First Appellant's husband even  better  status  for
             the Malaysian authorities.  It may  well  be  that  the  First
             Appellant's husband will have to  satisfy  certain  conditions
             before being successful in an  application  to  accompany  his
             wife to Malaysia but that situation would be no  different  to
             satisfying conditions if he was coming to the United Kingdom.

         26.  In short I conclude that whilst there may be  difficulties  in
             satisfying  the  Malaysian  authorities  but  there  are   not
             'insurmountable obstacles' as I believe potential  immigration
             obstacles will be capable of being surmounted and the evidence
             adduced does not suggest that a person in the situation of the
             First Appellant, who is a Malaysian citizen,  could  not  have
             her husband accompany her back to Malaysia.

         27.  I have then considered  276ADE(vi)  and  have  concluded  that
             again there would not be significant obstacles  to  the  First
             Appellant relocating back to Malaysia.  She has  family  still
             living there and on her own admission is  in  regular  contact
             with her mother.  I cannot also accept that  she  would  still
             not have friends and acquaintances still remaining in Malaysia
             who would be of some help to her.  I therefore have determined
             that the Appellants cannot satisfy 276ADE(vi).

         28.  I then need to consider the Appellants' rights under Article 8
             and  I  have  firstly  considered  their  rights   under   the
             Immigration rules Article 8 but I have also taken into account
             initially the position concerning the First Appellant's eldest
             child under Section 55 of the Borders Citizen and  Immigration
             Act.  This was considered by the Respondent  and  clearly  the
             best place for this child is to be with the family unit namely
             with the First Appellant and her other child  and  her  father
             and in the event that her mother is removed then  clearly  the
             Second Appellant would be removed with her mother as  part  of
             the family unit.

         29.  The Second Appellant has only recently started primary  school
             in Year 1 and  there  should  be  nothing  to  stop  her  from
             entering the Malaysian  education  system.   She  speaks  both
             English and some Tamil and given  the  age  that  she  is  she
             should be able to integrate in to the Malaysian primary school
             system.  I also am mindful of the fact that  I  need  to  find
             that there are good reasons to consider Article 8 directly and
             in that instance whether there are exceptional  circumstances.



         30.  I am minded in the case of MM Lebanon  -v-  the  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department the Court stated

                  "Nagre does not add anything to the debate  save  for  the
                  statement that if a particular person is outside the  Rule
                  then  he  has  to  demonstrate,  as   a   preliminary   to
                  consideration outside the Rule, that he  has  an  arguable
                  case that there may be good grounds for granting leave  to
                  remain outside the Rules.

                  I  cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing  this  further
                  intermediary test.  If the applicant  cannot  satisfy  the
                  rule, then there is either  or  there  is  not  a  further
                  Article claim.  That will have to  be  determined  by  the
                  relevant decision maker."

         31.  The circumstances relating to both Appellants' case have  been
             considered under the Rules and it has been concluded that they
             do not satisfy the Rules.  The family will be  returned  as  a
             family unit and I conclude therefore that there is  no  reason
             for me to  consider  the  Appellants'  position  outside  that
             framework and consequently I do not do so."

The Error of Law Hearing

23.  At the hearing before me, Miss Seehra developed  the  arguments  raised
    in the application for permission to appeal.  She relied on R  (On  the
    Application of HRP and Others)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00351 (IAC) and on JO and Others (Section 55
    Duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) and on Singh v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in law in not following a two stage approach. Ground  1
    was that the judge had erred in law in not finding that  there  was  an
    insurmountable legal obstacle to the family relocating  as  a  unit  to
    Malaysia.  But if she was wrong about that,  the  appeal  ought  to  be
    allowed on ground 2, as the judge had taken no account  of  the  likely
    separation of the second appellant from her father, which  was  plainly
    contrary to her best interests.

24.  In reply, Mr Bramble submitted the judge  had  given  adequate  reasons
    for finding that there were not insurmountable obstacles to the  family
    relocating as a unit. Having made this finding, on the particular facts
    it  was  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to  conduct  a   conventional
    proportionality assessment outside the Rules.

Discussion

25.  Ground 1 is that the judge's finding  on  insurmountable  obstacles  is
    speculative, insufficiently reasoned and not borne out by the objective
    evidence.  Having considered the skeleton argument  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the bundle of objective  evidence  that  was  relied  on
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and  the  judge's  reasons,  I  am  not
    persuaded that this ground is made out.

26.  The necessary starting point, which is not disputed by Miss Seehra,  is
    that the burden of proof rested with the appellant to show  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to her husband settling in Malaysia  with
    her and the children.

27.  One of the strands of objective evidence relied on by Counsel below  is
    that Malaysia is not party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and  lacks  a
    legislative and administrative framework to  address  refugee  matters.
    But the husband would not be going to Malaysia to claim asylum, and  so
    this evidence does not lead anywhere.

28.  The evidence principally relied on is summarised in paragraph  [18]  of
    the decision. It is derived from the  website  of  the  Malaysian  High
    Commission in Australia:

         I am not a Malaysian citizen but married to a Malaysian.  What type
         of visa do I need to apply to live in Malaysia?

         Answer: you can apply for  entry  permit  to  reside  in  Malaysia.
         Entry permit (EP) is a permit issued  to  foreigners  who  are  not
         citizens of Malaysia entering to reside in this country.  Those who
         have been issued with EP are exempted from applying for any type of
         pass either for employment or other purpose.

             Conditions:

             1.   Wife of Malaysian citizen residing  in  this  country  on
             long   stay    social    visit    pass/temporary    employment
             pass/employment  pass  on  a  year  to  year  renewable  basis
             continuously for five years or more ...

             2.    Children  of  Malaysian  citizen  below  6  years   old.
             Application can be made using an IM.4 pin 1/93 form  sponsored
             by father/mother/close relative of applicant who is  Malaysian
             citizen) permanent resident of Malaysia.

             3.   Spouse and children  of  Malaysian  citizen  who  possess
             expertise/skills and overseas working experience, planning  to
             return and work in Malaysia (under the programme to  encourage
             Malaysian citizens with expertise residing overseas to  return
             to Malaysia).

         Approval of this application will be given within six  months  from
         the date [of] submission to the Immigration Department.

29.  The argument for the appellant was that her  husband  plainly  did  not
    meet any of these three conditions.

30.  Since the appellant had studied in the United  Kingdom,  it  would  not
    necessarily follow that she would not qualify for  consideration  under
    the programme to encourage Malaysian citizens with  expertise  residing
    overseas to return to Malaysia.   No  enquiry  had  been  made  of  the
    Malaysian Embassy in London as to whether the appellant, and hence  her
    husband and children, could bring themselves within  condition  3.   It
    was clearly open to Judge Oakley to make the finding which  he  did  at
    paragraph [23] of his decision, which was that no  evidence  whatsoever
    had been adduced from the Malaysian immigration authorities or from any
    lawyer dealing with Malaysian immigration practise, to state  that  her
    husband would not be in a position to accompany her  and  her  children
    back to Malaysia.  On that ground  alone,  the  judge  has  provided  a
    sufficient reason for finding that the appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proof.

31.  The judge also reasonably drew a distinction between  an  entry  permit
    and another type of pass that might enable a  foreigner  to  reside  in
    Malaysia.  As the judge found at paragraph [22],  the  message  of  the
    website was that an entry permit was not the  only  means  by  which  a
    foreigner could reside  in  Malaysia  as  the  spouse  of  a  Malaysian
    citizen.  The thrust of the information on  the  website  was  that  if
    condition 3 was met, the foreign spouse would be exempted from applying
    for "any type of pass either for employment or other purpose."   So  if
    condition 3 was not met, it did not  follow  that  the  foreign  spouse
    could not reside in Malaysia.  All it meant was that the foreign spouse
    did not qualify for an entry  permit,  but  would  have  to  apply  for
    another type of permit to enable him/her to reside in Malaysia.

32.  At paragraph [24], the judge accepted that if the  husband  had  to  go
    down this route, it might not happen easily.   But,  since  the  burden
    rested with the appellant, it was  open  to  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion, which  he  does  at  paragraph  [26],  that  the  potential
    immigration obstacles which the husband  would  face  were  capable  of
    being surmounted; and the appellant had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that she could not have  her  husband  accompany  her  back  to
    Malaysia with the children.

33.  There is no appeal against the judge's finding at paragraph  [27]  that
    the appellant  could  not  bring  herself  within  the  scope  of  Rule
    276ADE(vi).  This is significant when considering ground 2.  By the end
    of paragraph [27], the judge has addressed the two potential avenues by
    which the appellant could qualify for Article  8  relief  under  either
    Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE.  At paragraphs [26] to [31], the  judge  is
    ostensibly giving extended reasons  as  to  why  the  children  do  not
    qualify for Article 8 relief under the Rules, and as to why it  is  not
    necessary  to  go  on  to  stage  2,  and  to  conduct  a  conventional
    proportionality assessment outside the Rules.  But in  fact  the  judge
    has gone on to conduct a stage 2 assessment, as the topics discussed in
    paragraphs [28] and [29] do not arise under the  Rules,  but  can  only
    arise as part of a conventional proportionality assessment,  where  the
    best interests of children are a primary consideration.  The discussion
    in paragraphs [28] and [29] cannot arise under the Rules,  as  none  of
    the children are qualifying children: that is to say, none of them  are
    British citizens and none of them has accrued seven years' residence in
    the UK.

34.  The judge needed to consider the best interests of  the  children,  and
    he has done so.  So I find there is no  material  error  in  the  judge
    having considered the best interests of the children on a  freestanding
    basis under Section 55 of Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act,
    rather than at stage 5 of the Razgar test.

35.  The main thrust of ground 2 is a criticism of substance, rather than  a
    criticism of form.  The alleged error is the judge's  failure  to  take
    into account the likelihood of the eldest child  being  separated  from
    her father, and the detrimental impact that would have on her wellbeing
    and development.  But it is made clear in  the  refusal  decision  that
    what is in contemplation is the family  being  removed  together  as  a
    unit.  This would involve the  husband's  cooperation,  as  he  is  not
    himself liable to removal.  He would have to  accompany  his  wife  and
    children voluntarily, having obtained the  necessary  permit  from  the
    Malaysian Embassy in London. While this would not  be  straightforward,
    it does not present an insurmountable obstacle.  In the  light  of  the
    finding at paragraph [26], which  the  judge  reiterated  at  paragraph
    [31], there is no risk of the eldest child  being  separated  from  her
    father (or indeed of any child being separated from either parent).  So
    it is not a threat which the judge needed to  take  into  account  when
    assessing the children's best interests.   Separating  the  family  was
    not, and is not, in  the  Secretary  of  State's  contemplation.   Thus
    ground 2 is also not made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  These appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


