
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24152/2015
                                                               IA/24154/2015
                                                               IA/24155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Monday 26 September 2016                   |On Tuesday 4 October 2016    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   1) S A
                                   2) A M
                                   3) A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Bild, Solicitor, Camden Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although  no  anonymity  order  was  made  at  any  earlier  stage  of   the
proceedings, two  of  the  Appellants  in  this  case  are  minor  children.
Accordingly, it is appropriate that their details and those of their  mother
be protected.  Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the
Appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  Appellants  or  any  member  of  their
family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and   to   the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

    1. The Appellants appeal the Respondent's decisions dated 11  June  2015
       refusing them leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
       their family and private life.  Their appeals  were  dismissed  under
       and outside the Immigration Rules by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Manuell in a decision promulgated on 10 December 2015.

    2. Permission to appeal that decision  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Gill on 10 June 2016  based  on  the  factual  developments  in
       relation to the Appellants' immigration status and on the basis  that
       Judge Manuell had arguably erred in finding that  he  was  unable  to
       take those factual  developments  into  account  as  they  were  "new
       matters".  The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on  20
       July 2016.  She found there to be an error on a point of law  on  all
       grounds but in particular because the Judge had  failed  to  consider
       the effect of removal of the family  on  the  third  Appellant  whose
       father (and younger sibling) are in the UK.  She therefore set  aside
       the decision of Judge Manuell and directed a  resumed  hearing.   The
       appeal came before me on the resumed hearing to re-make the decision.

  Factual background

    3. The First Appellant is a Moroccan national.  The Second Appellant  is
       the son of the First Appellant.  His father is  a  Moroccan  national
       who continues to reside in Morocco and from whom the First  Appellant
       is divorced.  He is also now registered as a British citizen,  having
       lived in the UK for over ten years.  He is aged  fifteen  years.   He
       retains contact with his father in Morocco via Skype.

    4. The First Appellant arrived in the UK on 25  January  2001  at  which
       time she was pregnant with the Second Appellant.  Her  leave  expired
       in June 2001.  Thereafter she overstayed. The  Second  Appellant  was
       born on 31 July 2001.  An application made for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain by the First and Second Appellants  was  refused  in  November
       2005 and the appeal against that decision was dismissed in 2007.

    5. The First Appellant married Mr AA on 16 November 2009.  Mr  AA  is  a
       Dutch national.  They have two children, the Third Appellant born  24
       October 2010 and another daughter born on 7 June 2015 who is  not  an
       Appellant in these proceedings.  The relationship between  the  First
       Appellant and Mr AA has broken down.  The Appellants were  refused  a
       permanent residence card as the family members of an EEA national  on
       16 June 2014.  It appears that they may have appealed  that  decision
       but I have not been made aware of the outcome of any appeal  on  that
       basis.  I am told that the First Appellant's youngest  child  who  is
       not an Appellant in these proceedings is now registered  as  a  Dutch
       citizen.

    6. The Second Appellant's registration as  a  British  citizen  occurred
       after the hearing before Judge Manuell but  prior  to  the  grant  of
       permission to appeal.  His appeal therefore falls away by  reason  of
       section  104(4A)  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002.
       However, his position as a British citizen is highly relevant to  the
       question whether the family can now be removed.  Indeed,  Judge  Gill
       when granting permission suggested that the Respondent  may  wish  to
       reconsider the position of the First and Third Appellants in light of
       that development. For ease of reference, I continue to refer  to  him
       as the Second Appellant hereafter even though,  strictly,  he  is  no
       longer an Appellant.

  Submissions

    7. Mr Bild relied predominantly on the position of the Second Appellant.
       He submitted  that,  as  a  British  citizen,  the  First  and  Third
       Appellants' appeals fall to be allowed under  the  parent  and  child
       categories of the Rules.   He  accepted  that  the  First  and  Third
       Appellant cannot meet certain requirements under the  Rules  such  as
       the financial and English language criteria.  However, he  relied  on
       EX.1. That does  not  require  the  First  Appellant  to  meet  those
       requirements.

    8. Mr Bild further pointed to the Respondent's IDIs  regarding  the  ten
       year route for leave which provides that  "save  in  cases  involving
       criminality, the decision maker must not take a decision in  relation
       to the parent or primary carer of a British citizen child  where  the
       effect of that decision would be to force that British child to leave
       the EU, regardless of the age of that child."  The IDIs go on to note
       that this reflects  the  ECJ  judgment  in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (European
       citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 (08 March 2011)  ("Zambrano").   He
       points also to the Supreme Court case of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of
       State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 and to what was  said  in
       that case regarding the best interests of a  British  citizen  child.
       He also relied on section 117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002.

    9. Mr Bild's subsidiary submission concerned the position of  the  Third
       Appellant and the First Appellant's other child who, if their  mother
       was removed from the UK, would be required to  leave  with  her.   He
       submitted that this would be  contrary  to  their  EU  Treaty  rights
       applying both Zambrano and the  principles  from  the  ECJ  cases  of
       Ibrahim and Teixeira.

   10. Mr Kotas relied in his short submissions on the Respondent's  reasons
       for refusal letter.   In response to a question from me, he confirmed
       that the Respondent did not argue that the British citizenship of the
       Second Appellant was a "new matter"  which  I  could  not  take  into
       account.  The Respondent's Rule 24 submissions say only that this  is
       a factor to be weighed in the consideration of Article 8 ECHR; it  is
       not a trump card.

         The Immigration Rules and Section 117B


         Appendix FM


         Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent


         EX.1.    This paragraph applies if


             (a) (i)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a child who-


                     (aa)    is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                     age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                     leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                     (bb)    is in the UK;


                     (cc)    is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                     continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                     preceding the date of application; and


                 (ii)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                 leave the UK; or ...


         Family life as a child of a person with limited leave as a partner
         or parent


         This route is for a child whose parent is applying for entry
         clearance or leave, or who has limited leave, as a partner or
         parent. For further provision on a child seeking to enter or remain
         in the UK for the purpose of their family life see Part 8 of these
         Rules.


             ...


             Section R-LTRC: Requirements for leave to remain as a child


             R-LTRC.1.1. The requirements to be met for leave to remain as
             a child are that-


             (a) the applicant must be in the UK;


             (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for leave
             to remain as a child; and either


             (c) (i)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of
                 the grounds in Section S- LTR: Suitability-leave to remain;
                 and


                 (ii)  the applicant meets all of the requirements of
                 Section E-LTRC: Eligibility for leave to remain as a child;
                 or


             (d) (i)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of
                 the grounds in Section S- LTR: Suitability-leave to remain;
                 and


                 (ii)  the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                 LTRC.1.2.-1.6.; and


                 (iii) a parent of the applicant has been or is at the same
                 time being granted leave to remain under paragraph D-
                 LTRP.1.2. or D-LTRPT.1.2. or indefinite leave to remain
                 under this Appendix (except as an adult dependent
                 relative).


             Section E-LTRC: Eligibility for leave to remain as a child


             E-LTRC.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a child
             all of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRC.1.2. to 2.4. must
             be met (except where paragraph R-LTRC.1.1.(d)(ii) applies).


             Relationship requirements


             E-LTRC.1.2. The applicant must be under the age of 18 at the
             date of application or when first granted leave as a child
             under this route.


             E-LTRC.1.3. The applicant must not be married or in a civil
             partnership.


             E-LTRC.1.4. The applicant must not have formed an independent
             family unit.


             E-LTRC.1.5. The applicant must not be leading an independent
             life.


             E-LTRC.1.6. One of the applicant's parents (referred to in
             this section as the "applicant's parent") must be in the UK
             and have leave to enter or remain or indefinite leave to
             remain, or is at the same time being granted leave to remain
             or indefinite leave to remain, under this Appendix (except as
             an adult dependent relative), and


             (a) the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is also
             a parent of the applicant; or


             (b) the applicant's parent has had and continues to have sole
             responsibility for the child's upbringing or the applicant
             normally lives with this parent and not their other parent; or


             (c) there are serious and compelling family or other
             considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable
             and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care.


             ...


             Section D-LTRC: Decision on application for leave to remain as
             a child


             D-LTRC.1.1. If the applicant meets the requirements for leave
             to remain as a child the applicant will be granted leave to
             remain of a duration which will expire at the same time as the
             leave granted to the applicant's parent, and subject to a
             condition of no recourse to public funds. To qualify for
             indefinite leave to remain as a child of a person with
             indefinite leave to remain as a partner or parent, the
             applicant must meet the requirements of paragraph 298 of these
             rules.


             D-LTRC.1.2. If the applicant does not meet the requirements
             for leave to remain as a child the application will be
             refused.


             Family life as a parent of a child in the UK


             Section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited leave to remain as a
             parent


             R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to
             remain as a parent are-


             (a) the applicant and the child must be in the UK;


             (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for
             limited or indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner;
             and either


             (c) (i)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under
                 Section S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and


                 (ii)  the applicant meets all of the requirements of
                 Section ELTRPT: Eligibility for leave to remain as a
                 parent, or


             (d) (i)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under S-LTR:
                 Suitability leave to remain; and


                 (ii)  the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                 LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and


                 (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.


             Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for limited leave to remain as a
             parent


             E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a
             parent all of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to
             5.2. must be met.


             Relationship requirements


             E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-


             (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or
             where the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant
             was first granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a
             parent under this Appendix, must not have formed an
             independent family unit or be leading an independent life;


             (b) living in the UK; and


             (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or


             (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
             immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph
             EX.1. applies.


             E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-


             (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for
             the child or the child normally lives with the applicant and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK); or


             (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
             must be-


                 (i)   a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;


                 (ii)  not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                 a person who has been in a relationship with the applicant
                 for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                 and


                 (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                 to remain as a partner under this Appendix.


             E-LTRPT.2.4.


             (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-




                 (i)   sole parental responsibility for the child, or that
                 the child normally lives with them; or


                 (ii)  direct access (in person) to the child, as agreed
                 with the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
                 or as ordered by a court in the UK; and


             (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
             upbringing.


             Immigration status requirement


             E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-


             (a) as a visitor; or


             (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less,
             unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of family
             court or divorce proceedings;


             E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -


             (a) on temporary admission or temporary release, unless:


                 (i)   the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
                 applicant arrived in the UK more than 6 months prior to the
                 date of application; and


                 (ii)  paragraph EX.1. applies; or


             (b) in breach of immigration laws (disregarding any period of
             overstaying for a period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph
             EX.1. applies.


             ...


             Section D-LTRPT: Decision on application for limited leave to
             remain as a parent


             ...


             D-LTRPT.1.2. If the applicant meets the requirements in
             paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1. (a), (b) and (d) for limited leave to
             remain as a parent they will be granted leave to remain for a
             period not exceeding 30 months and subject to a condition of
             no recourse to public funds unless the Secretary of State
             considers that the person should not be subject to such a
             condition, and they will be eligible to apply for settlement
             after a continuous period of at least 120 months with such
             leave, with limited leave as a parent under paragraph D-
             LTRPT.1.1., or in the UK with entry clearance as a parent
             under paragraph D-ECPT.1.1.


             D-LTRPT.1.3. If the applicant does not meet the requirements
             for limited leave to remain as a parent the application will
             be refused.


             Section 117


             "117A Application of this Part


             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


                 (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                 family life under Article 8, and


                 (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                 Human Rights Act 1998.


             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                 (a)   in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                 117B, and


                 (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                 criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.


             (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's right
             to respect for private and family life is justified under
             Article 8(2).


             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases


             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.


             (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-


                 (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                 (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


             (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-


                 (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                 (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


             (4) Little weight should be given to-


                 (a)   a private life, or


                 (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                 is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                 the United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5) Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-


                 (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and


                 (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                 leave the United Kingdom.


             ...


             117DInterpretation of this Part


          1) In this Part-


                 "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
                 Human Rights;


                 "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of
                 18 and who-


                 (a)   is a British citizen or ... "


   11. At the date of the Respondent's decision, the  Second  Appellant  had
       been in the UK for seven years.   However,  the  Respondent  did  not
       consider that it would be unreasonable to expect that child to return
       to Morocco as he is a Moroccan national, he did  not  have  leave  to
       remain in the UK and could avail himself  of  education  there.   The
       Respondent found that it was also reasonable for the  other  children
       to return there with the First  Appellant.   Other  than  the  Second
       Appellant, though, none could satisfy the requirements of  the  Rules
       (and that remains the case).  No  point  was  taken  in  relation  to
       suitability of any of the Appellants. The application on the basis of
       the First Appellant's private life was rejected on the basis that she
       had not been in the UK for  twenty  years  and  there  were  no  very
       significant obstacles to her reintegration in Morocco. Whilst it  was
       accepted that the Second Appellant was a child who had been in the UK
       for seven years, the point was repeated that it was not  unreasonable
       to expect him to return to Morocco.  The Third Appellant had not been
       in the UK for seven years at date of application.  Having  considered
       the children's best  interests  outside  the  Rules,  the  Respondent
       concluded that their best interests were  served  by  remaining  with
       their mother and that they would be returned to Morocco as  a  family
       unit.

  Discussion and conclusions

   12. The Respondent accepted in her decision that EX.1. is of relevance in
       this case.  At the date of her decision,  the  Second  Appellant  had
       been in the UK for seven years.  The refusal was on the basis that it
       would nonetheless be reasonable to expect him to return  to  Morocco.
       The position has now moved on, even  since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing of the appeal.  The Second Appellant is no  longer  simply  a
       child who has spent more than seven years in the UK; he is a  British
       citizen.  Moreover, the First Appellant is his sole carer; his father
       remains in Morocco and he only  has  intermittent  contact  with  his
       father via Skype.  There is no question therefore  but  that  if  the
       First Appellant were removed, the British citizen child would have to
       go with her.

   13. In ZH (Tanzania), Lady Hale recognised that  British  citizenship  is
       not a trump card.  Nevertheless, the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
       nationality of a child was an issue of particular importance when  it
       came to assessing the best interests of that child  which  are  of  a
       course a primary consideration.  It was  recognised  by  the  Supreme
       Court that removal would  interfere  potentially  very  significantly
       with the rights of that child since it effectively deprives the child
       of any meaningful content to its right as a citizen.   That  position
       is now bolstered by the ECJ's judgment in Zambrano.   The  derivative
       right given effect to by that judgment is recognised domestically  by
       the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   It  is
       almost certainly the case that, if the First Appellant were  to  make
       an application relying  on  that  derivative  right  now,  she  would
       succeed on the  facts  of  this  case.   The  Respondent's  own  IDIs
       recognise the importance of British citizenship of a child, no  doubt
       in light of that case law and recognise that a decision maker  should
       not take a decision to remove a parent where the effect of that would
       be to require a British citizen child to leave the UK.

   14. Although Mr Bild prayed in aid also the position of,  in  particular,
       the youngest child of the  First  Appellant  who  is  apparently  now
       registered as a Dutch national, I need go no further than to consider
       these appeals in light of  the  position  of  the  Second  Appellant.
       Based on the case law and the Respondent's own IDIs, I  am  satisfied
       that it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

   15. The effect of that is that EX.1.1(a)(ii) of the Rules applies to  the
       position of the First Appellant.  She is unable to meet the financial
       or English language requirements of the Rules but she does  not  have
       to if EX.1. is satisfied.  Although  applying  section  117B  to  the
       facts of the Appellants' cases for the most part does not avail  them
       - the First Appellant does not speak English, has been  here  without
       leave for most of the period of  her  stay  and  is  not  financially
       independent - section 117B(6) provides that the public interest  does
       not require removal where a  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with a qualifying child and  it  is  not  reasonable  to
       expect the child to leave the UK.  The Second  Appellant  meets  that
       definition.  I have explained why it is not reasonable for that child
       to leave the UK.

   16. Since the First Appellant therefore meets the Rules (applying  EX.1.)
       for leave to remain as a parent of the Second  Appellant,  the  Third
       Appellant's appeal also falls to be allowed on  the  basis  that  her
       mother is  being  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  parent  (see  R-
       LTRC.1.1(d) of the Rules).

DECISION

The appeal of the Second Appellant lapses as he is now a British citizen

The appeals of the First and Third Appellants are allowed  under  the  Rules


Signed      [pic]      Date 30 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
