
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24604/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 30th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                       Mrs Kathleen Margaret fairchild
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born 16th March 1955. She is
    married to John Fairchild a British citizen and they  have  a  daughter
    Lisa Fairchild born June 1984 also a British  citizen.  Lisa  Fairchild
    has  a  learning  disability  which,  I   understand,   resulted   from
    complications suffered during birth.

 2. For many years the Appellant, her  husband  and  Lisa  lived  in  South
    Africa together but approximately three years ago the family  travelled
    to the United Kingdom. The  Appellant  entered  on  a  visit  visa;  Mr
    Fairchild and Lisa of  course  are  British  citizens.  Mr  Fairchild's
    business in South Africa had  ceased  and  he  is  now  in  receipt  of
    Employment and Support Allowance.  On 29th September 2013 the Appellant
    was granted limited leave to enter until 13th March 2014. On 11th March
    2014 she applied for leave to enter as the spouse of  her  husband  and
    the mother of Lisa. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application
    under the Immigration  Rules  and  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant's private  life  under  Article  8  would  bring  her  within
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) of the Rules.

 3. The  Respondent  maintained  her  decision  to  refuse  entry  and  the
    Appellant appealed that refusal. The appeal came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In a determination promulgated on 12th September 2014 the FtT
    dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal.  The  Appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Mr Tettey on behalf of the Appellant made submissions. The thrust of Mr
    Tettey's  challenge  to  the  FtT's  decision,  revolved   around   the
    inadequacy of the findings made by the  Judge  when  dealing  with  the
    Article 8 issue before him. He submitted that it  was  imperative  that
    the Judge make clear findings on what was material evidence.   This  he
    had failed to do. A glance of the record  of  proceedings  and  witness
    statements would show that material evidence had simply not been  dealt
    with. To forego to deal with material  evidence  amounts  to  an  error
    requiring the determination to be set aside and the decision remade.

 5. Mrs Pettersen for the Respondent sought to  defend  the  determination.
    She accepted that the Judge's findings could be described as brief  but
    said he had come to the correct  decision  because  the  Appellant  was
    never going to be able to meet the Immigration  Rules.   She  said  the
    Judge had recognised  that  there  are  credibility  problems  for  the
    Appellant concerning the fact that she had entered on a visit visa when
    it was clearly always her intention to remain here permanently.

Finding on Error of Law

 6. I am satisfied that the determination  of  Judge  Hindson  contains  an
    error such that the decision must be set aside and remade. I  say  this
    because in my judgment the determination is deficient in its  reasoning
    on  material  matters  concerning   the   Article   8   proportionality
    assessment. Having correctly identified and referred  to  the  case  of
    Gulshan, the Judge set out in his determination the following,

         "Only if there are arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
         remain outside the Rules is it necessary, for Article  8  purposes,
         to go on to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules."

     He then said at [23],

         "In the circumstances of this case, I do not find  that  there  are
         arguably good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules."

 7. It is hard to see what factors the Judge took into account when  coming
    to this conclusion. Mrs Pettersen did say that  it  could  be  inferred
    that the factors which the Judge took into account were the  same  ones
    as those set out in [18] and [19].  I  disagree.  One  of  the  central
    planks to the appellant's case is that she is the principal  carer  for
    Lisa who is disabled. The Judges conclusion  may  or  may  not  be  the
    correct one, but it is difficult to see by what analysis  or  reasoning
    he arrived at it. Despite Mrs Pettersen's spirited attempt to save this
    determination, it is trite law that an Appellant is  entitled  to  know
    why he won or lost his appeal and what evidence the Judge is  accepting
    and what  he  is  rejecting.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtT  Judge's
    determination is legally unsustainable because it is  silent  on  those
    matters.

 8. I  considered  how  this  appeal  may  best  be  disposed  of.  In  the
    circumstances, since there is a lack of fact finding  it  seems  to  me
    that the appropriate course is to remit this appeal to the  FtT  for  a
    full rehearing, for that  Tribunal  to  conduct  a  full  fact  finding
    exercise. Therefore no findings of fact are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  12th
September 2014 is set aside. None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand.  I
direct that the appeal should be heard again in the First-tier  Tribunal  by
a Judge other than Judge Hindson.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Judge C Roberts

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


