
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/24663/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 21 April 2017                      |     On 3 May 2017              |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                            INDERJEET KAUR BAGGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr J Jimenez, Harrow Law Centre
For the Respondent:       Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge James promulgated on 17 October  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.





Background


3. The Appellant was born on 22 January 1980 and is a national of India.  On
17 June 2015, the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  application
for a residence card as confirmation of the right to remain in the UK  as  a
family member of an EEA national.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge James ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6  March  2017  Judge  Osborne  gave
permission to appeal stating, inter alia

      2. The grounds assert that the Judge referred to materials  which  had
      not  been  submitted  in  support  by  either  the  appellant  or  the
      respondent. The Judge  conducted  her  own  research.  It  is  unclear
      whether the Judge had done so in advance of the hearing but if so  she
      failed to disclose this. The Judge has failed to explain the scope  of
      her research. The Judge has not given a chance to comment  upon  this.
      The Judge held at [15] that Mr Bagga appeared not to  have  been  paid
      the minimum wage which suggested strongly that  he  was  not  working.
      This is a conclusion that does not follow from the caselaw.  The  term
      "worker" is given a very wide interpretation  which  establishes  that
      someone might be a worker even if he works for less than  the  minimum
      wage and even if he works only part time. The alternative finding that
      if Mr Bagga had worked then his employment was on such a  small  scale
      that it should be regarded as purely marginal and  ancillary  and  was
      not open to the Judge on the evidence. At [6]  the  Judge  appears  to
      confuse different types of derivative rights to reside. The  appellant
      conceded that she could not rely on a Zambrano type but asserted  that
      she could rely on an Ibrahim  type  (right)  to  reside.  The  Judge's
      findings at [17] that the payslips submitted do not marry with the P45
      issued by HMRC is misconceived as a P45 covers  money  earned  in  the
      relevant tax year. At [24] the Judge notes there  is  no  evidence  of
      Kall Belex taking over Karan Impex and the Companies House information
      confirms that prior to April 2014 Kall Belex was  in  liquidation  and
      had already been subject  to  a  Gazette  announcement  of  compulsory
      strikeout due to failure to submit accounts to Companies  House.  This
      provides confirmation that the Judge  conducted  her  own  researches.
      Companies House confirms this notice was withdrawn in May 2014 and  it
      was only in  September  2014  the  court  wound  up  the  company  and
      therefore the Judge's assertion is mistaken.


      3. In an otherwise careful and well-reasoned decision and  reasons  it
      is nonetheless arguable that to an extent the Judge conducted her  own
      research. At [24] the Judge refers to Companies House information upon
      which the appellant has had no opportunity to give evidence  as  those
      matters were arguably not put to the appellant. It is arguable that in
      all circumstances she should not  be  denied  that  opportunity  which
      arguably amounts to an arguable error of law.


      4. As this arguable error of law has been identified, all  the  issues
      raised in the grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a)  Mr Jiminez moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  told  me  that  the
decision contains many material  errors  of  law,  but  that  his  principle
submission  is  that  the  Judge  had  manifestly  carried   out   her   own
investigations and research.  He  told  me  that  a  number  of  the  Judges
findings of fact are based on material which neither  party  to  the  appeal
produced or referred to. He referred me specifically  to  [22],  [24],  [29]
and [44] of the decision, and told me that there  the  Judge  makes  several
findings suggesting she relied entirely on her  own  research.  He  told  me
that none of the matters leading to those findings of fact were put  to  the
appellant or to the respondent for comment. In  [22]  the  Judge  refers  to
credit report records which do  not  form  part  of  any  of  the  documents
produced to the First-tier.  [24], [29] and [44] all contain findings  based
on the materials found by the Judge at the Companies House website. None  of
those materials or records were before  the  First-tier  tribunal  nor  were
either the appellant or the respondent given the opportunity to  comment  on
those matters.

(b) Mr Jiminez relied on Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016]  UKUT  508
(IAC) and told me that the findings  based  on  the  Judge's  own  research,
which had not been  put  to  the  parties  for  comment,  create  procedural
unfairness. He told me that unfairness, in itself,  amounts  to  a  material
error of law so that the decision should be set aside.

(c)  Mr Jiminez adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  their
entirety. He told me that the Judge  had  incorrectly  interpreted  European
caselaw and, on the one hand makes a  findings  of  fact  which  places  the
appellant's husband within the definition of an EEA national present in  the
UK as a worker, but, on the other, uses  those  same  findings  to  conclude
that the appellant's EEA husband is not a worker. He told me that the  Judge
has misinterpreted the relevant types of derivative  rights  to  reside.  He
told me that the Judge's findings are clearly irrational, and  even  biased,
conclusions.

(d) Mr Jiminez told me that the Judge  had  taken  a  negative  approach  to
evidence which should have been interpreted in the  appellant's  favour.  In
particular, he told me that the  appellant's  entitlements  to  working  tax
credits and child tax credit are  adminicles  of  evidence  to  support  the
appellant's account that she and her husband  are  working,  yet  the  Judge
found that claims to DWP/HMRC benefits indicated that the appellant and  her
husband were engaging in fraud. He told me  that  the  decision  contains  a
number of factual errors. He urged me to  set  the  decision  aside  and  to
substitute my own decision allowing the appeal.

7. Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, candidly conceded the decision shows  that
the Judge carried out her own internet research, and that  the  parties  had
not had the opportunity to comment on that research. As a  result,  he  told
me that the decision is not safe and should be set aside.

8. I told both representatives that I find a material error of  law  in  the
decision because it is  clear  that  the  Judge  had  carried  out  her  own
research, and reached conclusions based on that research,  without  inviting
comment from the parties. I told both representatives  that  I  would  first
consider whether or not I can substitute my own  decision,  but  that  if  I
find that I cannot substitute my own decision, I would  remit  the  case  to
the First-tier to be determined on new.

Analysis

9. In EG (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria  [2008]  UKAIT  00015  the
Tribunal said that it is most unwise for a  Judge  to  conduct  post-hearing
research, on the internet or otherwise, into the factual issues  which  have
to be decided in a case. To derive evidence from  post-hearing  research  on
the internet and to base conclusions on that  evidence  without  giving  the
parties the opportunity to comment on it is wrong.

10. In Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 508 (IAC) it  was  held
that justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen to  be  done.
That  appeal  was  allowed  when  the  Judge  had  engaged  in   a   private
conversation  relating  to  the  Appellant's  case  with   the   Appellant's
representative in the absence of the other party's  representative,  in  the
precincts of the court room but partly out  of  sight  and  earshot  of  the
Appellant and his spouse, in a setting other than that of  bench/bar  before
the Appellant's hearing began: the contents whereof, other than  a  question
about the Appellant's religious adherence, itself an improper  enquiry  made
in this fashion, were not divulged to the Appellant.

11. In AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) it was held  that  If
a Judge is cognisant of something conceivably material which does  not  form
part of either party's case, this must be brought to the  attention  of  the
parties at the earliest  possible  stage,  which  duty  could  in  principle
extend beyond the hearing date;

12. It is clear that some of the Judge's findings of  fact  are  drawn  from
enquiry made at Companies House. It is equally clear that no credit  reports
are produced or relied on by either  party  to  the  appeal.  Both  parties'
representatives tell me that the Judge carried  out  her  own  research  and
that that research lead the Judge to  her  findings  of  fact.  The  Judge's
findings of fact should, of  course,  have  been  drawn  from  the  evidence
placed before her rather than the fruits of her own investigation.

13. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by material error of  law.
I set the decision aside. There is sufficient evidence before me  to  enable
me to substitute my own decision.
14. The 2006 EEA regulations have  now  been  superseded  by  the  2016  EEA
regulations. Although the new regulations revoked the 2006  EEA  regulations
by operation of Reg 1 (2), they are preserved for the purposes of appeals.

15. The basis of the appellant's appeal is that she is the family member  of
a German national who is exercising treaty rights of movement in the  UK  as
a worker. This appeal focuses on the appellant's EEA spouse's work history.

16. In Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT   00346
(IAC) it was held that neither section 85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 nor the  guidance  in  DR  (Morocco)*  [2005]  UKAIT  38
regarding a previous version of section 85(5) of that Act  has  any  bearing
on an appeal under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006. In such an appeal, a tribunal  has  power  to  consider  any  evidence
which it thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.

Findings of fact

17. The appellant is an Indian national. She was born on  22  January  1980.
On 1 January 2003,  the  appellant  married  Gurmit  Singh  Bagga  (The  EEA
Spouse), a German national. The EEA spouse was born in Afghanistan in  1960.
He  moved  to  Germany  in  1992  and  subsequently   was   granted   German
citizenship.

18. The appellant applied for a Schengen Visa in January 2003.  She  entered
Germany on 31 January 2003 and joined her husband there. The  appellant  and
her EEA spouse have two sons. Their first child was born  in  2003.  He  has
dual UK and German citizenship. Their second son was born in 2006. He  is  a
German national.

19. The appellant and her family entered the UK  in  2003.  On  28  February
2004 the respondent issued the appellant with a residence card, valid  until
28 February 2009.  In  January  2009,  the  appellant  tried  to  renew  her
residence card. Between January 2009 and October  2014  the  appellant  made
four unsuccessful applications for a residence card. On 3 October  2014  the
appellant  submitted  a  fifth  application  for  a  residence  card.   That
application was refused on 17 June 2015. It is against  that  decision  that
the appellant appeals.

20. Between 1 April 2014 and May 2014 the EEA spouse worked  for  a  company
called Kall Belex UK Ltd.

21. Between June 2014 and 30 April 2016 the EEA spouse worked for a  company
called Karan Impex UK Ltd.

22. On 31 December 2015 the EEA spouse became a director  of  Timberwood  UK
Ltd, a company incorporated under the Companies  Acts.   On  1st  June  2016
HMRC provided the EEA Spouse with a tax code for an  employer  called  Pizza
Plus (Ashford) Ltd.

23. Since 1 June 2016 the EEA spouse has worked for Carpet  Express  UK.  At
the date of this hearing the EEA spouse still works for  Carpet  Express  UK
Ltd. He is therefore an EEA national present in the UK as a  worker.  He  is
an EEA national exercising treaty rights of movement.

Conclusion

24. The appellant is a family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty
rights of movement as a worker. She  therefore  qualifies  for  a  residence
card.

25. The appeal is allowed. The  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations and is entitled to a residence card.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

27. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 17 October 2016.

28. I substitute my  own  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision dated 17 June 2015 is allowed.


Signed                        Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

