
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/24829/2015
     ia/25256/2015
     ia/25257/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th September 2016                   |On 10th October 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                                     IS
                                     SEN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As the third
Appellant is a minor, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision concerns the  appeals  of  the  three  Appellants  listed
    above. They have varying  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  their
    appeals have been linked because of a central common theme.

 2. They appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Bashir) promulgated on 27th April 2016 dismissing their appeals against
    the Respondent's decision to refuse their varying applications for  the
    right to remain in the UK.

 3. The First Appellant MA is a citizen of Pakistan (born 30th March 1990).
     He applied for a residence card as the extended family member (EFM) of
    the second Appellant IS, a Czech national  who  claimed  that  she  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 4. MA additionally made a  claim  to  asylum.   I  record  here  that  the
    substance of his  claim  to  asylum  is  not  an  issue  before  me.  I
    understand that he has a separate hearing of  that  claim  already  set
    down before the FtT.  Nevertheless as will  become  apparent  it  is  a
    matter to which I must give some attention and to which I will refer in
    the course of this decision.

 5. The second Appellant IS (born 26th March 1979)  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Czech Republic.  She appeals the Respondent's decision  to  remove  her
    from the UK, on the basis that she is not a qualified person exercising
    treaty rights under the EEA Regulations.  In other  words  she  is  not
    employed as claimed and therefore has no right to remain in the UK.

 6. The third Appellant SEN is the dependent minor daughter of  the  second
    Appellant. She too is a Czech national and conveniently  her  claim  to
    remain stands and falls with that of her mother. The  second  Appellant
    whilst in the UK has now given birth to another child.  The  father  of
    this child is the First Appellant MA. This child is not an Appellant so
    far as these proceedings are concerned.

 7. The basis of the  Respondent's  refusal  against  the  First  Appellant
    (apart from the asylum claim) centred on the evidence  of  his  claimed
    relationship with the Second Appellant.  In order to establish a  right
    as an EFM, the first Appellant needed to show that he  and  the  second
    Appellant were in a durable relationship.  The evidence before the  FtT
    consisted of evidence of them undertaking an Islamic marriage  (such  a
    ceremony is not recognised as a valid marriage in UK law),  their  oral
    evidence that they lived together and a birth certificate showing  that
    they have a child together.  The child was born on 12th November  2015.
    The Respondent, accepts the paternity of the child.  The  date  of  the
    Respondent's refusal is 9th June 2015.

 8. So far as the second Appellant was concerned, she  was  served  with  a
    decision notice to remove her on  the  basis  that  she  is  neither  a
    qualified person, nor is she someone exercising  treaty  rights  within
    the meaning of the EEA Regulations.  The removal notice was  served  on
    her following an investigation by the Respondent.  A  similar  decision
    was also served on her dependent child who is the third Appellant.  The
    date of the Respondent's decision in both cases is the same date as the
    First Appellant's notice, the 9th June 2015.

FtT Hearing

 9. When the Appellants' appeals came before the FtT, it found the evidence
    given by MA and IS unreliable.  A note of  several  inconsistencies  in
    their evidence was made and looking at those inconsistencies the  judge
    found that she comprehensively disbelieved their accounts.   She  noted
    that there was a child of the relationship  and  noted  other  evidence
    including documentary evidence but nevertheless concluded that  in  the
    light of the discrepant evidence, the other evidence was not capable of
    outweighing it. She concluded therefore that the  Appellants'  evidence
    did  not  demonstrate  on  balance  that  they  were   in   a   durable
    relationship.  The judge clearly sets this out in [24] and [25] of  her
    decision.

10. Further, the judge found with reasons, that the second Appellant IS did
    not qualify as a person exercising treaty rights within the compass  of
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations 2006.  The judge had regard to  IS'
    claimed employment history and for reasons fully set out at [26]  found
    that this claim not credible.  The third Appellant's claim  stands  and
    falls with that of her mother.

11. The judge then went on to consider whether any of the Appellants  could
    advance a case under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   She  decided  not.   She
    noted at [31] and [32] that there were no compelling reasons shown, why
    a grant of leave should be awarded outside the Immigration  Rules.  She
    also took into account S.55 Borders Citizenship Immigration Act 2009.

12. I pause here to record that the judge was plainly in error to make  the
    finding that she did at [31], regarding the  first  Appellant's  asylum
    claim.  It has always been the case  that  the  asylum  claim  forms  a
    separate and discrete matter. A separate hearing has been set down  for
    that issue and indeed I was given to understand that the hearing of the
    first Appellant's asylum claim would take place shortly.  (It may  even
    have been concluded by the time this decision is promulgated).

13. Such an error however is not in my view material to  the  other  issues
    before me. The judge simply had no right to determine  an  issue  which
    was not before her. She erred in doing so and the decision she made  in
    respect of the first Appellant's asylum claim is set aside. That matter
    will be heard, as I have indicated by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  a
    completely fresh hearing altogether.  I find that this error  does  not
    taint the separate and distinct findings made by the FtT in respect  of
    the matters which are before me.

The UT - Error of Law Hearing

14. Following the FtT's dismissal of their appeals, the  Appellants  sought
    permission to appeal the FtT's decisions to the Upper Tribunal.

15. The grounds seeking permission, apart from taking issue with the  FtT's
    decision to "dismiss" the first Appellant's asylum  appeal,  appear  to
    take issue only with the judge's credibility findings in so far as they
    relate to the durability or otherwise of the relationship  between  the
    first and second Appellants. This is what the grounds focus on.

16. Before me Ms Wilkins appeared for the Appellants and Mrs Petterson  for
    the Respondent.  Following a discussion with the representatives  about
    the terms of the grounds seeking permission, I indicated that so far as
    I could see there was no real challenge to the FtT's finding  that  the
    second Appellant is not exercising treaty rights, Ms  Wilkins  at  this
    point sought permission to amend the Grounds of Appeal,  to  include  a
    challenge to those findings.  This I declined to  give.  Other  than  a
    general statement challenging the finding she  could  provide  no  real
    grounds  for  doing  so.   The  second  Appellant  has   been   legally
    represented throughout these proceedings and clearly this is  a  matter
    upon which no instruction or issue has been raised.

17. Ms Wilkins' submissions therefore were confined to the grounds  seeking
    permission although I did announce that I was satisfied that the  judge
    had erred in "dismissing" the Appellants' asylum claim and that  I  had
    found this was not a material error.  I did however acknowledge that my
    decision would reflect this and that she did have permission to  ensure
    that the FtT was aware of this when the first  Appellant's  case  comes
    for trial on the asylum issue.

18. Mrs Pettersen referred to her Rule 24 response which indicated that for
    some reason, the Respondent had not been served  with  the  appropriate
    documentation  prior  to  the  hearing  before  me.   Nevertheless  she
    indicated she was prepared to proceed.   She  handed  up  the  recently
    published Tribunal decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT
    00411 (IAC).  She submitted that it would appear that Sala is authority
    for saying that the first Appellant had no statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision not to grant a resident card  to  him
    in any event.  She submitted that there was no error disclosed  in  the
    FtT's decision requiring it to be  set  aside  so  far  as  the  second
    Appellant is  concerned.   The  second  Appellant's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed. The third Appellants appeal should be dismissed in line with
    that. The first Appellant's appeal should be marked 'no valid  appeal'.
    His asylum claim would be dealt with in the way I set out in  paragraph
    13 above.

Consideration

19. The  only  matters  put  in  issue  before  me,  centre  on  the  FtT's
    credibility findings concerning the  durability  or  otherwise  of  the
    relationship between the first and  second  Appellants.  I  acknowledge
    that Mrs Pettersen's submission is that this matter is now not one that
    attracts a right of appeal. However I think it appropriate nevertheless
    to give full reasons for my decision so that if there  is  any  further
    litigation there is a clear understanding of why I reached the decision
    I did.

20. I find that the FtT's findings are clear and fully  justified,  on  the
    evidence before it.  The judge has set out the evidence before her  and
    weighed  that   evidence,   finding   that   there   were   fundamental
    discrepancies and inconsistencies in the  evidence  of  the  first  and
    second Appellant. From  my  reading  of  her  decision  she  was  fully
    justified in that approach.  She fully sets out at [24] over the course
    of several paragraphs inconsistencies which were such to  outweigh  the
    other evidence before her.  She has taken account of the other evidence
    before her and sets that out in [25].  She acknowledged  that  a  child
    had been born of the relationship but  correctly  found  that  although
    this is a weighty piece of evidence it does not of itself operate as  a
    trump card.  The amount of weight to be attached to the evidence  is  a
    matter for her judgment.  I find that more than adequate  reasons  have
    been given for her rejection of  part  of  the  evidence  and  for  her
    conclusions that the first and second Appellants were not in a  durable
    relationship.  I find that the challenge  to  the  FtT's  findings  and
    decision amounts to no more that a series of  disagreements  with  that
    evidence.

21. That is sufficient to dispose of the appeals before me but I ought  for
    the sake of completeness to deal with the second Appellant's appeal  in
    this way.  The FtT found as a fact that the second  Appellant  was  not
    exercising treaty rights under Regulation 6  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
    The judge made full findings on that aspect  in  [26].   She  carefully
    reviewed the evidence before her including the documentary evidence and
    the fact that the second Appellant was not a credible witness.

22. I am of the view therefore that there being no  distinct  challenge  to
    that evidence, the first Appellant's appeal could not  succeed  in  any
    event.  His applies for a residence card as the extended family  member
    of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.  If it has  been
    found that the EEA national is not exercising treaty rights  and  there
    is no real challenge to that finding then the foundation of  the  first
    Appellant's appeal falls down.

23. The third Appellant's appeal stands and falls with that of  her  mother
    and in any event  the  FtT  made  a  clear  finding  at  [32]  that  no
    compelling reasons had been shown for any grant outside  the  Rule  and
    she confirmed that she had had regard to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children as required by Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

24. For the foregoing reasons these appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of MA, IS and SEN are dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing the appeals of IS  and  SEN  stands.  The  decision
dismissing MA's asylum claim, is set aside for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
make the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 08 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date     08 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts



