
         [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 January 2018                     |On 18 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                             IROEGBU KAZI OKOMBA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 17 June 2015 refusing his application for a permanent residence
    card as a person with a retained right of residence.
Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 5  June  1969.   On  his
    own account, he first came to the UK in December 2000.  On 1 June 2003,
    he claimed asylum but his application was refused.  On 18 August  2008,
    he lodged an application for a residence card, but  this  was  refused.
    He married his wife, a French citizen, on 12 March 2010 and  on  5  May
    2010 applied for a residence card which was issued on 3 November  2010.
    However, his marriage was  dissolved  22  July  2014  when  the  decree
    absolute was granted.  He applied for a permanent residence card  under
    retained right of residence on 27 August 2014 but this was refused on 1
    November 2014.  On 19 November 2014, he made a further application  for
    a residence card and this was  again  refused  on  17  June  2015,  the
    decision under appeal.

3.    The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was able  to  meet
    the requirements of reg. 10(5) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 as she  found  that  his  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience. This decision was reached on the basis of discrepancies in
    the answers the appellant gave at interview on matters such as spelling
    his wife's surname incorrectly, having to check his  phone  when  asked
    her mobile number, saying he last met her in November 2014, giving  the
    wrong date of her birth (29 August  1989  instead  of  11  June  1993),
    saying that he moved out in January 2014 when there was a joint council
    tax bill in March 2014 and saying that her boyfriend  was  French  when
    the respondent was aware that she was now claiming  to  be  married  to
    another non-EEA national, not a French national as he claimed

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal.

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant.  The appellant also relied on  documentary
    evidence in his bundle of documents. The judge dealt with each  of  the
    discrepancies identified in the respondent's decision in  [38]-[42]  of
    his decision and summarised his findings on this aspect of the evidence
    at [43] where he said:

        "I have had regard to all six  "discrepancies"  relied  on  by  the
        respondent.  When considered collectively as well  as  individually
        they are not sufficient to raise a suspicion that the  marriage  in
        2010 was one of convenience."

5.    However, the judge went on to say that he had also had regard  to  the
    submissions made  by  the  Presenting  Officer,  who  added  a  further
    question mark over the appellant's application the fact that his former
    wife did not attend either the interview or the  hearing  and  did  not
    provide a witness statement despite the fact  that  the  appellant  was
    legally represented [43].  The judge  said  that  he  found  this  most
    surprising particularly as the appellant had stated in his interview he
    still had her telephone number, he had met her at least once to  obtain
    supporting documentation and they had remained  in  contact  [44].   He
    commented that it had not been suggested that the absence of supporting
    evidence from his wife was accounted for because she and the  appellant
    had an embittered relationship and she could not reasonably be expected
    to support him. On the appellant's evidence the opposite was  true:  he
    said that he still supported her, was attached to her and even now they
    were still in contact and talked once in a while. [45].

6.    The judge was satisfied that the respondent had therefore  shown  that
    there was a reasonable basis for suspecting that this was a marriage of
    convenience and commented that these concerns had been exacerbated when
    he considered the appellant's written and oral evidence at the  hearing
    together with the documentary evidence [46].  He  then  considered  the
    relevant background.  The appellant was a failed asylum seeker  who  at
    the time of his marriage had been in the UK without leave from 2000  to
    2010.  He said that he had married his wife,  a  practising  Christian,
    because they were in love that she was not  willing  to  live  in  sin.
    However, the appellant had had a child born  on  21  November  2010  by
    another woman who must have been conceived early in 2010 during the 3 -
    4 month period  between  the  appellant  meeting  his  wife  and  their
    marriage in March 2010.  The judge was prepared to make  allowance  for
    human frailty and temptation but he found that this cast doubt  on  his
    evidence that he married his wife because they were  so  in  love  but,
    rather, it suggested the probability of an alternative explanation [48]

7.    The judge also commented that the appellant's description of his  wife
    as a Christian who was unwilling to live in sin was  inconsistent  with
    his account  of  having  discovered  her  committing  adultery  in  the
    matrimonial home, albeit four years later [49].  He  further  commented
    that there were surprising discrepancies in  the  appellant's  evidence
    relating to the wedding [50] and the fact that in his witness statement
    he said that he and his wife had lived one address "for some years" but
    the British Gas bills related to a period of just over six months  only
    [51].

8.    Finally, the judge noted that the appellant was now in a  relationship
    with the mother of his daughter born in November 2010, he had supported
    his daughter financially during  this  period  and  it  was  stretching
    credibility to suggest that this relationship with his daughter and her
    mother had  not  subsisted  the  intervening  years  [52].   For  these
    reasons, the judge found that the respondent had proved on the  balance
    of probabilities that the appellant had entered into this  marriage  as
    one of convenience and solely for the purpose of  obtaining  rights  of
    free movement and residence [53].

The Grounds and Submissions.

9.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the judge erred in law  as
    firstly there was no adequate evidence to discharge the initial  burden
    of showing that there was a reasonable basis for  suspecting  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience, secondly, the absence of evidence from
    the appellant's ex-wife in circumstances where the respondent  did  not
    seek to interview her or ask the appellant to call her to give evidence
    was "wholly unfair and perverse" and thirdly, the judge's consideration
    of the issue in the round was flawed, particularly in relation  to  his
    comment about his wife's adultery being inconsistent with her desire to
    marry and the fact that the appellant had previously fathered a  child.
    It is argued that the absence of his wife's parents and other relatives
    from the wedding and the absence of photographs  were  not  factors  of
    significant weight. The judge had failed to place weight on  the  clear
    documentary evidence showing that they had lived together and had  also
    failed to  consider  the  clear  failure  of  the  respondent  to  make
    enquiries to establish by way of evidence whether  there  were  serious
    credibility concerns about the genuineness of the  relationship  or  to
    produce evidence to undermine the appellant's evidence.

10.   Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

        "It is not an arguable error of law for the Tribunal to  find  that
        the respondent had discharged the legal burden of proving that  the
        appellant's marriage was one of convenience, based as it  was  upon
        an overall assessment of the evidence.  [Paragraphs 47 to 53].   It
        was however arguably  unfair  for  the  Tribunal  to  draw  adverse
        inferences from the absence of evidence from the appellant's former
        wife given the lack of any pre-hearing notice that this might be an
        issue in the proceedings [paragraphs  43  to  46].   Permission  to
        appeal is accordingly granted on this basis".

11.   Mr Jafferji relied on the grounds.  He submitted that the judge  erred
    in law by finding that the evidential burden had been  discharged  even
    though he had accepted that the six reasons given by the respondent  in
    her decision letter had been inadequate to do so.  He argued  that  the
    absence of evidence from the appellant's wife could not  discharge  the
    evidential  burden  and,  alternatively,  that  the  appellant  had  no
    opportunity to deal with this issue as it was raised in submissions for
    the first time.  It had been unfair for the appellant to be criticised,
    so he argued, for not calling  his  former  wife.   In  any  event,  he
    submitted that the judge's analysis of the further evidence was  flawed
    and there was no proper basis on which he could find that the burden of
    proof had been discharged.

12.   Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had properly directed himself  on
    the burden and standard of proof in accordance with the guidance of the
    Supreme Court in Sadovska v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 54.  The judge  had  been  entitled  to  consider  all  the
    evidence. The appeal was a full rehearing and it was a matter  for  the
    appellant and his advisers to decide what evidence  to  adduce  at  the
    hearing.

Assessment of the Issues.

13.   The issue on which permission to appeal was  granted  was  whether  it
    was unfair of the tribunal  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  from  the
    absence of evidence from the appellant's former wife given the lack  of
    any prehearing notice that this might be an issue in  the  proceedings.
    In R (Anjum)v  ECO  Islamabad  (entrepreneur  -  business  expansion  -
    fairness generally) [2017] UKUT 406, the Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
    and UTJ Allen) said at [20]:

         At  this  juncture,  we  turn  to  examine  the  governing  legal
        principles. This  Tribunal  had  occasion  recently  to  review  the
        doctrine of procedural fairness in R (AM) v Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department [2017] UKUT 262 (IAC), at [76] particularly:


        "While the decision of the House of Lords in R  v  SSHD,  ex  parte
        Doody and Others [1994] 1 AC 531 involved a very different context,
        namely the release of prisoners sentenced to  life  imprisonment,  I
        consider that the terms in which Lord Mustill devised his celebrated
        code of procedural fairness  makes  clear  that  it  is  of  general
        application. Furthermore, its association with the EU and ECHR legal
        rules and principles outlined above is unmistakable. The passage  in
        question (at page 560D) is not susceptible  to  cherry  picking  and
        demands reproduction in full:


        'My Lords, I think it unnecessary to refer by name or to quote from,
        any  of  the  often-cited  authorities  in  which  the  courts  have
        explained what is essentially an intuitive judgment.  They  are  far
        too well known. From them,  I  derive  that  (1)  where  an  Act  of
        Parliament confers an administrative power there  is  a  presumption
        that it will be exercised in a manner  which  is  fair  in  all  the
        circumstances. (2) The standards of fairness are not immutable. They
        may change with the passage of time, both  in  the  general  and  in
        their application  to  decisions  of  a  particular  type.  (3)  The
        principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically  in
        every situation. What fairness demands is dependent on  the  context
        of the decision, and this is to be taken into  account  in  all  its
        aspects. (4) An essential feature of  the  context  is  the  statute
        which creates the discretion, as regards both its language  and  the
        shape of the  legal  and  administrative  system  within  which  the
        decision is taken. (5) Fairness  will  very  often  require  that  a
        person who may be adversely affected by the decision  will  have  an
        opportunity to make representations on his own behalf either  before
        the decision is taken with a view to producing a favourable  result;
        or after it is taken, with a view to procuring its modification;  or
        both. (6) Since the person affected usually cannot  make  worthwhile
        representations without knowing what factors may weigh  against  his
        interests, fairness will very often require that he is  informed  of
        the gist of the case which he has to answer.'"

14.   Taking  account  of  this  guidance,  in  this  appeal  the  issue  of
    procedural fairness depends on  whether  the  appellant  had  a  proper
    opportunity to put his  case  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or  whether  he  was  disadvantaged  by  the  failure  of  the
    respondent to indicate that the appellant should produce evidence  from
    his former wife. I am not satisfied that there has been any  procedural
    irregularity  causing  unfairness.   The  appellant's  application  was
    refused because respondent found that his  marriage  had  been  one  of
    convenience.  In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  the
    respondent's decision is vigorously challenged and it  is  asserted  in
    ground 15 that there is compelling evidence that the appellant and  his
    former spouse were in a genuine, durable  and  subsisting  relationship
    lasting from March 2010 until their divorce in July 2014.

15.   In addition to evidence from the appellant, it  is  obvious  that  the
    most compelling and cogent evidence as to whether the marriage was  one
    of convenience would be from the other party to  the  marriage.   There
    was no obligation on the respondent to indicate to the appellant or his
    advisers what evidence should  be  called  in  support  of  the  appeal
    whether in the decision, a prehearing notice or otherwise, particularly
    when it relates to  evidence  which  an  appellant  can  reasonably  be
    expected to call.  The judge considered the issue of whether there  was
    any good reason why the appellant might not be in a  position  to  call
    his  former  wife  dealing  with  that  issue  in  [45].   Further,  no
    application was made at the hearing for  an  adjournment  so  that  the
    appellant's wife could be called  to  give  evidence  in  circumstances
    where it had become clear in submissions, if it was not clear  already,
    that the absence of evidence from her  was  regarded  as  a  matter  of
    significance [43].  There was an opportunity not only  to  address  the
    issue in submissions but also to  apply  for  an  adjournment  so  that
    further evidence could be called.

16.   I am therefore satisfied that this is  a  case  where  the  judge  was
    entitled to draw  an  adverse  influence  on  the  failure  to  produce
    evidence from the appellant's former wife.   This  was  evidence  which
    could reasonably be expected and its absence called for an explanation.
     The judge was entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no  such  adequate
    explanation and to draw an adverse inference accordingly.  The  grounds
    argue that the respondent should have made further inquiries about  the
    marriage. It is not arguable that  there  was  any  such  duty  in  the
    circumstances of the present appeal.  It was open to the  appellant  to
    produce at the hearing all the evidence he  regarded  as  relevant  and
    probative.

17.   Permission to appeal was not granted on the  grounds  that  the  judge
    erred in law in his assessment of the evidence and in finding that  the
    legal burden had been discharged.  Mr Jafferji sought to  pursue  these
    arguments in his submissions but he did not satisfy me that  there  was
    any basis for permitting them  to  be  argued  or  that  they  had  any
    prospect of success.  The fact that the judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the discrepancies relied  on  by  the  respondent  were  sufficient  to
    discharge the evidential burden did not preclude him from finding  that
    other evidence  did  discharge  that  burden.  He  was  not  judicially
    reviewing the respondent's decision but hearing a full  appeal  on  the
    merits. He was obliged to consider the evidence produced before him  as
    a whole and was fully  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  relevant
    background, the absence of evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife,  the
    discrepancies in the evidence he highlighted at [50], the circumstances
    of the appellant's relationship with his daughter and  her  mother  and
    those in which his marriage came to an end.

18.   In summary, I am satisfied that the judge  properly  directed  himself
    on the law and, having considered the  evidence  as  a  whole,  reached
    findings and conclusions properly open to him for the reasons he gave.

Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and the decision  dismissing
    the appeal stands.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
              Dated: 17 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
