

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30 April 2014                              |on 16 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     GM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Chapman, instructed by Wilson LLP
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   The Appeal

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon and  was  born  on  20  January
      1978.


   2. This is a re-making of the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
      decision dated 17 August 2011 to make a deportation  order  under  the
      Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   EEA
      Regulations).

   Background

   3. The following matters are common ground. The appellant came to the  UK
      on 25 February 2003 as a student with leave until 30  April  2007.  In
      2005 he met a French national, CG and they formed a relationship.


   4. The appellant received a conviction on 12 December  2005  for  driving
      with excess alcohol and was disqualified from driving for 16 months.

   5. The appellant and CG began to cohabit in 2006.  In the same year,  the
      appellant  was  diagnosed  with   paranoid   schizophrenia.   He   was
      sufficiently unwell to require a short period in hospital under s.2 of
      the Mental Health Act and was discharged to a Community Mental  Health
      Team (CMHT) on amisulpride an anti-psychotic medication.  CG was aware
      of his condition and supportive of him.

   6. The appellant and CG married on 19 January 2007. On 9 August 2007  the
      appellant was issued with a residence card valid until 12 August  2012
      recognising  his  status  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
      exercising Treaty rights.

   7. At some point  during  2007,  the  appellant  discontinued  his  anti-
      psychotic medication after consulting the CMHT.

   8. On 19 April 2008 the appellant received a caution  for  possession  of
      cannabis. On 13 May 2008 he  was  convicted  of  driving  with  excess
      alcohol and was disqualified for 36 months.

   9. On 15 July 2009 the appellant assaulted his wife. He was charged  with
      assault occasional actual bodily harm (ABH) and bailed. In August 2009
      he resumed taking his medication.

  10. Whilst on bail for that offence he committed two offences of  criminal
      damage, throwing a brick through the window of  his  wife's  home  and
      through  the  window  of  her  car.  He  was  sentenced  to  6  weeks'
      imprisonment for those offences on 27  November  2009.   On  the  same
      date, CG also obtained a restraining order against the appellant under
      the Protection from Harassment Act 1997. That order remains in  force.
      In compliance with the terms of that order, there has been  no  direct
      or indirect contact between the appellant and  CG  since  27  November
      2009. We were told that on 7 April 2011  she  did  make  contact  with
      prisoner location services to try to get in touch with the  appellant,
      but she did not follow up her initial inquiries. There was no evidence
      before us as to her current whereabouts. Of course, the separation  of
      the couple does  not  affect  the  appellant's  status.  There  is  no
      evidence that she has divorced him.

  11. On 6 December 2010 the appellant pleaded guilty to the ABH charge.  On
      7 March 2011 he was sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment.  Whilst  in
      prison, he engaged in rehabilitation courses and carried  out  relapse
      prevention work.  This gave him a better understanding of  his  mental
      illness and of the  need  to  continue  taking  his  prescribed  anti-
      psychotic mediation for the foreseeable future.

  12. On 17 August 2011  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
      appellant under the EEA Regulations.  The appellant lodged  an  appeal
      on 23 August 2011.

  13. On 1 September 2011 the appellant was released on immigration bail but
      was recalled under his criminal  licence  on  2  September  2011.  The
      appellant was eventually released from detention on 9  July  2012  and
      placed in accommodation in Swansea. He suffered a heart attack  on  28
      July 2013.  As well  as  being  prescribed  medication  the  Appellant
      undertook cardiac rehabilitation and made changes  to  his  lifestyle,
      including giving up cigarettes and alcohol.

  14. On 21 December 2011 the FTT  promulgated  a  decision  dismissing  the
      appeal. Permission to appeal was granted on  8  February  2012.  On  3
      September 2012 the Upper Tribunal found an error on  a  point  of  law
      following a concession by the respondent regarding the  FTT's  failure
      to consider the period of cohabitation with CG prior to their marriage
      and the FTT not having taken the period  of  remand  and  imprisonment
      into  account  when  assessing  whether  the  appellant  had  obtained
      permanent residence.  That concession was in line with legal  thinking
      at the time.

  15. The appeal was then stood down until the outcome of a reference to the
      Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) in  Onuekwere  (Case  C-
      378/12) CJEU (Second Chamber), 16 January 2014  which  considered  the
      effect of a period of imprisonment on the establishment  of  permanent
      residence.

   The Law

  16. Where the respondent proposes to deport a  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national, Directive 2004/38/EC  provides  a  hierarchy  of  levels  of
      protection against expulsion  and those provisions are incorporated in
      domestic law by regulation 21 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations). Regulation 21 states:

        Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
        grounds


        (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA  decision
        taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
        health.


        (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


        (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
        with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
        serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
        grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


           (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
           at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


           (b) is under the age of 18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
           necessary  in  his  best  interests,  as  provided  for  in  the
           Convention on the Rights of the Child  adopted  by  the  General
           Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.


        (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
        or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
        preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
        with the following principles-


           (a)  the  decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
           proportionality;


           (b) the decision must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
           conduct of the person concerned;


           (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent
           a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
           of the fundamental interests of society;


           (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision;


           (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
           themselves justify the decision.


        (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
        policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
        in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
        his country of origin.

Preliminary Issue - Permanent Residence

  6. As indicated above, this appeal was adjourned for an  extended  period
     to await the reference to the CJEU in Onuekwere. That case was  issued
     alongside MG (Case C-400/12) (Second Chamber) 16/1/14, both  of  which
     confirm that a period of imprisonment breaks continuity  of  residence
     when assessing whether permanent residence has been established.


  7. Ms Chapman accepted that the sentences  of  imprisonment  in  November
     2009 and March 2011 precluded the appellant  from  having  established
     permanent residence.


  8. The appeal  therefore  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant
     benefitted only from the basic  level  of  protection  from  expulsion
     provided by the  EEA  Regulations  and  we  must  assess  whether  the
     appellant can be deported  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
     security, taking into account the factors set out in Regulation  21(5)
     and 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.

 Our Decision

  9. It was our judgment that on the basis of the evidence before us,  this
     appellant's personal conduct does not represent a genuine, present and
     sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
     of society  such  that  deportation  under  the  EEA  Regulations  was
     justified or proportionate.

 10. The main evidence against the appellant relied  upon  before  us  with
     regard to  a  current  risk  of  offending  was  a  National  Offender
     Management Service (NOMS) report which was requested as  long  ago  as
     August 2011.

 11. The NOMS report found that there was a medium risk of reconviction and
     the appellant was found to require MAPPA level 2  management.  He  was
     also stated to pose a medium risk of serious harm.  The  risk  factors
     were: non-compliance with his mental health medication, non-engagement
     with mental health services, alcohol dependency, and violence  towards
     known females. The NOMS report also recorded that  at  that  time  the
     appellant was defensive, minimising his own behaviour and blaming  the
     victim, although he did express some remorse.

 12. It was our view that other evidence before us  indicated  that  things
     had moved on since the NOMS report was prepared.

 13. First, there is the basic fact that the appellant has  not  reoffended
     since his release from detention on 9 July 2012.   There  is  also  no
     dispute that (a) he has complied with the  terms  of  the  restraining
     order and has not attempted to contact his wife and (b) there has been
     no concern regarding his behaviour towards  women  since  his  release
     from detention.

 14. Secondly, we had before us a psychiatric report dated  1  August  2012
     from Dr Amlan Basu,  consultant  forensic  psychiatrist  at  Broadmoor
     Hospital and a further psychiatric report dated 27 April 2014 from  Dr
     Deborah Brooke, consultant forensic psychiatrist  in  the  Oxleas  NHS
     Foundation Trust.

 15. Both psychiatric reports assessed  the  risk  of  reoffending  and  of
     serious harm arising to be lower than the NOMS report. Dr  Basu  found
     the appellant to be at a low risk of reoffending and  at  "low-medium"
     risk of causing serious harm. It was also Dr Basu's opinion  that  the
     appellant had developed a proper understanding of his mental  disorder
     and that there was no reason to believe that the appellant  would  not
     comply with psychiatric medication or continue to abstain  from  heavy
     alcohol abuse. Dr Basu's report was not the subject of  any  challenge
     by the respondent and we found that we could place weight on it.

 16. Dr Brooke concurred in the assessment that the appellant was at a  low
     risk of further violent reoffending and pointed out that he  had  been
     compliant with medication since his release  from  detention  in  July
     2012. In addition, Dr Brooke's  assessment  was  conducted  after  the
     appellant's heart attack in July 2013. He had abstained  from  alcohol
     and  tobacco  entirely  since  then.  Dr  Brooke  found  that  to   be
     additionally beneficial for his mental health, "markedly" reducing the
     risk of further offending.

 17. Thirdly, we had further medical evidence before us by way of a  letter
     dated 13 March 2014 from the appellant's GP and the  GP  records  from
     August 2012 onwards which confirmed his compliance with  antipsychotic
     medication from October 2012 onwards and his abstinence  from  alcohol
     and tobacco following his heart attack in July 2013.

 18. Fourthly, there was consistent evidence before us from the  appellant,
     his four family  witnesses  and  two  friends  who  all  attended  the
     hearing, that since his release from detention the appellant has  been
     compliant with medication, initially reduced his alcohol  consumption,
     has been entirely abstinent since July 2013 and has actively sought to
     remain well and refrain from further offending.  They  have  all  been
     supportive of him, although none of his family  members  lives  nearby
     and contact between them is mainly telephonic.

 19. Mr Melvin submitted that little weight should be placed on Dr Brooke's
     assessment of low risk of violent offending  as  it  was  based  on  a
     conclusion that the appellant would continue taking his medication and
     remain drug  and  alcohol  free.  Our  view,  given  the  various  and
     consistent sources of evidence set out above, was that  the  appellant
     had shown a serious commitment to remaining  compliant  and  drug  and
     alcohol free and that we could therefore place weight on  Dr  Brooke's
     conclusions.

 20. Mr Melvin also suggested that the NOMS report from 2011  should  still
     carry weight as it was stated to be valid for 5 years. In the  context
     of all of the evidence set out above concerning the reduction of risk,
     we did not find that the NOMS report could be  determinative.  Indeed,
     Dr Basu and Dr Brooke both specifically commented on  the  limitations
     of the NOMS assessment  and  applied  a  different  test,  the  HCR-20
     Structured Professional Judgement Risk Assessment tool in making their
     own independent professional assessments.

 21. Mr Melvin also questioned the appellant's compliance  with  medication
     as the letter dated 13 March 2014 from the  GP  stated  that  when  he
     moved to Swansea he failed to attend for hospital appointments for his
     mental  health  and  was  discharged  from  specialist  mental  health
     services as a result. We did not find that  this  comment  in  the  GP
     letter was an indication  of  material  non-compliance.  Firstly,  the
     appellant provided a credible explanation for the  failure  to  attend
     hospital for a mental health consultation, the appointment having been
     sent to him at the time that he moved to Swansea  and  whilst  he  was
     changing his address there. He was unaware of the appointments because
     the letters were sent to his old address. His  evidence  on  initially
     obtaining  medication  from  a  health  centre   there,   subsequently
     registering with a GP was equally credible. Secondly, if  his  failure
     to attend and consequent discharge from specialist services was of any
     importance to the treatment of his mental disorder, his GP could  have
     been expected to say so, but does not. On the contrary, the GP records
     suggested  to  us  that  his  treatment  via  his  GP  was   medically
     uncontentious and sufficient.  Dr  Brookes  comments  specifically  at
     7.16 and 7.21  of  her  report  that  "general  practitioner  care  is
     appropriate for his mental health needs" and  that  the  appellant  is
     "fully engaged with appropriate treatment."

 22. We noted the comments  in  a  Parole  Board  recommendation  dated  26
     October 2011 and Probation Service parole assessment dated 28 November
     2011 that the appellant did not have  his  medication  with  him  when
     released on bail on 1 September 2011 and did not  attend  a  Probation
     Service appointment on 2 September 2011,  leading  to  a  recall.  The
     respondent's reasons letter dated 12 September  2011  maintained  that
     these matters indicated that he was likely to reoffend and become non-
     compliant with his anti-psychotic medication.  It appeared to us  that
     his conduct since then has been sufficient to put to rest any concerns
     arising from the circumstances of his release and recall in  September
     2011, some 4 years ago. We also accepted that there was some evidence,
     at the very least,  of  confusion  concerning  what  happened  to  his
     medication when he left prison on 1 September 2011 (at pages 82 and 83
     and 89 of the appellant's bundle) and concerning the need to report to
     the Probation Service (page 79 of the appellant's bundle).

 23. In summary, we accepted that the appellant is committed  to  remaining
     highly compliant with his  various  medications,  to  maintaining  his
     physical and mental health and to abstaining entirely from alcohol and
     any illicit drugs. The appellant has therefore addressed  the  factors
     that give risk to a risk of reoffending.

 24. Where that is so,  and  where  there  has  been  no  question  of  any
     reoffending since release from detention in July 2012, it is our  view
     that the current risk of reoffending  is  sufficiently  low  that  the
     appellant's personal conduct cannot be said to  represent  a  genuine,
     present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
     fundamental interests of society such that he can  be  deported  under
     the EEA Regulations.

 25. Where the appeal under the EEA Regulations succeeds, it is unnecessary
     to address Article 8 of the ECHR, an appeal on EEA grounds necessarily
     bringing with it a consideration of identical principles under article
     7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

 26. We feel it  appropriate  to  indicate,  however,  that  although  both
     parties put forward their case on the basis of the decision to  deport
     the appellant under the EEA Regulations, there was some discussion  as
     to whether the appellant retained a right  of  residence  under  those
     Regulations. Although so far as we are aware CG has not  yet  divorced
     him, there was no evidence as to whether she is still  exercising  her
     Treaty rights within the United Kingdom. The appeal  proceeded  on  an
     assumption  that  she  is.  That   assumption   also   underlies   the
     respondent's decision to deport the appellant.  Bearing  in  mind  the
     difficulties facing the appellant in ascertaining the position because
     of the restraining order and in the absence of any evidence  from  the
     Home  Office  to  the  contrary,  and  having  given   both   parties'
     representatives the opportunity to make submissions about it, we  were
     persuaded to deal with the matter on that assumption.

 27. Had the appeal come before us to be decided under  Article  8  of  the
     ECHR, it was our view that it would be unlikely to succeed. We did not
     consider that that the appellant could show that he has a family  life
     for the purposes of Article 8 with his adult siblings in the UK.  They
     have all, including the appellant in the  past,  established  families
     and lives of their own. The appellant does not live with or  near  his
     family and although they offer support, his relationship with them  is
     within  the  range  of  normal  emotional  dependency  between   adult
     siblings. Much of the support  that  he  receives,  including  limited
     financial support, could continue if he were in Cameroon. The evidence
     also indicated that the appellant spent some years  of  his  childhood
     with the mother of his half-sister P and that she remains in Cameroon.
     There was evidence from a friend, F O, of concern  from  a  female  in
     Cameroon who telephoned the hospital when  he  visited  the  appellant
     there after the appellant suffered his heart attack in 2013.

 28. It was also our view that any private  life  that  the  appellant  has
     established would be  outweighed  by  the  importance  of  the  public
     interest in deportation acting as a deterrent and expressing society's
     concern at offending by foreign  nationals  even  where  the  risk  of
     reoffending is low. That is particularly  so  where  he  retains  some
     links to Cameroon and has  support  from  relatives  in  the  UK,  The
     evidence was insufficient to show that he would be unable  to  receive
     some treatment for his medical conditions in Cameroon,


 Decision

 29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a  point
     of law and was set aside to be re-made.


 30. We re-make the appeal as allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 6 May 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Anonymity


 We make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
 Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of any  information  regarding
 the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to
 identify the appellant, his wife or other members of  his  family  for  the
 reason of the appellant's medical issues.

