
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24731/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 23 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                Pritpal SINGH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P.S. Chodha, Chambers of T.S. Chodha


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of India, born on 10 January 1979. It  is
not entirely  clear  when  he  first  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  but
according to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  the  Respondent
arrived clandestinely on 3 September 2007. On 6 July 2013, he  married  Anna
Maria Lakotas, a Hungarian national, born on 14 February  1993,  having  met
on 26 March 2011 and thereafter commenced a  relationship.  On  13  November
2013, the Respondent applied for a  residence  card.  This  application  was
rejected on 2 June 2014 as the Secretary of State decided that the  marriage
was one of convenience entered into for the sole purpose of enabling him  to
remain in the United Kingdom. This  decision  was  based  on  "a  number  of
inconsistent and conflicting answers given  during  the  marriage  interview
which took place on 23rd April 2014 at the Home Office in  Liverpool."   The
refusal letter further asserts that the  Respondent  and  his  Sponsor  were
asked to conduct a language interview in order  to  establish  whether  they
had a common language by which they could both  communicate  and  this  test
demonstrated beyond any doubt that they were unable to  communicate  in  any
common language.

The hearing before the First Tier Tribunal

2.    The appeal came before First Tier Tribunal Judge Cary for  hearing  on
13 February 2015. The Respondent, his  Sponsor  and  two  further  witnesses
attended to give evidence. There was  no  appearance  by  the  Secretary  of
State nor had she served or made available any record of the interview  that
had taken place on 23rd April  2014.  The  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
Respondent, from Maria Lakatos, his wife and from  Mr  Piara  Singh  and  Mr
Jagjit Singh and he heard  submissions  from  Mr  Chodha,  who  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.

The Judge's determination

3.    In a determination promulgated on 19 February 2015, the Judge  at  36-
38 directed himself in respect of the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
Papajorgji (EEA Spouse- marriage of convenience) Greece  (2012)  UKUT  00038
(IAC) and noted that the burden of proof was upon the State and that it  was
not enough that the Respondent honestly suspects  there  is  a  marriage  of
convenience, the claimant will only be disqualified  if  it  is  established
that it is. The Judge noted at  [39]  that  he  had  not  been  assisted  in
reaching his decision by the lack  of  documentation  by  the  Secretary  of
State, who had failed to include a copy  of  the  interview  record  in  the
bundle or even identify in the reasons for  refusal  letter  precisely  what
the allegedly  inconsistent  and  conflicting  answers  were  and  in  those
circumstances it is difficult to place any reliance  on  that  part  of  the
Respondent's reasons for refusing the application. The Judge  further  noted
at [40] that he was not assisted by the  absence  of  a  presenting  officer
particularly as the Secretary of State has, at the very least, to  establish
that there were  some  grounds  for  suspecting  the  marriage  was  one  of
convenience. At [41] he held that there is no reason  to  believe  that  the
parties are not able to communicate at some  level  in  English.  The  Judge
then proceeded to allow the appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  had  not  been
established that the marriage was one of convenience.

Grounds of appeal

4.    The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  27  February
2015. The grounds of appeal asserted that  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
erred materially in law in failing to give reasons or any  adequate  reasons
for  findings  on  material  matters  viz  his  finding  at  [41]  that  the
Respondent and his wife were able to communicate in a  common  language.  It
was further asserted that this was a perverse or irrational  finding  as  it
was not supported by any evidence provided by the Respondent or his spouse.



Grant of permission to appeal

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
on 16 April 2015 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  has
materially erred in law by failing to give reasons or adequate  reasons  for
his findings on a material matter.

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.    Mr Avery submitted that there was one ground and one issue  which  was
the Respondent and his wife's ability to communicate with each  other.  This
was also the focus of  the  refusal  decision.  The  couple  were  asked  to
conduct a language interview and show they could communicate but the  result
of that was unsuccessful. The way in which the Judge  dealt  with  this  was
extremely unsatisfactory - there had  been  no  attempt  to  communicate  in
English in the hearing and the fact that they simply said  they  communicate
in English is clearly inadequate. The  Respondent  has  a  poor  immigration
history. At [46] the Judge acknowledged that  it  might  be  a  marriage  of
convenience and the burden was  then  on  the  Respondent.  The  fundamental
point and the focus of the decision was the English language and  there  was
nothing before the Judge to show they could speak English. Mr  Avery  stated
that the interview record was not based on  discrepancies  but  on  language
scenarios as to whether or not the couple could communicate.

7.    In response, Mr Chodha said that it was most regrettable there was  no
Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing. The Judge was very  clear  in
the determination as to the basis he decided this was  a  genuine  marriage.
He had been perfectly well assisted by the evidence  of  3  people  and  the
Judge was entitled to find that the marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting.
Three of the witnesses attended the wedding and  the  Sponsor's  mother  had
come to the UK and was quite happy and there was a statement  from  her.  He
pointed out that there was no test as to how far or how strong the  language
should be between a husband and wife and  that  most  couples  rely  on  the
language of love and it was clear that the couple are in love. They had  met
in March 2011 and had been living together for quite a few years.  They  had
answered questions at the interview to their best ability.

8.    Mr Avery indicated that he had a summary of  the  interview  with  the
Respondent and his wife by the interviewing officer but no verbatim  record.


9.    I reserved my decision.

Error of law decision

10.   The Respondent made an application for a residence card as the  family
member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
He and his wife travelled to Liverpool for an interview which I am told  was
not a question and answer interview but one based  on  "language  scenarios"
by which it was intended to test whether or not the Respondent and his  wife
were able to communicate with each other in English, as a  common  language.
The Respondent, his wife and two witnesses attended the hearing  before  the
First Tier Tribunal Judge. However, no Presenting Officer  was  present  and
no record of the interview which took place on 23rd April 2015 was  produced
to the First Tier Tribunal Judge. The only issue raised by the Secretary  of
State in the refusal letter was that the marriage  was  one  of  convenience
based on the contents of that interview. In the absence  of  any  record  of
this interview before him and in the absence  of  a  Presenting  Officer  to
test the evidence of the  witnesses  in  cross-examination  and  by  way  of
submissions, the First Tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to  find  that  the
Secretary of State had failed to establish that  the  Respondent's  marriage
was one of convenience cf. Papajorgji (EEA Spouse- marriage of  convenience)
Greece (2012) UKUT 00038 (IAC) at 39. He was  not  satisfied,  having  heard
evidence from the parties and the supporting witnesses, that " it  was  more
probable than not this is a marriage of convenience"  [op  cit  at  39].  He
accepted the evidence that the Respondent  and  his  wife  communicated  "at
some level" in English. In any event, that is  not  the  only  test  of  the
genuineness of a marriage. There was evidence before him of cohabitation  in
the form of a tenancy agreement in joint names, bank statements and  utility
bills and the fact of the marriage and cohabitation were  confirmed  by  the
two witnesses at the hearing and by a statement from the  Sponsor's  mother,
Mrs Maria Kallai.

11.   For these reasons, I find that there is no material error  of  law  in
the decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

Conclusion

12.   The First Tier Tribunal Judge did not err materially in  law  and  his
decision to allow the appeal stands.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22 July 2015
