
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                              Mr MUHAMMAD ASLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Haji of Counsel instructed by Kingswood
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan and his date of  birth  is  1
       March 1985. He appeals with permission  granted  by  Judge  Kelly,  a
       Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  following  the  dismissal  of  his
       appeal against the respondent's decision refusing to grant him an EEA
       Residence Card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising  community
       Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

    2. The hearing before  Judge  Dickinson,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal took place at Nottingham Justice Centre on  9  January  2015
       and the determination setting out reasons for the dismissal of appeal
       was promulgated on 26 January 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper
       Tribunal was granted on 26 March 2015.

    3. In granting permission Judge Kelly said, "Nevertheless, the  Tribunal
       appears to have accepted that  the  parties  had  conceived  a  child
       together [paragraph 13 II of the decision]. Whilst it is  clear  that
       the Tribunal considered the psychological  effect  of  the  sponsor's
       subsequent miscarriage as a possible explanation for their discrepant
       answers during a Home Office interview, it is arguable that it failed
       also to consider the extent to which the conception of  a  child  and
       accepted trauma suffered by the parties as a result of its  loss  was
       directly relevant to the central issue of whether they had entered  a
       marriage of convenience [paragraphs 1 and 2 of the  application].  It
       is also arguable that in failing to refer to the  evidence  that  the
       sponsor had taken out "Critical Life Insurance Cover" in  respect  of
       which the appellant was the beneficiary, the Tribunal failed to  have
       regard to a further aspect of the evidence that was material  to  the
       issue of whether the parties had entered a  marriage  of  convenience
       [paragraph 4 of the application]. These  are  matters,  which  either
       alone or in combination, arguably affected the outcome of the appeal.
       Permission to appeal is therefore granted on these grounds."

    4. At the hearing before me, counsel for the appellant, relying  on  her
       written grounds of appeal asked that the appeal be allowed. According
       to her, the  FTT  Judge's  finding  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience was unreasonable and  against  the  weight  of  evidence,
       given that the burden of  proof  on  an  allegation  of  marriage  of
       convenience rested upon the respondent. Ms Haji drew my attention  to
       all the relevant evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  of  documents
       which, she argued, established that the appellant and  his  wife  are
       cohabiting, drawing my particular attention to the witness statements
       of the sponsor and appellant,  photographs,  medical  reports,  hotel
       confirmation  document,  letters  of   support   from   friends   and
       appellant's employment documents, tenancy documents etc. She  pointed
       out that the FTT Judge had omitted to give any consideration  to  the
       Critical Life Insurance Cover in respect of  which  the  sponsor  had
       nominated the appellant as the beneficiary. This  item  of  evidence,
       according to Ms Haji was crucial and its omission from  consideration
       was a material error of law.

    5. In response Ms Fujiwala agreed that the Judge had not  mentioned  the
       Critical Life Insurance Cover as an item  of  evidence  that  he  had
       considered but she argued that a Judge was not required to mention in
       his determination every piece of evidence that he had seen and  given
       consideration to.

    6. Ms  Haji  further  argued  that  the  decision  to  refuse  was  also
       materially flawed in that the respondent had failed to  carry  out  a
       home visit as required and had given no consideration to the couple's
       attempt to have a baby. At this stage  Ms  Fujiwala  asked  that  the
       appeal be allowed but only to the extent of  being  remitted  to  the
       First Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

    7. Having given careful consideration to the reasons and decision as set
       out in Judge Dickinson's determination,  the  reasons  that  led  the
       respondent to refuse the application, the records  of  interview  the
       initial grounds of appeal and grounds of  appeal  for  permission  to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the documents filed in support  of  the
       appeal including witness statements of the appellant and the sponsor,
       the terms of the decision granting permission to appeal to the  Upper
       Tribunal, I have concluded that the decision of Judge  Dickinson  was
       certainly in material error  of  law.   The  Judge  ignored  material
       evidence  such  as  the  Insurance  Policy,  the  couples'  medically
       corroborated evidence  of  miscarriage  and  failed  to  provide  any
       reasons for "disbelieving" the oral evidence that the  appellant  and
       his sponsor wife gave at the hearing of the appeal. The Judge has not
       even recorded what evidence was given by the appellant and  his  wife
       before him. His disbelief appears to have stemmed from  discrepancies
       in the answers the two (appellant and the sponsor) gave to  the  over
       500 questions  they  were  asked  by  the  respondent's  interviewing
       officer. Instead of carrying out a holistic assessment of the answers
       and noting that most answers given were consistent internally as well
       as externally the  Judge  focussed  solely  on  inconsistent  answers
       without any regard to the circumstances that had played a part in the
       way  that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had  reacted   to   the
       questioning. I am also concerned about the contents of  paragraphs  5
       to 10 of Judge Dickinson's decision. These  paragraphs  set  out  the
       Judge's understanding of the burden and standard of proof applying to
       an allegation of marriage of convenience. I have found  the  contents
       unclear and somewhat muddled. In my judgement the grounds  of  appeal
       supporting the application for permission to appeal are made out  and
       the determination of Judge Dickinson,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal is accordingly set aside as being in material error  of  law
       for the above reasons.

    8. At this point I note that Ms Fujiwala had asked that  the  appeal  be
       remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. Ms Haji, the
       appellant's representative, did not support the request. Ms  Fujiwala
       offered me no reason as to why I should remit the appeal for a  fresh
       hearing by the First Tier Tribunal. I have all the evidence before me
       to make a decision in respect of the appeal lodged by  the  appellant
       against the respondent's decision to refuse the application  for  the
       reasons given and notified on 29 May 2014.  I  therefore  proceed  to
       make the substantive decision in this appeal.

    9. I have noted the contents of the appellant's application for grant of
       Residence Permit and the reasons given  by  the  respondent  for  her
       decision to refuse as well as the record of the interview carried out
       by an Officer of the respondent. I have also taken account of all the
       evidence submitted by the appellant and his spouse subsequent thereto
       including that tendered in the course of the  appeal  proceedings.  I
       note that the decision to refuse the application was based solely  on
       the inconsistent answers given by the appellant and  the  sponsor  in
       response to the questions they were asked at their interview.  Whilst
       it is true that there were a lot of inconsistencies in their answers,
       it is crucial to bear in mind that the sponsor/spouse was  asked  335
       questions and the appellant was asked were just over 280 in number.

   10. I also note with some concern that the Interviewing Officer had  been
       given  information  prior  to  conducting  her  interview   that   an
       allegation had been received from  the  Intelligence  Unit  that  the
       appellant is entering into a "suspicious marriage" Ms Sue  Wentworth,
       the Interviewing Officer has recorded in her Interview Summary  Sheet
       that she "spoke to Intel prior to marriage  interview".  However  she
       has not disclosed the nature and content of that conversation. It  is
       safe to say, based on the contents of  the  Interview  Summary  Sheet
       that Ms Wentworth did  not  conduct  or  could  not  reasonably  have
       conducted the interview with an open and objective mind.

   11. In my view in carrying out an appraisal  of  the  discrepancies,  the
       nature and importance of the inconsistencies is relevant and  I  note
       that many are of the inconsistencies are of a fairly  minor  or  even
       trivial nature. It is important therefore to look to the totality  of
       answers, the context of the questions and the attitude  displayed  by
       the appellant and his sponsor in providing the answers. It is evident
       upon reading the record of the interview that  the  sponsor  made  it
       clear that she was unsure of her memory and at times appeared annoyed
       that too much detail was being asked and displayed her  annoyance  by
       being flippant at times. It is also obvious to me that the  two  were
       giving answers while  they  were  still  suffering  from  the  trauma
       arising from the loss of their baby. It is  also  important  to  note
       that both the appellant as well as the sponsor showed no great desire
       to live in the United Kingdom permanently. I also note that in  many,
       many answers the appellant was noted as being "inaudible". On balance
       I  believe  the  information  given  in  the  interview  was  not  so
       contradictory or inconsistent as, bearing in mind  all  the  relevant
       circumstances as well as the context of questions asked,  to  justify
       the conclusion  that  the  marriage  of  the  appellant  was  one  of
       convenience.

   12. The substantial  evidence  that  points  in  the  direction  of  this
       marriage  being  genuine  when  put  in  balance   as   against   the
       discrepancies at the interview far outweighs the inconsistencies that
       arose in the answers given to the questions asked. In this context  I
       give due weight to the Critical  Insurance  Policy  which  names  the
       appellant as the beneficiary. I also give weight to  the  photographs
       tendered in evidence taken at various times which I find  demonstrate
       body language of love between the appellant and his  spouse.  I  also
       give weight to the tenancy agreement, which gives names  of  both  as
       tenants. I also give due weight to the fact pointed out  by  Ms  Haji
       that the respondent should have but did not carry out  a  home  visit
       before concluding that the marriage was one of convenience contracted
       for the sole purpose of securing right of residence in the UK.

   13. I have noted the consistency of content in material respects  in  the
       letters of support from the friends of the appellant and his  spouse.
       I have noted the corroborative evidence in respect of the miscarriage
       of their baby.  On  balance  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
       marriage to Natalija Naidionova, a national of Lithuania,  exercising
       her community rights in the United Kingdom is genuine.

   14. In  the  circumstances  therefore  I  allow  the  appeal,  as  in  my
       judgement, the appellant is entitled to be issued  with  a  Residence
       Card as confirmation of a right of residence under European Community
       Law as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  the
       United Kingdom.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date: 23 August 2015

