
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24270/2015
                                                               IA/24271/2015
                                                               IA/24272/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd June 2017                             |On 25th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                   MOLLAH MD HAMIM YASIN (FIRST appellant)
                    TAMANNA KHANDAKAR (SECOND appellant)
                      ABUL KALAM AZAD (THIRD appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants     Mr Karim, Counsel for Shahid Rahman Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on 15th  February  1983,
    24th April 1982 and 4th July 1985 respectively.  The second  and  third
    Appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third  Appellant's  appeal
    depends on the result of the second Appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellants appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    16th June 2015 refusing the  combined  application  of  the  first  two
    Appellants for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrants.  Their appeals were  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Callender Smith on 16th September 2016.  The appeal
    was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds
    in a decision promulgated on 13th March 2017.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan on 11th May 2017.  Judge  Jordan
    had previously refused permission but  has  set  aside  this  decision,
    which he made on 21st April 2017.  As the appeal  hearing  was  carried
    out in the absence  of  the  Appellants  through  illness,  this  would
    normally result in an adjournment, without requiring the merits of  the
    claim to be established.  The Appellants did not appear for the hearing
    of the appeal, and there is now evidence that they were at the Accident
    & Emergency Department of their local  hospital  on  the  date  of  the
    hearing due to illness.  This evidence was not before the judge when he
    refused  the  adjournment.   Judge  Jordan  grants  permission  on  all
    grounds.  At number 3 of the permission he states that the absence of a
    party is a ground for setting aside.

 4. The grounds are  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  refusing  the
    adjournment.  The medical issues arose on the morning  of  the  hearing
    and at paragraph 23 the  judge  states  that  witness  statements  were
    before him and these would be considered.  The grounds state  that  the
    oral evidence was critical.  The  grounds  go  on  to  state  that  the
    judge's decision not to adjourn was unfair in  the  circumstances.   An
    application under Rule 43 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 inviting the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision on the
    grounds of the interests of justice was made.  The medical evidence was
    not available at the date of  the  First-tier  appeal  hearing  as  the
    Appellants had only that morning attended the  hospital.   The  grounds
    state that there does not have to be  any  fault  attributable  to  the
    First-tier Judge for there to be an error of  law  and  in  this  case,
    because some material  evidence,  (being  a  medical  letter)  was  not
    considered, this resulted in unfairness.  In the  decision  the  First-
    tier Judge states that postdecision material cannot  be  considered  in
    support of an appeal of this type so the only  method  for  any  issues
    arising can only be addressed by oral  evidence.   Even  a  credibility
    issue denotes the necessity of  the  Appellants'  oral  evidence.   The
    grounds go on to list the key factors that require to be considered for
    a just decision and I have taken  these  into  account.   The  relevant
    medical evidence is now available.

 5.  On  20th  June  2017  the  Appellants'  representative  submitted   an
    additional bundle of documents  including  an  application  under  Rule
    15(2) which sets out  the  second  Appellant's  wishes  to  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom under the  ten  years'
    long residence category as per paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.
     The third Appellant relies on his additional grounds for leave as  the
    spouse of a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    enumerated in  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  actual
    Statements of Additional Grounds were submitted on 13th June  2017  for
    this hearing, scheduled to take place, today, 22nd June 2017.

The Hearing

 6. Counsel for the Appellants submitted that if  I  find  there  to  be  a
    material error of law in the decision the  claims  should  be  remitted
    back to the Respondent.  The Presenting Officer agreed to that but only
    if a material error of law is found.

 7. Counsel submitted that  the  primary  focus  is  that  the  adjournment
    request was refused.  The judge  was  told  that  the  Appellants  were
    unable to attend as they were ill and Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  has
    now seen medical evidence and confirms that two of the Appellants  were
    at Accident & Emergency at their local hospital  on  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  He submitted that Judge Jordan states that the absence  of  a
    party at a hearing is a reason for setting aside the decision.   I  was
    referred to the case of MM [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) head note  2.   This
    states that an Appellant need not show the First-tier  Tribunal  is  at
    fault for there to be a legal error.  He submitted that the  judge  did
    not have the medical evidence but the Tribunal now has this and as  the
    Appellants were unable to attend the hearing, the  decision  should  be
    set aside as their attendance was important.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellants' evidence has not been tested and the  judge  therefore  was
    unable to give it proper weight.  He submitted that an Appellant has  a
    right to be at his  hearing  and  has  a  right  to  be  examined.   He
    submitted that even if he is not cross-examined and no oral evidence is
    sought the Appellant could have given his  representative  instructions
    based on something which arises at the hearing and therefore the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision should be set aside.

 8. Counsel submitted that if I find that there is a material error of  law
    in the decision he will make further submissions.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  At paragraph 4  of  the  response  it  is  stated  that  the
    Appellants had provided witness statements  and  the  First-tier  Judge
    found that they did not adequately explain the discrepancies  in  their
    evidence at interview nor the  paucity  of  their  market  research  or
    advertising so it is difficult to see in this  appeal  how  their  oral
    evidence could have made a material difference to the outcome.   I  was
    referred to the case of Ahmed [2014] UKUT 365. The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that this entrepreneur application was  on  the  points-based
    system and at paragraphs 10 and 11 of the First-tier  Judge's  decision
    the judge makes it clear that he has read all the information which was
    before the Respondent at the time of the original refusal and has  read
    all the material in the Appellants' bundle.  At paragraph 23 the  judge
    refers to the witness statements which the Appellants had  intended  to
    adopt and has considered them properly.  The  Presenting  Officer  then
    referred to paragraphs 24 to 27 of the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that he declined to adjourn the proceedings because he  was  not
    satisfied with the substance of what before him and  does  not  believe
    that  the  Appellants  could  have  added  anything  to  their  witness
    statements and that what the court has to consider is  the  information
    available at the  time  the  decision  was  made  with  any  additional
    information that could have been submitted at  that  time  and  he  was
    being referred to postdecision evidence.  He states  that  he  did  not
    consider the postdecision comments or material.

10. At paragraph 32 the judge  states  that  there  is  a  significant  and
    serious discrepancy in the key figures quoted by the first 2 Appellants
    in interview, in respect of what the other said and no reason has  been
    given for that discrepancy.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that perhaps if this had  not  been  a
    PBS case oral evidence might  have  been  material  but  based  on  the
    evidence before the judge it is not clear that if  the  Appellants  had
    been cross-examined there would have been  a  different  decision.   He
    submitted that the parties were on the telephone to  Counsel  and  gave
    instructions so there was communication and the fact that the case  was
    not adjourned and the Appellants  were  not  at  the  hearing  was  not
    material as their evidence would have made little or no  difference  to
    the discrepancies referred to in the  judge's  decision  based  on  the
    evidence before him.

12. At paragraph 24 the judge deals with the interests of justice  and  the
    Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  his  decision   to   refuse   the
    adjournment was fair.  He also submitted that based on the  Grounds  of
    Appeal no material error has been addressed.

13. Counsel submitted that a Rule 43 application is  very  rare  and  Judge
    Jordan, after seeing the  medical  evidence,  set  aside  his  previous
    refusal of permission and granted permission so that justice  was  seen
    to be done.  He submitted that it is not  clear  whether  a  difference
    would have been made if the Appellants had attended the hearing but  it
    might have made a difference.  He submitted that at any future  hearing
    the Respondent can cross-examine the Appellants and if they  are  still
    found not to be credible the original decision can be cemented.

14. He submitted that Counsel did  not  represent  the  Appellants  at  the
    hearing but they had a legal representative and he submitted  that  the
    Appellants should have been in  attendance  so  that  the  judge  could
    assess their evidence and they had a right to be present.

15. I was referred to paragraph 24 of the decision in which the judge deals
    with declining to adjourn the proceedings.  Two  of  the  reasons  were
    that there was difficulty relisting matters in the  foreseeable  future
    and also the cost to the judicial process in adjourning  cases  out  at
    the last moment is prohibitive and should not be done unless absolutely
    necessary.  He submitted that  the  Appellants  were  entitled  to  the
    benefit of the doubt.

16. Counsel submitted that in this case the  judge  was  not  culpable  but
    there is a material error of law in the decision as the  appeal  should
    have been adjourned.

17. He then referred to his Section 120 application and submitted that  the
    Secretary of State requires to assess the Appellants' long residence in
    the United Kingdom.   He  submitted  that  with  regard  to  the  first
    Appellant he should be entitled to a de novo hearing at a future date.

18. The Presenting Officer referred me to the standard directions  relating
    to this case.  At number 6 a timetable is set out.  He  submitted  that
    the Appellants' representative's letter of 20th June was not lodged  on
    time.  I was referred to the Immigration Rules -"Part 1 Leave to  Enter
    or Stay  in  the  United  Kingdom"  which  has  been  produced  by  the
    Respondent at 34(1)(a) and (b) about how to make  a  valid  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  This states that where  the
    applicant is required to pay a fee the fee must  be  paid  in  full  in
    accordance with the process  set  out  in  the  application  form.   He
    submitted that that has not been done.  Also the  application  must  be
    made on an application form  which  is  specific  for  the  immigration
    category under which the applicant is applying on the date on which the
    application is made.  I was referred to Section 4, "Apply to settle  in
    the United Kingdom  on  long  residence"  and  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that no application has been made under Rule 34.

19. The Presenting Officer also referred to paragraph 276B of the Rules and
    the fact that public interest requires to be taken into  account.   The
    Respondent has to form a view on this  and  that  has  not  been  done.
    Criminal record checks have to  be  done  and  he  submitted  that  the
    Appellants can apply based on long residence now.   He  submitted  that
    based on the public interest it should not be added on to  the  present
    appeal, which cannot succeed based on the PBS Rules  and  that  is  the
    basis on which this application has been made.  He submitted that if  I
    do find that there is an error of law then it will require to  go  back
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  based  on  the  Rules  relating  to   an
    entrepreneur application and on that basis it will have to be reheard.

20. Counsel submitted that with regard to Rule 15 of the Procedure Rules an
    application can be made under Section 120.  He submitted that there  is
    no time  limit  and  the  Appellants  could  not  have  submitted  this
    application until now as their ten year period of residence started  on
    19th June 2017.  He submitted that the statutory provision  must  trump
    the Procedure Rules.

21. I was referred to Section 96 of the 2002 Act.  Because of the terms  of
    the Rules the Tribunal has to be the primary decision maker.

22. I was referred to the case of Patel and  Counsel  submitted  that  this
    claim should be remitted to the Respondent relating to the  application
    based on ten years' long residence and at that point the Respondent can
    ask for fees, etc., but he submitted that the claim can be  decided  by
    me today.

23. He submitted that there is nothing to show that  it  would  be  against
    public interest to allow these  Appellants  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom so the claim must be allowed based on their long residency  and
    in my decision the additional fee can be requested and no-one  will  be
    prejudiced.

24. He submitted that based on the said case of Patel and the  case  of  AS
    (Afghanistan) the Tribunal is compelled to make a decision  and  I  was
    asked to find that there was a material error of law in the  First-tier
    decision and that the Appellants' claim should be allowed based on  ten
    years' long residency.

Decision and Reasons

25. I have carefully  considered  the  terms  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision relating to the  first  two  Appellants'  appeals  for
    leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants.  I have noted the permission by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Jordan
    dated 11th May 2017.  He states that the absence of a party is a ground
    for setting aside a decision.  Having taken note of all the evidence in
    this claim, and taken note of the judge's decision and  the  fact  that
    the terms of the  PBS  application  cannot  be  satisfied  for  reasons
    carefully set out in the First-tier Judge's decision, I believe that if
    the Appellants had attended the  court  hearing  the  judge's  decision
    would have been the same, as no matter what their  oral  evidence  was,
    the decision would have  been  the  same,  as  the  terms  of  the  PBS
    application could not be satisfied.  The judge refers in particular  to
    the  discrepancy  in  the  first  and  second  Appellants'  answers  to
    questions about projections and turnover, gross profit and net  profit.
    The discrepancies are significant.   The  judge  makes  this  clear  at
    paragraph 32.

26.  The  judge  finds  that  the  Respondent  was  entitled,  against  the
    background, to doubt the credibility of the  contracts  and  the  sales
    figures being relied on.  The judge also refers to market research  for
    which there was no evidence, and  the  fact  that  at  interview  their
    specific  details  as  owners  of  any  credible  business   were   not
    acceptable.  There were also problems with the advertising costs given,
    as both Appellants were extremely vague.  The judge states  that  their
    educational experience causes no concern  but  they  do  not  have  any
    relevant business experience and he finds that the Appellants have  not
    discharged the burden of proof to the balance of probabilities.

27. The judge refers to the refusal letter mentioning all of these concerns
    and it is clear that in spite of this the Appellants  did  not  address
    the concerns in their statements or with additional evidence.

28. There was no medical evidence before the judge at the  hearing  and  we
    are told that this was because they attended the hospital on  the  same
    day as the hearing.  That is of course true but the evidence from North
    Middlesex University Hospital NHS Trust states that Mr  Yasin  attended
    the A&E Department on 16th September at 10.18 a.m. and  was  discharged
    at 11.31 a.m.  He was in touch with his solicitor on the  date  of  the
    hearing.  I find that the letter from the hospital does not sway me and
    would not have swayed the judge at the First-tier hearing.  There is no
    substance in the second appellant's brief attendance at  the  hospital.
    It also appears as if only one of the appellants attended the hospital.
     There were 3 appellants in this appeal.  Why did the others not attend
    the hearing?  There is nothing before me and there was  nothing  before
    the judge which  could  enable  the  PBS  claims  as  entrepreneurs  to
    succeed.  Had the  Appellants  been  given  a  chance  to  submit  oral
    evidence the judge's decision would not have been any different.  There
    is no error and no procedural  unfairness  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.

29. There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

30. We now have the additional grounds and the Section 120 notice submitted
    by the Appellants' solicitors.  The Presenting Officer has  given  good
    reasons for not considering these and as I find there is  no  error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision there is not any  scope
    for me to consider these. It is significant that the 10 year period  of
    residence started on 19 June 2017. The First-tier  hearing  was  on  16
    September 2016.

 Notice of Decision

31. I find that there is no material error of law in the First-tier Judge's
    decision and that his decision  must  stand  relating  to  the  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) applications which decision was promulgated on 13  March
    2017.

32. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

