
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24893/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 8 June 2017                      |On 30 June 2017                         |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ZOHAIB IQBAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O. Sobowale, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1984.  He arrived in the
    UK illegally in March 2000 and has never had any lawful basis of  stay.
    An application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds was refused  by
    the respondent in a decision dated 24 June 2015.

 3. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Farmer ("the FtJ")  on
    18 October 2016 following which he allowed the appeal with reference to
    the Article 8 Immigration Rules.  The respondent's  grounds  of  appeal
    upon which permission to  appeal  against  his  decision  was  granted,
    contend that the FtJ was wrong to have concluded that the appellant met
    the requirements of the Rules in  terms  of  his  relationship  with  a
    partner in the UK because their relationship was not one that  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.  It is further contended that  the  FtJ  was
    wrong to deal with the appeal with reference to paragraph EX.1  of  the
    Rules and  further,  in  so  doing,  failed  to  assess  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Pakistan  with
    reference to relevant authority.

 4. In his decision the FtJ summarised the appellant's case  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds as follows.  The appellant had  been  in  a
    relationship with his current partner, [FM], a British  citizen,  since
    2011.  They underwent an Islamic  marriage  in  July  2015,  which  was
    "celebrated" in December 2015.

 5. The only family that the appellant has in Pakistan is his  mother,  his
    father having died when the appellant was young.  He has  no  siblings.
    [FM] had been in the UK since she was 13 years of age.  They come  from
    different areas of Pakistan which the appellant asserted would  present
    linguistic difficulties for one or other of them if returned.  [FM] has
    suffered two miscarriages.  She has type 2  diabetes  which  makes  her
    more prone to miscarry.

 6. The appellant asserted that he had strong ties in the community through
    his volunteer work in a mosque and the mosque supports  him  with  food
    and "charitable donations".  He also worked in his local church.

 7. The FtJ found both the appellant and [FM] credible. At [11] he said  as
    follows:

         "It follows that I accept that they are and have been in a  genuine
         relationship and have been since 2011.  They married in  July  2015
         and have lived together since then.  I accept that the  photographs
         produced are of their wedding and their anniversary.  I  find  that
         they meet the criteria of Paragraph E-LTRP.1.2 of Appendix FM".

 8. He then went on to say that he next  had  to  determine  whether  there
    would  be  "very  significant  difficulties"  in  their   family   life
    continuing abroad under EX.1.  Referring to various  decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal, he summarised the  position  at
    [15].  He referred to the appellant's contention that he has no home or
    employment in Pakistan and that his mother lives in different places by
    relying on friends to accommodate her and by cleaning their houses.  He
    reiterated that the appellant's father had died when the appellant  was
    2 months old and that he has no siblings.  He referred to the appellant
    having left Pakistan when he was 16 years old and that he had lived  in
    the UK for over half his life, being now 32 years  of  age.   He  found
    that the appellant has no other ties or connections with Pakistan.

 9. He then referred to [FM]'s family all being in the UK.   She  has  both
    parents here and two brothers and two sisters in the UK  and  has  been
    here herself since the age of 13 and had  obtained  a  good  education.
    She is a type 2 diabetic and is insulin dependent.  He referred to  the
    two  miscarriages  that  she  had  suffered  since  January  2016.   He
    concluded that although she is still young (22  years  of  age)  it  is
    possible that she will need specialist treatment to be able to carry  a
    child to term.  He referred to her intention to find employment as  she
    had previously done.  [FM] thought that it would be difficult,  if  not
    impossible, for her to find employment in Pakistan.

10. Finally, he said that he accepted their evidence  and  found  that  the
    circumstances they had portrayed amounted to  insurmountable  obstacles
    in that they would have no accommodation and no-one  to  stay  with  in
    Pakistan, or anyone  who  could  support  them  there.   The  appellant
    himself had lost all his ties to Pakistan.  Whilst  the  appellant  had
    been in the UK  to  support  [FM],  he  concluded  that  she  has  also
    benefited enormously from having all her family with her in the UK.

11. In submissions Ms Holmes relied on the grounds which were elaborated on
    with reference to aspects of the FtJ's decision.  It was submitted that
    the FtJ had failed to appreciate the high threshold for  insurmountable
    obstacles under EX.1.  I  was  referred  to  various  passages  in  the
    decision in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWCA Civ 440.

12. Mr Sobowale submitted that there was no error of law on the part of the
    FtJ, alternatively that any error of law  was  not  material.   It  was
    submitted that though the respondent contended that two  years  is  the
    hallmark of a  genuine  relationship  as  partners,  that  ignored  the
    cultural context.  The matter needed to be looked at  holistically  and
    it would not have been acceptable for the appellant and  [FM]  to  live
    together before marriage.  Had the appellant had  status  documentation
    they would have married.  Furthermore, the notion of 'living  together'
    is a broad one.

13. Alternatively, it would still have been open to  the  FtJ  to  find  in
    favour of the appellant outside the Article 8 Rules.  I was referred to
    the respondent's guidance entitled Immigration Directorate Instruction,
    Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, relating to family life  as
    a partner or parent and private  life,  10-year  routes,  dated  August
    2015.  That guidance, it was submitted, referred to issues to be  taken
    into account in  terms,  for  example,  of  language  difficulties  and
    cultural barriers.  The decision in Agyarko was also relied on.

14. It was submitted that the FtJ had applied the  test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles sensibly and practically.  It  would  be  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, for [FM] to return to Pakistan.  She would be  expected  to
    modify her behaviour  and  would  be  expected  to  restrict  her  life
    ambitions.

15. Both parties agreed that an assessment  outside  the  Article  8  Rules
    would need to take into account s.117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") in  terms,  for  example,  of  the
    precariousness of the  appellant's  immigration  status.   However,  Mr
    Sobowale submitted that it was not entirely clear that [FM]  was  fully
    aware of the appellant's immigration  status  when  they  entered  into
    their relationship.

    Conclusions

16. I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Article 8 Rules.  His analysis at
    [11] which I have set out does not reveal that the Rules are met.

17. The position can be summarised relatively simply.  In order to  qualify
    for limited leave to remain as a partner under section E-LTRP, all  the
    requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 to 4.2 must be met.  These include under  E-
    LTRP.1.8 that if the applicant and partner are married or  in  a  civil
    partnership it must be a "valid marriage" or  civil  partnership.   The
    appellant and [FM]'s marriage is  not  a  marriage  that  is  valid  in
    English law, a fact that is not disputed on behalf of the appellant.

18. Nor is the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  [FM]  one  that
    qualifies under the Rules in terms of [FM] being  a  "partner".   Under
    GEN.1.2(iv) the appellant would have to establish that  they  had  been
    living together in a relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership
    for at least two years prior to the date of application.   The  Islamic
    marriage was in July 2015 and even if they started living together then
    (as opposed to when the marriage was "celebrated" in December 2015) the
    two year period was not satisfied as at the date of the hearing  before
    the FtJ, still less at the date of the application which is in fact the
    relevant date.

19. Accordingly, under the Rules they are  neither  spouses  nor  partners.
    That being the case, EX.1 does not arise for consideration, EX.1  being
    an exception to certain of the eligibility requirements  but  not  with
    reference to their relationship needing to be a qualifying relationship
    in terms of there being a marriage, or [FM] being a partner as  defined
    in GEN.1.2.  The FtJ was therefore  wrong  to  consider  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles to family life under EX.1.

20. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that any error  of  law  on
    the part of the FtJ in terms of his consideration of the Rules was  not
    material in the light of his factual findings.  I do  not  agree.   The
    fact that the appellant is not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules in terms of his relationship not being a 'qualifying' one, as  it
    were, is highly significant.  Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    FtJ's decision must be set aside.

21. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that  if  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtJ, any re-making of the decision could take place  on
    the basis of the information presently before me.  In that context, the
    findings of fact made by the FtJ will stand,  unless  infected  by  the
    error of law.  Essentially, the FtJ found that the appellant  and  [FM]
    gave  credible  evidence  in  relation  to  their  and  their  family's
    circumstances both in the UK and in Pakistan.

22. I also take into account the supplementary bundle provided  in  advance
    of the hearing before me which contains  a  further  witness  statement
    from [FM] and medical evidence which confirms  that  unfortunately  she
    suffered another miscarriage in April 2017.

23. The case for the appellant has never been put on the basis that  he  is
    able to meet the private life requirements  of  the  Rules.   The  only
    basis upon which such an argument could be  advanced  is  in  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), i.e. that he establishes that there  would  be
    very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Pakistan.   No
    argument in that respect was advanced before me.  Neither  individually
    nor cumulatively could his length of time in the UK, his  private  life
    as found by the FtJ, or his cultural integration  here,  establish  the
    very significant obstacles necessary to succeed under  that  aspect  of
    the Rules.  His mother is in Pakistan.  He lived there until he was  16
    years of age and he is  familiar  with  the  language  and  customs  of
    Pakistan.  There is no reasonable basis from which to conclude that  he
    would not be able to re-integrate  there,  even  accepting  that  there
    would be initial difficulties.

24. The appellant not being able to succeed under the Rules,  the  question
    arises as to whether there are "compelling circumstances" to support  a
    claim for a grant of leave to remain outside the  Rules  (Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.
    I am prepared to accept that there are such circumstances in this  case
    in the light  of  the  FtJ's  findings.   In  brief,  those  compelling
    circumstances include, in particular, [FM]'s health  in  terms  of  her
    diabetes, and the support that she enjoys from her  family  in  the  UK
    which is important given that she has suffered now three miscarriages.

25. I proceed on the footing that the respondent's decision does amount  to
    an interference with their family life in the  sense  that  they  enjoy
    family life in the UK in particular circumstances and that their family
    life in Pakistan would be different.  I move therefore, straight to the
    issue of proportionality.

26. Again, I take into account all the positive findings  in  their  favour
    made by the FtJ, which it is not necessary for me to repeat in  detail.
    It is likely to be the case that there would be a difficult  period  of
    adjustment for both of them in pursuing their family life in  Pakistan.
    However, they would be able to live together; it has not been suggested
    otherwise.  [FM] would be without the family support that she enjoys in
    the UK and the FtJ found that all her family are here.   She  has  been
    here for a number of years, arriving at the age of 13.  She is  now  23
    years of age.

27. There is no evidence to suggest that she would not be  able  to  obtain
    the necessary treatment that she needs for her  diabetes  in  Pakistan.
    She has a number of qualifications which are set  out  in  her  witness
    statement dated 18 October 2016, including 5 GCSEs, an  NVQ  in  travel
    and tourism management, and a diploma in travel and tourism management.
     She has experience of working in a  hotel.   There  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that they would not be able to continue trying for a family  in
    Pakistan.  The medical facilities there may  in  some  cases  be  of  a
    lesser standard than in the UK (although no evidence to that effect has
    been provided) but she would still be able to obtain medical  treatment
    should she need it.

28. The close support that she has  in  the  UK  could  not  of  course  be
    replicated in Pakistan but there  is  no  reason  that  she  could  not
    continue to receive emotional support from her family here, albeit at a
    distance.

29. It is important to bear in mind that the appellant arrived  in  the  UK
    illegally, albeit at a young age.  He has never had any lawful  status.
    Although it was submitted on the appellant's behalf  that  it  was  not
    entirely clear that [FM] was fully aware of his immigration  status  at
    the time they established their relationship, it is likely  to  be  the
    case that [FM] was aware of his immigration status at about the time of
    their marriage, if not before.  She must have questioned why they could
    not have their marriage  registered  in  the  UK  as  a  legally  valid
    marriage in UK law.

30. Even if she was not aware of his precarious immigration status  at  the
    time they entered into their relationship, it is  settled  law  that  a
    State is not required to respect the choice of individuals as to  where
    they wish to conduct their married life.

31. Under s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act, little weight is  to  be  given  to  a
    private life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, which this appellant is.  Likewise in relation  to  private
    life established by a person when the person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.

32. Furthermore, as was reiterated in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10 at [41], if family life was  created
    at a time when the people involved knew that the immigration status  of
    one of them was such that persistence of family life in the host  state
    would from the outset be  precarious  "it  is  likely  only  to  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family
    member will  constitute  a  violation  of  article  8".   Put  slightly
    differently, and more significantly for  the  purposes  of  the  appeal
    before me, in Agyarko v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 the fact that family life has  been  established  by  an
    applicant in the full knowledge that his stay in the UK was unlawful or
    precarious affects the weight to be attached to  it  in  the  balancing
    exercise [50].  That is consistent with s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act,  and
    the issue of the maintenance of effective immigration controls being in
    the public interest, also reflected in s.117B.

33. I am satisfied that the appellant and [FM] would be  able  to  continue
    their family life in Pakistan, albeit accepting that there would  be  a
    degree of hardship in their being required to do so, for the reasons  I
    have identified.  I am not satisfied  that  the  respondent's  decision
    amounts to a disproportionate interference with their family  life,  or
    either of their private lives.

34. Accordingly, the appeal on Article 8 grounds is dismissed.










    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside.  I re-make the decision,
    dismissing the appeal.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            30/06/17


