

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24934/2013
                                                               IA/24952/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27th February 2014                         |On 10th April 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           RABINDER KUMAR HIRAWAT
                              PRIYANKA BARARIA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Chowdhury of ACM Immigration Experts LTD.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Creswell promulgated  on  25th  November  2013  in  which  he
        allowed the Appellants' appeals on the basis the decision  was  not
        in accordance with the law and that the application awaits a lawful
        decision.


     2. Mr Hirawat is a citizen of India born on 18th July 1984.  His  wife
        Priyanka Bararia, also  a  citizen  of  India,  was  born  on  23rd
        December 1983.


     3. Mr Hirawat's immigration history shows that on 14th September  2006
        he was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student.  His
        leave was varied as a student until 31st October 2008, as a Tier  1
        (Post Study Work) Migrant from 24th January  2009  to  8th  January
        2011 and from 15th April 2011 as a Tier 1 (General)  Migrant  valid
        until 15th April 2013.  On 18th March 2013 he applied  for  further
        leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant which was refused  on
        3rd May 2013.


     4. Mrs Bararia was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier
        1 (General) Dependent on 24th September 2011 valid until 15th April
        2013. On 18th March 2013 she too made an application for  leave  to
        remain but as a partner of a Tier 1 Migrant which  was  refused  in
        line with that of her husband.


     5. Mr Hirawat's application was refused on the basis of  his  previous
        earnings.  He  claimed  20  points  under  paragraph  245CA(b)  and
        Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  In support of  his  claim  he
        provided payslips from Lloyds TSB Group PLC and from  First  Source
        Solutions Ltd which were considered by the decision maker.  It  was
        noted that the Lloyds Group PLC payslips started  on  20th  January
        2012 and ended on 18th January 2013 and therefore  record  thirteen
        months pay whereas the provisions of  the  Rules  only  enable  the
        decision maker to consider whether the required  minimum  level  of
        earnings had been acquired over twelve  months.  The  First  Source
        Solutions Ltd payslips start on 20th January 2012 and end  on  31st
        December 2012 but the decision maker was  unable  to  consider  the
        January 2012 payslip as, again, they will be  considering  thirteen
        months earnings and not the stipulated twelve months.


     6. Judge Creswell noted that the  period  of  assessment  of  earnings
        contained within the Immigration Rules is that of twelve months and
        not the period for which the  wages  were  paid.  This  is  legally
        correct as it is the period over which the earnings are earned  and
        not when the wages are  received.   An  applicant  is  required  to
        establish by  the  production  of  admissible  documents  that  the
        required level of previous earnings  has  been  met  based  upon  a
        twelve month period of assessment of earnings.


     7. By the date of the hearing Mr Hirawat was able to show that he  had
        sufficient income during the relevant twelve month period when  his
        income from self-employment that he undertook was also  taken  into
        account albeit that he did  not  prove  he  could  do  so  when  he
        submitted his application, as he failed to disclose this additional
        source of earnings.  His explanation for not providing such details
        to the case worker was that he had made a  mistake  in  calculating
        his income from wages and did not think he would need to add in his
        self-employed income.


     8. It was submitted before Judge Creswell  that  had  the  Respondent,
        when identifying that thirteen rather than twelve payslips had been
        sent, made a simple enquiry Mr Hirawat would have provided  details
        of his self-employed income which would have filled the gap in  his
        earnings.  It was submitted this would have, in  any  event,  given
        him a chance to remedy his mistake.


     9. In paragraphs 15 (v) to (vii) of his determination  Judge  Creswell
        set out his core findings upon which the decision he made was based
        in the following terms:




     (v)  I agree with Mr Chowdhury that the  policy  of  fairness,  evident
   from           Rodriguez, is wider than the context of Rule 245AA,  which
   is a                statement of what the Respondent might do, not of all
   that she                should do. "The rules are not be  construed  with
   all the strictness           applicable to the construction of a  statute
   or a statutory instrument             but, instead, sensibly according to
   the  natural  and  ordinary  meaning               of  the  words   used,
   recognising that they are statements of the                 Secretary  of
   State's administrative policy: Mahad (Ethiopia)  v  ECO            [2009]
   UKSC 16, Lord Brown as para 10"


     (vi) Mr Kirwan ought to have been given the opportunity to realise  his
          mathematical error and submit his evidence of  income  from  self-
     employment. It would  be  a  rather  sad  day  if  decent  hard-working
   people  were  to  be  removed  from  the  country  simply  because   they
   made a mistake with their maths, when  a  single  letter  to  them  could
   have remedied the situation.


     (vii)    Because the Respondent did not  act  in  accordance  with  her
   policy              and the public law duty detailed  in  Rodriguez,  the
   Appellants'                  applications await a  lawful  decision.  The
   outcome of Mrs Bararia's               application  continues  to  depend
   upon the outcome of that of Mr            Hirawat. The removal  direction
   was withdrawn.


    10. Permission to Appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  whose
        grounds submitted that the First-tier Judge's decision involved  an
        unlawful application of  the  evidential  flexibility  policy.  The
        policy referred to in Rodriguez and cited by  Mr  Chowdhury  before
        the First-tier Tribunal was not relevant to the Secretary of States
        policy at the date of decision as it had  been  withdrawn  on  13th
        March 2013. In considering a policy that  had  been  withdrawn  the
        Judge made a legal error.  The  Grounds  also  assert  that  having
        failed to apply the right policy the  Judge  then  gave  no  lawful
        reason to explain how the Secretary of State could have "sufficient
        reason" to know that Mr Hirawat had a separate self-employed income
        when it had not been disclosed on the application.





Discussion



    11. It was not in dispute that Mr Hirawat  was  unable  to  demonstrate
        that he had the required minimum level of previous earnings on  the
        basis of the documents he chose to disclose.  The Judge  was  right
        not to accept the income disclosed in the payslips provided as  the
        first of those payslips,  which  is  dated  at  the  start  of  the
        relevant twelve month period, records income earned in the previous
        month.  Had all  the  income  contained  in  the  wage  slips  been
        considered, that would have been for a thirteen month period  which
        is outside the period specified in the Immigration Rules  as  found
        in Appendix A.


    12. Paragraph 20 of Appendix A states that applicants  should  indicate
        in the application form for which 12-month  period  their  earnings
        should be assessed. Paragraph 21 states that for all applicants the
        period for assessment of earnings must (i) consist of no more  than
        12 months which must run consecutively, and
           (ii)  fall  within  the  15  months  immediately  preceding   the
   application. Mr              Hirawat specified the  period  20th  January
   2012 to 19th January 2013.


    13. Mr Chowdhury referred the Judge to the case of  Rodriguez  and  the
        evidential flexibility considered by  the  Tribunal  in  that  case
        although I find  no  merit  in  such  an  "evidential  flexibility"
        argument.  The policy  for  applications  under  the  points  based
        system was incorporated into the Rules at paragraph  245AA  on  6th
        September 2012 which states:


         245AA. Documents not submitted with applications
              (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred  to  in  Part  6A
state that specified                documents must be  provided,  the  Entry
Clearance Officer, Immigration               Officer  or  the  Secretary  of
State  will  only  consider  documents  that   have                     been
submitted  with  the  application,  and   will   only   consider   documents
     submitted after the application where they are submitted in  accordance
                  with subparagraph (b).

              (b)      If the applicant has  submitted  specified  documents
in which:

                  (i)  Some  of  the  documents  in  a  sequence  have  been
omitted (for                        example, if one bank  statement  from  a
series is missing);

                  (ii)     A document is in the wrong format  (for  example,
if a letter is not on                   letterhead paper as specified); or

                  (iii)     A  document  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
document; or

                  (iv)     A document does not contain all of the  specified
information;

                  the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or  the
Secretary  of  State                   may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
representative  in   writing,   and   request   the                  correct
documents.   The   requested   documents   must   be   received    at    the
     address specified in the request within 7 working days of the  date  of
the               request.

              (c)      Documents will not be  requested  where  a  specified
document has  not  been                submitted  (for  example  an  English
language certificate is missing), or                       where  the  Entry
Clearance   Officer,   Immigration   Officer    or    the    Secretary    of
State does not anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred  to
in                 subparagraph  (b)  will  lead  to  a  grant  because  the
application will be                     refused for other reasons.

              (d)      If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

                  (i)  in the wrong format; or

                  (ii)     which is a copy and not an original document;  or


                  (iii)    which does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified
information,  but   the                           missing   information   is
verifiable from:

                        (1)       other   documents   submitted   with   the
application,

                        (2)       the  website  of  the  organisation  which
issued the document, or

                       (3)      the website of  the  appropriate  regulatory
body;

                  the application may be  granted  exceptionally,  providing
the Entry                       Clearance Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or
the Secretary of State is  satisfied                    that  the  specified
documents   are    genuine    and    the    applicant    meets    all    the
other requirements. The Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or
              the Secretary of State  reserves  the  right  to  request  the
specified original                  documents in the correct format  in  all
cases where (b) applies, and to refuse                applications if  these
documents are not provided as set out in (b).



    14. A 'specified' document which is in the wrong format (e.g. a  letter
        is not on headed notepaper, as specified), or is a copy rather than
        the original, or does not contain all  the  specified  information,
        can trigger a request for the correct version of the  document.   A
        'missing' document can  only  be  requested  if  it  is  one  of  a
        sequence, e.g. one bank statement from a series has  been  omitted,
        but not if it is the sole "specified" document.  A condition of the
        above policy is an instruction to decision makers that before  they
        seek  further  information  from  the  applicant  they  must   have
        established that the evidence exists or have sufficient  reason  to
        believe the information exists.


    15. The case of Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042  (IAC)
        was overturned by the Court of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Rodriguez  and
        Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2 in which it was held that the Secretary of
        State for the Home Department had not been under any obligation  to
        afford applicants for leave to remain as Tier 4  (General)  Student
        Migrants in the United Kingdom any opportunity to remedy defects in
        their applications in relation to maintenance funding  requirements
        under her evidential flexibility policy. The evidential flexibility
        policy was not designed to give an applicant the opportunity  first
        to remedy any defect or inadequacy in an application or  supporting
        documentation so as to save  the  application  from  refusal  after
        consideration (my emphasis).


    16. In R(on the application of Kaur) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  1538  it  was
        held that  where  the  procedure  involved  the  submission  by  an
        appellant  of  documents  for  whose  selection  he  or   she   was
        responsible, the respondent was not required to communicate  doubts
        about a document to the appellant or  give  the  appellant  further
        opportunity to supply documentation or explanations.


    17. In light of the above I find it  not  proved  that  there  was  any
        legally binding obligation upon the Secretary of State to refer  to
        Mr Hirawat to invite him to remedy defects in documents that he had
        submitted and that he has  sought  to  rely  upon.  The  common-law
        principle of fairness does not impose such an obligation and nor do
        the specific provisions of 245AA of the Immigration Rules. There is
        no arguable basis on which the Secretary of State could be expected
        to have been aware of undisclosed sources of income.  As  a  result
        it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  allowed  the
        appeal on the basis the decision was not in accordance with the law
        as a result of failure to apply the correct policy, based  upon  an
        evidential flexibility argument, has  legally  erred  in  a  manner
        material to his decision to allow the appeal to the  extent  it  is
        remitted to the Secretary of State.


    18. I  set  aside  the  decision.  The  findings  in  relation  to  the
        immigration  history,  the   documentation   submitted   with   the
        application, the fact that insufficient evidence  of  the  required
        minimum level of previous earnings  had  been  disclosed,  and  the
        findings in relation  to  the  payslips  submitted,  shall  all  be
        preserved findings.


    19. In relation to re-making the decision; I find that at the  date  of
        the application or decision it has not  been  established  that  Mr
        Hirawat was able to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
        and undisclosed documents which may have  enabled  him  to  correct
        errors that were made in his application do not now enable  him  to
        succeed. Accordingly his appeal is dismissed as is that of his wife
        in line.



Decision

    20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. These appeals are dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such direction.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10th April 2014












