


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24510/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 18 February 2014                         |On : 24 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              aga meher tahreen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Kaderi of MQ Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 22 September 1976.  She  has
   been given permission to appeal against the determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Greasley, dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse her application for leave  to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

2. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  6  July  2007  with  entry
   clearance conferring leave to enter as a student, valid until 31  October
   2008. She was subsequently granted further periods of leave to remain  as
   a student and a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 14 April 2013.

3. On 13 April 2013 the appellant applied for further leave to remain  as  a
   Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  Points  Based  System.  Her
   application was refused on 31 May 2013 on the grounds that  she  was  not
   able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)   of   the
   immigration rules. She had previously been granted  leave  to  remain  to
   study a BSc in Management at City College of  London  from  25  September
   2008 until 30 September 2009 and ACCA at London School  of  Business  and
   Finance from  18  January  2010  until  14  December  2012.  Her  current
   application was to study a Diploma in Strategic Direction and  Leadership
   at the British Institute of Technology & E-commerce from 12 April 2013 to
   27 February 2015. Accordingly a grant of leave  to  follow  the  proposed
   course of study would lead to her  having  spent  more  than  five  years
   undertaking studies at degree level or above, contrary to the  provisions
   of paragraph 245ZX(ha).

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard  on
   20 November 2013 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley.  The  appellant
   claimed before the judge that the respondent was wrong to  have  included
   the period from 25 September 2008 because the college had closed down and
   she had commenced an Advanced Diploma in Business Management at  Business
   College of London from January 2009 (although the course began in October
   2008) to October 2009 which was below degree  level.  Her  evidence  was,
   further, that she had then applied to study ACCA at the London School  of
   Business and Finance and had completed some parts  before  commencing  an
   MBA, of which she completed Part 1 in  November  2012  and  had  only  to
   submit a dissertation in order to complete the course. She had  completed
   one semester of her current course. The appellant did  not  believe  that
   the ACCA course should have been included in the five year period because
   it was  not  a  comparable  UK  degree  course  but  was  a  professional
   qualification and also because she had commenced it under the old rules.

5. The judge found that the one  year  of  study  for  the  BSc  before  the
   college closed down was at degree level; that the period of study at  the
   Business College of London from October 2008 or  January  2009  up  until
   October 2009 was at degree level; that the ACCA course was equivalent  to
   a degree-level course; and that there had been a  further  two  years  of
   studies for the MBA from the beginning of 2012 until  the  present  time,
   which  amounted  in  total  to  over  five  years  at  degree  level.  He
   accordingly dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules. With regard
   to Article 8 and private life, he considered that  the  appellant  had  a
   history of starting courses and not completing  them  and  that  she  was
   seeking to enrol on courses and start courses simply for the purposes  of
   remaining in the United Kingdom. He considered that any interference with
   her private life would not be disproportionate or in breach of Article  8
   and he accordingly also dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

6. Permission to appeal that decision was sought on behalf of the  appellant
   on the grounds that the judge had erred by including  in  the  five  year
   period the studies undertaken during the year before the  college  closed
   down, the advanced diploma at Business College of London  and  the  ACCA,
   with reference made to the decision  in  Mirza  (ACCA  Fundamental  level
   qualification -- not  a  recognised  degree)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  41.
   Further, the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant  was
   currently studying towards a level 8 Diploma in Strategic  Direction  and
   Leadership which was a level 8 qualification leading to a doctorate level
   programme. He had also failed to consider Article 8.

7. Permission to appeal was initially refused on 18 December 2013,  but  was
   subsequently granted on 13 January 2014 in a renewed application, on  the
   grounds that it was arguable that the Advanced Diploma was not at "degree
   level".

Appeal hearing and submissions

8. At the hearing I heard submissions on the error of law.

9. Mr Kaderi submitted that the period of time spent  by  the  appellant  on
   the BSc course should not have been counted by the judge because she  had
   not been able to complete it due to the college closing down,  which  was
   not her fault. She had instead obtained a Diploma at a level below degree
   level. The Advanced Diploma was not degree level study, but  was  at  NVQ
   level 5. The judge had wrongly  counted  periods  of  vacation  time  and
   accordingly the time spent studying for the ACCA was in effect  one  year
   and not two. In any event, following the findings in Mirza, the ACCA  was
   not a recognised degree level course. Further, the course for  which  she
   had applied for leave was a level 8 course leading to a  PhD  and  should
   not have been counted as part of the five years but brought the appellant
   into the exception at paragraph 245ZX(ha)(ii).  The judge had also  erred
   by failing to consider the guidance in CDS (PBS: "available": Article  8)
   Brazil [2010] UKUT 00315 (IAC) in relation to the appellant's  Article  8
   claim.

10. Mr Bramble submitted that even if the judge had erred  in  finding  that
   the Advanced Diploma constituted degree level studies,  that  was  not  a
   material error since the appellant's current course of studies  would  in
   any event lead her to exceeding the maximum of five years of degree level
   study. The ACCA course was degree level. Accordingly there  was  the  one
   year BSc course of study before the college closed down, the two years of
   the ACCA course and the year of the MBA course as stated by the judge  at
   paragraph 12 of his determination, making a  total  of  four  years.  The
   current course  was  almost  two  years  and  therefore  would  take  the
   appellant beyond the five year limit.  With  regard  to  Article  8,  the
   judge's findings were adequately made. In any event, the appellant  could
   not succeed on Article 8 grounds in the light of the recent Supreme Court
   judgment in Patel & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2013] UKSC 72.

11. In response, Mr Kaderi reiterated the submissions made earlier.

Consideration and findings

12. It is relevant at this point to set  out  the  provisions  of  paragraph
   245ZX(ha) as follows:

         "To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under
         this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If
         the applicant meets these requirements, leave  to  remain  will  be
         granted. If the applicant does not  meet  these  requirements,  the
         applicant will be refused.

         Requirements:

         ....

         (ha) If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave
         to remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:

           i) the applicant has successfully completed a course  at  degree
              level in the UK of a minimum duration of  4  academic  years,
              and will follow a course of study at  Master's  degree  level
              sponsored by a Sponsor that is a Recognised Body or a body in
              receipt of public funding as a higher  education  institution
              from the Department of Employment and  Learning  in  Northern
              Ireland, the Higher Education Funding  Council  for  England,
              the  Higher  Education  Funding  Council  for  Wales  or  the
              Scottish Funding Council, and the grant of  leave  to  remain
              must not lead to the applicant having spent more than 6 years
              in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant,  or  as  a  Student,
              studying courses at degree level or above; or

          ii) the grant of leave to remain is to follow a course leading to
              the award of a PhD  and  the  applicant  is  sponsored  by  a
              Sponsor that is a Recognised Body or a  body  in  receipt  of
              public funding as a higher  education  institution  from  the
              Department of Employment and Learning  in  Northern  Ireland,
              the Higher Education Funding Council for England, the  Higher
              Education Funding Council for Wales or the  Scottish  Funding
              Council; or.."

13.  The respondent's case is that the courses of study  undertaken  by  the
   appellant were such that a grant of leave to undertake and  complete  her
   current course would take her above the  maximum  five  years  of  degree
   level study. Judge Greasley reached the same conclusion for  the  reasons
   set out at paragraphs 16 and 17 of his determination. The  chronology  of
   the appellant's studies set out at  paragraphs  11,  12  and  17  of  the
   decision has not been disputed, but what is challenged is  the  level  of
   study the judge attributed to some of the courses of study undertaken.

14. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the one year  course  of
   study undertaken at City College of London  between  September  2007  and
   September 2008, although commenced as a BSc course, resulted in the award
   of a lesser qualification of a Diploma in Management,  at  level  NVQ  5,
   below degree level, owing to the closure of the college. Judge  Greasley,
   however, found that it constituted degree level studies, since the course
   was a BSc course. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
   Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb was clear in  his  view  that  the  judge  had
   properly concluded that the period was at "degree level" and he  did  not
   consider that there was an arguable error in that respect. I would  agree
   with that view and consider that Judge Greasley was entitled, given  that
   the course undertaken was a BSc course, to conclude that that  period  of
   time constituted "degree level studies".

15. Likewise, UTJ Grubb considered that the  judge  had  properly  concluded
   that the ACCA studies were at "degree level". Indeed, at paragraph 16 the
   judge gave detailed reasons why the decision in Mirza did not support the
   appellant's claim and it is  the  case,  as  he  found,  that  that  case
   concerned a different issue, namely whether the ACCA was a "UK recognised
   degree". Mr Kaderi sought to argue further that the period of studies for
   the ACCA ought to have been considered  as  one  year  rather  than  two,
   having regard to the actual time attending tutorials. However I  find  no
   merit in that submission. I note the appellant's own  grounds  of  appeal
   which state, at paragraph 8, that "during complete years of 2010 and 2011
   the appellant was studying ACCA from the tuition provider  London  School
   of Business and Finance". Indeed the grounds do not challenge the judge's
   findings that the appellant  studied  the  ACCA  for  two  years  between
   January 2010 and the end of 2011, but only raise a challenge with respect
   to the level of the course.

16. It  was  on  the  basis  of  the  judge's  findings  in  regard  to  the
   appellant's Advanced Diploma that UTJ Grubb granted permission to appeal.
   The reason given by the judge, at paragraph 16, for concluding  that  the
   course was at degree level was that there was  no  evidence  to  indicate
   otherwise. It does appear that that was the case, although  evidence  has
   since been adduced to suggest  that  the  course  was  at  NVQ  level  5.
   However, even if the judge had been in error  in  that  respect,  I  find
   merit in Mr Bramble's submission that that was not  material  given  that
   even excluding that  period  of  studies,  the  grant  of  leave  to  the
   appellant would still have taken her over the maximum five year period of
   degree level studies. The total period of degree level  studies  consists
   of the one year of BSc studies at City College London from September 2007
   until September 2008, two years of study on the  ACCA  course  at  London
   School of Business and Finance from January 2010 until the  end  of  2011
   and one year of studies for the MBA for the duration of  2012,  making  a
   total of four  years.  The  appellant's  application  for  leave  was  to
   undertake a level 8 Diploma in Strategic Direction  and  Leadership  from
   April 2013 to 27 February 2015, a period of nearly two years  of  studies
   above degree level, which would take her beyond the five-year limit.

17. Mr Kaderi submitted in the alternative that the  appellant  fell  within
   the caveat at paragraph 245ZX(ha)(ii) since the grant of leave to  remain
   was to follow a course leading to the award of a PhD. The basis for  that
   argument was that the Diploma course at QCF level 11  was  equivalent  to
   the academic level of a Doctorate. However, it  seems  to  me  that  that
   argument fails on the same basis as did the arguments made in  regard  to
   the status of the ACCA course in Mirza, as endorsed in Syed,  R  (on  the
   application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC
   984. The rule is specific in its reference to a PhD and does  not  permit
   for any wider interpretation  such  as  to  include  equivalent  courses.
   Furthermore, the terms in  which  the  submission  is  expressed  in  the
   grounds before the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  4  of  the  skeleton
   argument indicates a concession that the sponsor was not a  "  Recognised
   Body" as required by the rules.

18. In the circumstances it seems to me that Judge Greasley was entitled  to
   conclude that the appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 245ZX(ha) and to dismiss the appeal on that basis.

19. As regards his findings on  Article  8,  the  judge  plainly  gave  full
   consideration to the submissions made on behalf of the appellant and took
   account of the guidance in CDS. At paragraphs 19 to 21 he gave clear  and
   cogent reasons for concluding that any interference  to  the  appellant's
   private life would not be disproportionate or in breach of Article 8.  He
   was entitled to reach the conclusion that  he  did  and  the  grounds  of
   appeal are little more than a  disagreement  with  his  decision.  As  Mr
   Bramble submitted, such a decision was in any event  entirely  consistent
   with the Supreme Court's view in Patel (in particular paragraph 57 of the
   judgment). Accordingly, I find no error in his findings on Article 8.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.






Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
