
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24512/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th October 2014                             |On 27th October 2014       |
|Extempore Judgment                              |                           |


                                   Before

                       THE HON. mr justice t r a king
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                             Mr MD Noor Hossain
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Khan (Immigration4u)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision of the First-tier Tribunal taken by  Judge  Aziz  at  Hatton
    Cross on 18th December 2013.  His Decision followed a hearing  on  13th
    December 2013 and the appeal was about a citizen of Bangladesh who  had
    originally come into the UK in 2011 as a student and  who  had  applied
    for leave to remain outside the Rules to have medical  treatment.  That
    application was refused and it was  the  appeal  against  that  refusal
    which came before Judge Aziz.

 2. On that day there was no appearance by  either  the  Appellant  or  his
    representative.  The Judge noted in his determination  at  paragraph  8
    that the Appellant did not attend, the representative  did  not  attend
    and no explanation was provided for  their  failure  to  attend.   Thus
    matters proceeded by way of submissions only.

 3. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted point out  that
    in fact the day before the hearing, a fax  was  sent  to  Hatton  Cross
    requesting an adjournment on the basis  that  the  Appellant  was  ill.
    That fax was not dealt with by the administration and indeed it did not
    reach the court file until some days later, 16th  December  2013.   The
    Judge  therefore  was  unaware  that  there  had  been  an  adjournment
    application.

 4. It is regrettable that the letter which had plainly been faxed on  12th
    December 2013 was not immediately brought to the attention of the Judge
    but it was not.  It is also plain that at a previous hearing in October
    the Appellant and his representative both attended, so it is clear that
    the Appellant had intended  to  attend  his  appeal  hearing  and  give
    evidence.

 5. On that basis  the  Tribunal  should  have  considered  an  adjournment
    application and the explanation and so the Judge, through no  fault  of
    his own has made an error of law.  There was a procedural  error  which
    gave rise to an unfairness amounting to an error of law.

 6. We have in mind the recent decision of  the   President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)
    which makes it clear that when considering an adjournment  request  the
    main point is whether the appeal can be  decided    fairly  without  an
    adjournment.  Clearly this case  is  one  where  it  was  unfair.   The
    Appellant has not had his appeal heard properly and for that reason  we
    set aside the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   As  the  Appellant
    has not had a fair and proper hearing before the First-tier  it  is  an
    appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a full de novo
    rehearing and we do so.






Signed                              Date 20th October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

