
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24579/2014
     IA/24571/2014
     IA/24578/2014
     IA/24580/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th December 2014                         |On 13th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         Ms Lateefat Folasade Salami
                     Fauz Anrolaoluwa Adenekan (a minor)
                   Fadlullah Feyisayohi Owolabi (a minor)
                   Fakhr Oluwatoniloba Adenekan (a minor)
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Brown
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant  was  born
    on 29th September 1976.  The second to fourth Appellants are her  three
    children born respectively on 20th January 2010, 13th  March  2007  and
    18th September 2011.  The appeals of the second  to  fourth  Appellants
    rise and fall on that of  the  first  Appellant  and  unless  otherwise
    specifically stated  herein  all  references  are  made  to  the  first
    Appellant.  The first Appellant  claims  to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom  in  May  2003.   On  29th  November  2010  she  submitted   an
    application for an EEA residence card on  the  basis  that  she  was  a
    family member of Mr Marek Ziga a Slovakian national.  That  application
    was refused with a right of appeal on 19th September 2011 and  although
    an appeal was lodged on 11th November 2011 it  was  withdrawn  on  23rd
    December 2011.

 2. On 13th February 2012 the first Appellant submitted an application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  That application was  refused
    with no right of appeal  on  28th  May  2013.   The  second  to  fourth
    Appellants who were all born in the United Kingdom but retain  Nigerian
    nationality were parties to that appeal.

 3. By way of consent order dated 4th February 2014 agreement  was  reached
    to reconsider the Appellants' application  for  further  leave  in  the
    United Kingdom and on 23rd May 2014 the Secretary  of  State  issued  a
    Notice of Refusal having reconsidered the Appellants' application under
    Article 8 taking into account Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizens  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and the Immigration Rules put in place on 9th July
    2012.  In reconsidering the application the  Secretary  of  State  gave
    consideration to the family life of  the  Appellants  under  Article  8
    which from 9th July 2012 fell under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Levin sitting at Manchester on 2nd September 2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 16th September 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 5. On 15th September 2014 Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds asserted that the judge erred  in  failing  to
    apply Edgehill v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 406.  The grounds contended that the  applications  were  made
    prior to the July 2012 Rule change  and  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered  Article  8   without   reference   to   the   2012   Rules.
    Alternatively the grounds argue that the judge's findings regarding the
    relationship of the parents was  flawed  given  the  existence  of  two
    children of the relationship and that the removal of the  children  and
    mother would have an unjustifiably harsh result.

 6. On 6th October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted  permission
    to appeal.  On 16th October 2014 the Secretary of  State  responded  to
    the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response  notes  that
    it is  discernable  from  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  grant  of
    permission that the issue in contention is the application of the ratio
    of Edgehill.  The Rule 24 response submits that the date on  which  the
    application is made is immaterial and that the new Rules  provide  case
    workers  and  the  court  with   a   structure   for   conducting   the
    proportionality assessment which properly reflects the public  interest
    as the Secretary of State and Parliament have expressed it to be.   The
    response further contended that the importance of having regard to  the
    material provisions of the new Rules  when  conducting  the  Article  8
    proportionality  assessment  including  in  cases  where  the  material
    application  was  made  before  the  new  Rules  came  into  force  was
    recognised by the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen v The SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ  558  and  that  that  case  stands  as  clear  authority  for  the
    proposition  that  when  addressing  Article  8  proportionality   that
    assessment must be conducted with proper regard to the  new  Rules  and
    the public interest they reflect.  The Rule  24  response  opposes  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant's appear by their  instructed
    Counsel Ms Brown.  In support of her submission Ms Brown has produced a
    detailed skeleton argument dated 15th December 2014 running to some  28
    paragraphs all of which I have read and considered.   In  addition  she
    has attached to that skeleton the authority of Odelola (FC) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL  25  and  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal dated 23rd September 2014 drafted by her  colleague  Ms  Record.
    In addition she refers me to  the  original  skeleton  produced  by  Mr
    Plowright of Counsel dated 2nd September 2014 and authorities  referred
    to therein.   There  are  thus  three  skeleton  arguments  upon  which
    effectively  the  Appellants  rely  all  of  which  I  have  given  due
    consideration to.  The Secretary of State in this matter appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Ms Brown's starting point is to rely on the skeleton arguments  stating
    that there  has  been  no  codification  of  Article  8  prior  to  the
    Immigration Rule changes and that the  Immigration  Judge  should  have
    gone on  to  consider  a  claim  pursuant  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. Ms Brown criticises paragraphs 21 to  25  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination.  She submits that the judge did not address  the
    position of the two children of the Appellant's  relationship  with  Mr
    Adenekan and therefore it was inappropriate for him  to  refer  to  the
    relationship the  Appellant  had  with  Mr  Adenekan  as  casual.   She
    comments that the analysis by the Immigration Judge at paragraphs 21 to
    24 of his determination addressed the Immigration Rules  in  particular
    Appendix FM and submits that the analysis at paragraph 22 is a  mistake
    because at that time the decision of the Supreme Court in  Odelola  was
    available and that this decision should  have  considered  the  Supreme
    Court's determination rather than that of the Court of Appeal and  that
    there were different findings made within the Supreme Court.

10. Ms Brown contends the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give due  and
    proper consideration to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  and  the
    family and family life as a whole and argues that there are breaches of
    Article 8 as the decision would remove the children from their  father.
    She notes the finding that had been made in particular at paragraph  47
    of the determination and submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
    not taken into account the removal of the children  from  their  father
    and that it is unjustifiably harsh for that to take  place.   Ms  Brown
    points out that Mr  Adenekan  works  in  London  and  then  returns  to
    Manchester to spend the weekends  with  the  Appellants.   She  further
    points out that the first Appellant is currently pregnant.  She submits
    that these factors were not considered by the  judge.   She  relies  on
    Odelola v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  UKHL,
    Edgehill v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 402 and Regina (on the application of  Amin)  v  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 4071 (Admin).  She refers  me
    to the three stage test in Amin namely,

         "(a) Has the Defendant given full consideration to  the  Article  8
             grounds advanced by the Claimant in his application?

         (b)  Would the Defendant's decision have been different if the  new
             rules had not been taken into account?

         (c)  Is the Defendant's conclusion irrational or otherwise unlawful
             on Article 8 grounds?"

    She submits that the answer to (a) is no on the basis that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to take into account the effect  of  removal
    on the whole family life as set out above and that the  answer  to  (b)
    and (c)  is  yes  because  the  evidence  was  not  considered  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  She asked me to find material errors of law and  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  McVeety  starts
    by taking me to  the  original  skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent and to the concession made therein by Mr Plowright  who  was
    the advocate who attended on the Appellant's behalf before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  He  notes  that  Mr  Plowright  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the Rules as they were prior to the  immigration
    changes on 9th July 2012 and that the appeal is therefore solely  under
    Article 8 and that it is acknowledged that the Tribunal can  take  into
    account the current provisions under paragraph 276ADE when  considering
    her Article 8 claim.  He submits  that  that  is  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has done and that Judge Levin was  invited  to  consider
    the application under the new Rules and therefore there cannot  be  any
    error of law in his determination.

11. Mr McVeety submits that that is the correct approach.   He  reminds  me
    that we were not setting aside the old Rules and that this  was  not  a
    direct challenge to the Rules.  Thereafter he submits that Judge  Levin
    went on to consider Razgar and the principles set out therein and  that
    the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  close  relationship  with  the
    Appellant's father and that none of the children were British citizens.
     He indicates that the judge's approach reflects the  proper  balancing
    exercise to the question of proportionality, and  that  the  Appellants
    have no legal basis to remain in the UK and the judge has  carried  out
    this analysis and therefore there are no errors of law.  He asked me to
    dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I start by reminding myself that it  is  not  the  role  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal when considering whether or not there is a material  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  rehear  the  matter.
    The role of the Upper Tribunal is to correct errors  that  might  arise
    within a First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.  Providing a  judge
    has carried out a proper analysis and applied the  facts  and  evidence
    appropriately and thereafter  exercised  his  discretion  in  a  proper
    manner it is not for the Upper Tribunal to interfere in  his  decision.
    The main thrust of the Appellant's appeal is that the  judge  erred  in
    failing to apply Edgehill on the basis that the  application  was  made
    prior to the July 2012 Rule change  and  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered Article 8 without reference to the 2012 Rule change.  In the
    alternative it is submitted that the  judge's  findings  regarding  the
    relationship of the parents were flawed  given  the  existence  of  two
    children of the relationship and that the removal of the  children  and
    mother would have an unjustifiably harsh effect.

15. Despite Ms  Brown's  submission  to  the  contrary  I  consider  it  is
    important to take into account the concession made by Mr Plowright both
    in his skeleton argument and before the First-tier Tribunal  especially
    as it was on that basis that Judge Levin  heard  the  appeal.   In  any
    event I consider that  that  was  the  correct  approach  and  that  no
    material error of law is disclosed on such an analysis.  It has  to  be
    remembered that this was not a direct change to the Rules as there were
    no old Rules to preserve in the manner in which there was  for  example
    in Odelola.  All the Rules did was to  reflect  the  rights  of  public
    interest that is reflected  both  in  Edgehill  and  more  recently  in
    Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  Further that case is  also  authority
    for stipulating that for leave to remain  to  be  granted  outside  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules there  need  to  be  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new
    Rules  that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   It  is
    appropriate to look at the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Judge Levin  starts  by  noting  Mr  Plowright's  submission  that  the
    Secretary of State was wrong to have considered the  application  under
    Appendix FM and that the appeals fell to be determined under Article  8
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  he  found   that   the   Appellants'
    application was made outside the Rules given that the  first  Appellant
    on her own admission entered the UK illegally and that she had no right
    to remain under the Rules.  He found that the  transitional  provisions
    did not apply to the Appellant's application and his analysis  relating
    to that albeit challenged is correct.  I do not find the fact that  the
    judge referred to the Court  of  Appeal  in  Odelola  rather  than  the
    Supreme Court to create a material error  of  law  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that  the  Respondent  was  correct  to  consider  the
    Appellant's application with reference to Appendix FM on the grounds of
    family life and under paragraph 276ADE on the grounds of private life.

16. Thereafter in a very detailed analysis the judge goes  on  to  consider
    both the factual circumstances of this matter and the claims made  that
    the Appellant is entitled to succeed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The determination is thorough in the extreme and whilst  I  acknowledge
    that there is an ever-changing scenario regarding the case law  he  has
    made reference to that that was relevant  before  him,  considered  the
    definition of Article 8 and applied the principles in Razgar.   He  has
    gone on to consider whether or not the Appellant was entitled  to  rely
    on a qualification for leave to remain under Section EX  and  has  then
    given due and proper consideration to Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act
    relating to the issues of public interest and also  considered  Section
    55 of the 2009 Act relating to the best interests of the children.

17. This is a determination  that  has  given  a  very  full  and  thorough
    analysis of the position and  the  judge  has  considered  within  that
    determination  the  position  of  the  Appellants'   father   and   his
    relationship with the children and has made findings of fact  which  he
    was entitled  to.   In  such  circumstances  the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to reach the conclusion that he did and the decision discloses
    no material error of law and the appeal must fail.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of all three Appellants is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

