
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25985/2015
                                                               IA/25982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 June 2017                       |On 3 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             1) MRS FATMA SUSAM
                           2) MISS AYSE NUR SUSAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nash, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Reza Choudhury, Counsel instructed by VE White &
                    Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Maxwell, sitting at Hatton Cross on  26  October  2016)
    allowing under the Rules and, in the  alternative,  outside  the  Rules
    under Article 8 ECHR, the claimants' appeals against  the  decision  of
    the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  7  July  2015  to  maintain   upon
    reconsideration her earlier decision made on 21 August 2014  to  refuse
    the first claimant's application for a further period of limited  leave
    as the spouse of  a  person  present  and  settled  here.   The  second
    claimant, who is the daughter  of  the  first  claimant  and  their  UK
    sponsor, made a parallel application as the dependant  of  her  mother,
    and her application was refused in line with that of her mother.

 2. The sole issue arising under Rule 284 was whether  the  first  claimant
    was exempted from providing a certificate or other documentary evidence
    to show that she had taken and passed an  acceptable  English  Language
    test so as to qualify for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom:  did
    she have a physical or mental condition that  would  prevent  her  from
    meeting the requirement to provide an original  English  language  test
    certificate in speaking and listening which must meet or  exceed  level
    A1 of the CEFR?

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimants require anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal raising  two  grounds.   Ground  1  was  that  the  Judge  had
    materially directed himself in law, and/or had been irrational,  and/or
    was  guilty  of  procedural  impropriety,  in  finding  in  the   first
    claimant's favour that she came within the exception  provided  for  in
    paragraph 284(ix)(a)(ii): "The  applicant  has  a  physical  or  mental
    condition that would prevent him from meeting  the  [production  of  an
    English language test certificate] requirement".

 5. The Secretary of State pleaded that the  Judge's  first  error  was  to
    treat  this  provision  as  operating  retrospectively,   rather   than
    prospectively.  The Judge's second alleged error was to  take  judicial
    notice of the fact that the side  effects  of  Clomipramine  (the  drug
    which had  been  prescribed  to  the  first  claimant  for  depression)
    included memory loss and trouble in concentrating, along with  feelings
    of anxiety.  The Judge's third alleged error was that his finding  that
    the first claimant's depression was the cause of her not  providing  an
    English Language test certificate was inconsistent  with  his  parallel
    finding that she was more than capable  of  following  the  proceedings
    before him in English.  The Judge's fourth alleged error  was  that  he
    failed to take into account that the first claimant had not  previously
    intimated to the Secretary of State that she would  be  relying  on  an
    argument that she was unfit to take the English language test,  and  so
    the Secretary of State had been precluded  from  advancing  a  case  in
    rebuttal of the Judge's finding on the side effects of Clomipramine.

 6. Ground 2 was that the Judge's findings on Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules were vitiated by inadequate reasoning and speculation.

 7. On 12 May 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  granted  the  SSHD
    permission to appeal on both grounds.  He considered that the Judge had
    arguably erred in finding that the first  claimant  qualified  for  the
    exemption  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  given  that  the  relevant
    Immigration  Rule  had  no  retrospective  application.   In  addition,
    arguably his finding of fact was not supported by  the  evidence  which
    was before him.  As to ground 2, it was arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to give the proper and adequate reasons for allowing the appeals
    under Article 8.

The Error of Law Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr  Nash  developed  the  arguments  advanced  in  the  permission
    application.  On behalf of the claimants, Mr Choudhury  submitted  that
    the error of law challenge was, in essence, no more than expression  of
    disagreement with the findings that were reasonably open to the  Judge,
    having regard to the guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Shizad
    (Sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

Discussion

 9. The claimants are nationals of Turkey, who were born on 1 January  1962
    and 12 July 1996 respectively.  They landed in the United Kingdom on 17
    May 2012 having been granted  entry  clearance  as,  respectively,  the
    spouse and child dependant of the first claimant's  husband.   However,
    as noted by Judge Maxwell, their application for  entry  clearance  had
    been made as far back as 5 October 2010 and had been initially  refused
    on 13 December 2010.  The refusal was the subject of a prolonged appeal
    process, which led to a significant delay in their eventual admission.

10. The claimants' leave was valid until 26 July 2014, and they applied  to
    extend their leave to remain on 9 July 2014.  This was when the  second
    claimant was 3 days short of her 18th birthday.

11. Their applications were refused in August 2014 on the sole ground  that
    the first claimant had failed to comply with the requirement to provide
    an English  Language  test  certificate.   The  claimants  successfully
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Their appeals were allowed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 13 April 2015. The decision is not  before  me,
    and so my understanding of its salient contents is derived  from  Judge
    Maxwell, who had sight of it. The appeals were allowed  on  the  ground
    that the decisions had been made otherwise in accordance with the  law,
    as there had been no material consideration of the circumstances of the
    second claimant, who was a child under the age of 18  at  the  date  of
    application.

12. As rehearsed by Judge Maxwell at paragraph [13] of  his  decision,  the
    judge in the earlier appeal addressed the issue of the first claimant's
    failure to produce an English Language test certificate.  He noted that
    the first claimant said that she had problems with her memory  "because
    she was on medication for depression".   She  said  that  she  used  to
    travel back to Turkey to see her doctor  every  few  months  until  her
    daughter's English was good enough to take her to see a doctor here.

13. The judge at the earlier appeal noted that, although the first claimant
    gave evidence with the assistance of an interpreter, she also  answered
    some questions spontaneously in English before  they  were  translated.
    Judge Maxwell said that he observed the same type of response from  the
    first claimant when she gave evidence before him.  He  found  that  she
    was clearly following  the  discourse  because  she  had  made  several
    interventions while the second claimant  and  her  spouse  were  giving
    their evidence in English.

14. Judge Maxwell held that it was apparent to him that the actual level of
    the first claimant's command  of  English  seemed  to  be  adequate  to
    satisfy the very basic requirements of CEFR Level A1.  He said  it  was
    reasonable to infer that this was also the case when the first claimant
    appeared before the previous Tribunal.  He concluded that, "there  must
    be some reason as to why she apparently cannot pass her test."

15. He noted that there was a letter from her GP in  the  bundle  dated  11
    March 2015.  The GP said that the first claimant had come to see him on
    20 February 2015 and reported that she had  been  seeing  a  doctor  in
    Turkey for the past 16 years for depression: "She reported that she  is
    on Clomipramine 75mg once daily.  She reports that  she  is  unable  to
    study and learn in view of her depression."

16. Judge Maxwell said at paragraph [18] that he was  aware  of,  and  took
    judicial  notice  of  the  fact,  that  amongst  the  side  effects  of
    Clomipramine, were memory loss and trouble in concentrating, along with
    feelings of anxiety.

17. At paragraph [19], he considered the first claimant's background.   She
    was an ethnic Kurd whose spouse had fled Turkey in the  year  2000  and
    come to the UK, leaving her to look after their children.  Although her
    spouse had not been granted asylum, one of her sons had.  He  had  been
    granted asylum on political  grounds  as  he  had  been  active  whilst
    studying at university in Turkey, and he had had to leave  the  country
    to avoid arrest.  He was now currently studying at  the  University  of
    Sheffield.  The Turkish authorities used to  come  to  their  home  and
    question the first claimant as to the whereabouts of her son.  For many
    years, she was anxious for her family, both in Turkey and  in  the  UK,
    and she had developed depression for which she continued to be treated.

18. At paragraph [20], the Judge held that  the  first  claimant  found  it
    extremely  difficult  to  concentrate  on  a  course  leading  to   the
    examination she knew she must undertake to  gain  her  A1  certificate.
    She had the confidence of her course-provider as to her  competence  to
    pass the examination "now", but she was not able to do so  because  the
    Secretary of State continued to retain her passport.  The issue of  her
    passport had been raised at the previous appeal.

19. At paragraph [21], the Judge said that he was satisfied that the  first
    claimant had done her best to comply with  the  English  Language  test
    requirements of paragraph 284, but her progress had been impeded by her
    depression which  he  found  to  be  a  mental  condition  "capable  of
    preventing her from meeting this requirement."

20. At paragraph [22], the Judge directed himself that he had  to  look  at
    the position at the time of application, rather  than  as  to  how  the
    first claimant was presently faring.  He concluded, at paragraph  [23],
    that there were sufficient evidence before him to find, on a balance of
    probabilities, that at the date of decision the first  claimant  had  a
    mental condition that prevented her from meeting  the  requirement  and
    providing a certificate, and she was therefore entitled to the  benefit
    of this exception.

Ground 1

21. I consider that the Judge has given adequate reasons for  reaching  the
    conclusion that the first  claimant  could  bring  herself  within  the
    stated exception, and I find that no error of law is made out.

Alleged Procedural Unfairness

22. There is no procedural unfairness as alleged, because the Secretary  of
    State was put on notice by the evidence given at  the  previous  appeal
    hearing, and which was recorded  in  the  subsequent  decision  of  the
    judge, that the first claimant suffered from depression, which she said
    inhibited her ability to study and learn.  So the  Secretary  of  State
    knew that it was her case that she had problems with her memory because
    she was on medication for depression,  and  she  knew  that  the  first
    claimant had thereby intimated that she had a  mental  condition  which
    prevented her  from  sitting  for  and  passing  the  required  English
    Language test so as to  provide  the  required  English  Language  test
    certificate.

Alleged Irrationality

23. There is no irrationality in the Judge on the one hand recognising that
    the first claimant appeared to display to a level of competence in  the
    English language of at least CEFR Level A1  but,  on  the  other  hand,
    finding that she had a mental condition which would  prevent  her  from
    actually sitting for and passing the required English language test.

24. The Judge was right to focus on the position as it stood at the date of
    decision, rather than upon the first claimant's current  condition.  So
    the fact that there was evidence of an improvement in  her  ability  to
    communicate in the English language since the date of decision did  not
    preclude a finding that at the  date  of  application  and/or  date  of
    decision she had a mental condition which would, and did,  prevent  her
    from meeting the  requirement  to  produce  an  English  language  test
    certificate.  The finding was supported by the  evidence  from  her  GP
    contained in the letter dated 11 March 2015, which the Judge  cited  at
    paragraph [17] of his decision.

25. The gloss which the Judge  adds  at  paragraph  [18]  is  not  strictly
    necessary. The first claimant attributed her  inability  to  study  and
    learn to her depression.   The  Judge  opines  that  the  cause,  or  a
    contributory factor, for this professed inability arises from the  side
    effects of the drug which she has been taking for her depression.   The
    Judge is thus endorsing the evidence given by  the  first  claimant  by
    drawing on his own knowledge. In short, he is explaining why  he  finds
    her credible. But even if  he  is  wrong  about  the  side  effects  of
    Clomipramine (and no evidence has been brought forward by the Secretary
    of State to suggest  that  he  is  wrong)  there  has  never  been  any
    challenge by the Secretary of State to the evidence given in the  first
    appeal as to why the first claimant had thus far failed to  provide  an
    English language test certificate: namely, she suffered from depression
    which made her feel unable to study and learn;  and  she  had  problems
    with her memory because she was on medication for depression.

Alleged error in treating the exemption has operating  retrospectively,  not
prospectively

26. The exception is expressed in the present tense, and so it is  arguable
    that the applicant has to continue to suffer from the condition  relied
    on at the date of the hearing. But the  contrary  proposition  is  also
    sustainable, for the reasons which the Judge gave. The  Rule  envisages
    the certificate being provided with the application. So  if  the  first
    claimant  had  a  condition  which  prevented  her  from  producing   a
    certificate with the application and/or by the date  of  decision,  she
    fulfilled the requirements of the Rule at  the  date  of  decision  and
    there is no justification for depriving  her  of  the  benefit  of  the
    exception retrospectively. It would be particularly unfair to do so  in
    circumstances where, as the Judge also noted, she could not sit for the
    test when her condition had improved as the Home  Office  had  retained
    her passport.

Ground 2

27. Even if I am wrong to find that ground 1 is not made  out,  I  consider
    that ground 2 is not made out.  The Judge has given  extensive  reasons
    for finding that the consequences of  the  refusal  decision  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh for the first claimant, the second claimant and for
    the other members of their family.  The Secretary of State takes  issue
    with two of the reasons given: one is that the second claimant may face
    problems in Turkey as she shares the same political views as her  older
    brother, who has been recognised as a political refugee; the  other  is
    that the first claimant's depression consequential  upon  her  enforced
    return to Turkey would "almost certainly" prevent  her  from  obtaining
    the necessary English language test certificate.  I  consider  that  it
    was open to the Judge to find  that  the  second  claimant's  political
    views could create difficulties for her in Turkey.  I  agree  that  the
    other reason which is under attack is tendentious. But it is  only  one
    reason amongst many given by the Judge, and overall I consider that  he
    has given adequate and sustainable reasons for finding that the refusal
    of  further   limited   leave   to   remain   to   the   claimants   is
    disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 27 June 2017

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
