
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/25858/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision and Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 September 2015                  |             On 28 September 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA

                                   Between

                             MR VINODKUMAR DUVA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision promulgated on 25 February  2015,
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
      FTTJ).


   2. Permission to appeal was granted on 24 June 2015.

      Background

   3. The appellant initially entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 migrant
      on 3 October 2010. He extended his leave to remain as  a  Tier  1(post
      study) migrant until 18 April 2014. On 17 April  2014,  the  appellant
      sought leave to remain under Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).   That application
      was refused on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine
      entrepreneur.


   4. The FTTJ,  in  his  decision  and  reasons,  appeared  to  accept  the
      submissions on behalf of the respondent that  the  appellant  had  not
      advertised  his  business;  that  there  was  no  business  plan;  the
      appellant lacked the relevant experience and had not  established  his
      own website.

   5. The grounds of appeal made no reference to  the  FTTJ's  findings  but
      asserted that  the  record  of  the  appellant's  interview  with  the
      respondent had not been produced. Permission to appeal was granted  on
      the basis that the decision was "inadequate to the point where it is a
      clear error of law,"  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  was  also  described  as
      "inadequate" and "non-independent" and it was said that the transcript
      of the appellant's interview should have been available.

   6. In the Secretary of State's response of 9 July 2015,  the  appeal  was
      opposed  and  it  was  submitted  that  the  FTTJ   directed   himself
      appropriately. The point was made that the grounds did not dispute any
      of the submissions of the presenting officer at the First-tier. It was
      argued that the appellant had done "virtually" nothing  to  show  that
      the business was genuine or viable.

The hearing

   7. The appellant did not attend the hearing and nor was  he  represented.
      Late on 24 September  2015,  Legend  Solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  firm   was   withdrawing
      representation. As this letter had not reached the file by the time of
      the hearing before me, my clerk telephoned Legend Solicitors in  order
      to make enquiries. My clerk was informed that the firm had been unable
      to contact the appellant and had no instructions from him.  A  further
      letter  was  sent  on  25  September   2015,   which   confirmed   the
      aforementioned state of affairs and the appellant's last-known contact
      address.


   8. The case file shows that the notice of hearing was sent, on 28  August
      2015, by first class post to the appellant at the address provided  on
      the application  for  permission  to  appeal  as  well  as  to  Legend
      Solicitors. The address concerned is the same  as  that  mentioned  in
      Legend Solicitor's letter of 25 September 2015. That  notice  was  not
      returned by the post office.  Given  the  correspondence  from  Legend
      Solicitors as well as their indication to my clerk that their  efforts
      to contact  the  appellant  had  failed,  I  was  satisfied  that  the
      appellant had received adequate notice of the hearing date.

   9. I decided to proceed to hear the appeal in his absence, given that the
      notice of hearing advised the  parties  that  failure  to  attend  may
      result in the Tribunal determining the appeal in their absence.

  10. After hearing briefly from Mr Jarvis, I decided to uphold the decision
      of the FTTJ for the following reasons.

  11. The application for permission to appeal was made by  the  appellant's
      former legal representative.  However,  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
      identical to those, which accompanied the appellant's notice of appeal
      to the First-tier Tribunal. Those grounds included an allegation  that
      the respondent had  not  supplied  a  transcript  of  the  appellant's
      interview with the respondent.

  12. A cursory glance at the respondent's bundle  of  evidence,  which  was
      before the FTTJ, reveals that a 14-page  interview  record  sheet  was
      enclosed, marked annexe 'D.' That  interview  record  shows  that  the
      appellant's comments were accurately reproduced  in  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter.

  13. The FTTJ granting permission considered that FTTJ Majid's reasons  for
      finding that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine  entrepreneur  were
      inadequate. However, at  paragraph  10,  the  FTTJ  remarks  that  his
      perusal of all the documents left him "in no doubt that the  Appellant
      cannot easily surmount the Respondent's objections." He also sets  out
      a list of deficiencies with the appellant's Tier 1 application,  which
      were highlighted in the submissions of the presenting officer  at  the
      hearing. That list appears under the section of the  decision  devoted
      to his reasons and deliberations.

  14. The FTTJ's attention was drawn to the appellant's failure to advertise
      his business, the absence of  a  business  plan,  that  the  appellant
      lacked any relevant experience of computer technology despite  wishing
      to set up an IT  consultancy  and  he  had  not  established  his  own
      website. The appellant admitted these facts during his interview  with
      the respondent. There has been no attempt by the appellant  or  Legend
      Solicitors to engage with what appear to be real concerns  as  to  the
      appellant's business, either in the grounds of appeal, at the  hearing
      before the FTTJ, in the application for permission to appeal or at the
      hearing before me.

  15. At [9] and [10] the FTTJ confirms  that  he  has  considered  all  the
      evidence before him and  is  confining  his  reasons  to  "dispositive
      aspects" of the case. While the FTTJ's reasons were brief,  they  were
      adequate in this instance and the parties were left in no doubt as  to
      the reasons for his decision.

  16. I find that the FTTJ did not err in preferring the  arguments  of  the
      respondent; which were fully supported by  the  interview  transcript;
      over those of the appellant.

  17. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are no errors of law,
      such that the decision ought to be set aside.




Conclusions

     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     The decision of FTTJ Majid is upheld.





     Signed                                  Date: 26 September 2015


     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
































