
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25921/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2014                               |On 5th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Shina Tomide Atoyebi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. There is no anonymity order in place and I am not invited to make one.

 2. The Appellant in these proceedings was the Respondent in the First-tier
    Tribunal, and I refer to the parties as they were known in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for my own convenience.

 3. The Respondent appeals a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    who in a determination promulgated  on  29th  April  2014  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his application  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as the husband  of  someone  who
    is here with discretionary leave to remain until 2016, and asserted  in
    the context of the family and private life rights the relationship with
    his spouse and also with two children born on 1st January 2012 and  1st
    August 2013. The Article 8  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    Appendix FM exclude switching to leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  of
    someone with discretionary leave to remain.

 4. The Respondent appeals with permission on the grounds that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is flawed in terms of  the  assessment
    of Article 8 on the basis that the judge has failed  to  consider  that
    the Appellant and his spouse and children could relocate to Nigeria and
    specifically in the grounds asserts that there  are  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to that relocation, and further Mr Saunders,  in  elucidating
    the grounds before me, asserts that the fact of the wife  having  leave
    to remain is not of itself a reason to find that such relocation  would
    be insurmountable or unreasonable.

 5. I find that the decision does not reveal any material error of law.  In
    terms of the reasoning of the judge specifically  on  the  question  of
    whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    family returning to Nigeria with him in order to continue their  family
    life the judge applied the correct test, which is the reasonableness of
    expecting the Sponsor to return to Nigeria. The assessment is  made  on
    the position as at the date of hearing i.e.  that the sponsor does have
    leave in the United Kingdom. The  evidence  of  her  circumstances  and
    difficulties in relocating was not challenged. The judge finds  on  the
    basis of her unchallenged evidence that it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect her to relocate, and that finding is set out  at  paragraph  16.
    The judge refers to the Sponsor's employment, the  home  that  she  has
    established here over her fourteen years  of  residence,  and  in  that
    context has referred back to the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge
    Moore, who found in 2009, on the basis of her own  private  and  family
    life rights in the United Kingdom as established at that time, that  it
    would not be right to require her to return to Nigeria.

 6. The judge also takes into account the best interests  of  the  children
    and finds that it would not be reasonable to expect them to relocate to
    Nigeria and that to do so would have significant  adverse  consequences
    for them. The Respondent prays in aid the case of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]
    UKSC 74 but in doing so fails to note that in that case Lord  Hodge  in
    the paragraphs quoted in the  grounds  makes  it  clear  that  where  a
    decision-maker does find, as Judge Kamara found here, that there  would
    be serious detriment to the wellbeing of the children if they  were  to
    relocate to Nigeria, then one could  not  say  that  the  decision  was
    irrational. The judge also noted that in that case both parents  lacked
    any basis  to  remain  under  the  rules,  and    were  being  returned
    together, so that the proposal was to remove the family as  a  unit  at
    that time.  That of course was not the position in  this  case  as  the
    Sponsor has leave to remain until 2016, and I  have  already  explained
    that the judge was entitled to conclude that in  the  circumstances  of
    this case it was not reasonable to expect the Sponsor relocate.

 7. At best the decision can be described as being generous but it is not a
    conclusion which was not open to the judge on the evidence, and  it  is
    not a decision which is irrational or perverse.

 8. Taking into account all of those reasons I find no material  error  and
    the decision of the judge stands.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


