
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/25608/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2017                           | On 05 July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Malik law
                    Chambers Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal L K Gibbs (FtJ), promulgated on 21 November 2016, allowing
        the Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's  refusal,  dated  1
        July 2015, of his  human  rights  claim  made  on  article  8  ECHR
        grounds.


   Background


     2. The Respondent is a national of the United States of America,  date
        of birth 5 December 1999. In a statement dated 27 October 2016  the
        Respondent described his parent's relationship as "not good."  They
        fought on a daily basis and were, at times, violent and aggressive.
        The Respondent  became  depressed  and  traumatised  by  the  whole
        experience. The situation was so bad that sometimes he had to sleep
        without food. He could not focus on his studies and did not want to
        leave school. He got on particularly badly with his mother  and  he
        saw very little of his father who worked in  the  evenings  and  at
        weekends as a taxi driver.  At  the  hearing  before  the  FtJ  the
        Respondent explained that his father now lived in New York and  his
        mother and younger sibling remained in California.  The  Respondent
        has a very close relationship with AS, his paternal aunt,  and  her
        husband RS, both of whom are British citizens residing in  the  UK.
        They would often visit him in the USA.


     3. The FtJ found that there  had  been  a  pre-agreement  between  his
        parents and AS and RS to bring the Respondent to the UK. He entered
        the UK on 11 September 2014 as a visitor. Before his leave  expired
        he made an application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his
        private and family life with AS and RS.

The Reasons for Refusal Letter

     4. The Appellant noted that neither of the Respondent's parents  lived
        in the UK. He  could  not  therefore  meet  the  immigration  rules
        (Appendix FM) for leave to remain as a child. The  application  was
        also refused under paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration  rules  in
        relation to the  Respondent's  private  life.  The  Appellant  then
        considered whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  which,
        consistent with the right to respect for private  and  family  life
        contained in article 8, might warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain
        outside  the  immigration  rules.  The  Appellant  noted  that  the
        Respondent  was  studying  towards  his  GCSEs  and  that  he   had
        established a private life through his visit visa.  The  Respondent
        however had no legitimate expectation that he would stay in the  UK
        when he entered. It was considered to be in his best  interests  to
        remain with his parents, the most important people in his life, who
        would help him reintegrate back to life in America. He  would  have
        sufficient access to education in the USA.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     5. The FtJ did not have the assistance of a Presenting Officer at  the
        hearing. The FtJ heard from the Respondent,  RS  and  AS.  The  FtJ
        found the evidence from the witnesses credible.  The  FtJ  accepted
        the Respondent's evidence regarding the problems  in  his  parent's
        marriage and that they were now separated. The Respondent was happy
        in the UK, settled at home with his aunt, uncle and cousin, and was
        attending school. The FtJ accepted the Respondent's  oral  evidence
        that he wanted to remain in the UK because he does not want to live
        with his mother and could not  live  with  his  father  because  he
        worked nights. The FtJ found that the Respondent could not meet the
        requirements of paragraph 276 ADE, but was persuaded  that  it  was
        appropriate to consider  the  appeal  outside  of  the  immigration
        rules, applying SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.


     6. The FtJ  noted  the  unchallenged  evidence  before  her  that  the
        Respondent felt happy and settled in the UK and felt  loved  within
        his new family  unit.  The  FtJ  accepted  the  problems  that  the
        Respondent had in the USA. The FtJ gave weight to the  Respondent's
        view of what were in his best interests. Having lived in the UK for
        2 years the FtJ concluded that it was in the best interests of  the
        Respondent to remain in his current family unit.


     7. Having identified the Respondent's best  interests,  the  FtJ  then
        applied the approach identified in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The  FtJ
        was satisfied that the Respondent had established a  family/private
        life in the UK and that a decision to remove  him  would  interfere
        with that family/private life.  The  FtJ  was  satisfied  that  the
        interference was in accordance with the law and  in  pursuit  of  a
        legitimate aim. In assessing proportionality the FtJ identified and
        applied the relevant public interest factors  set  out  in  section
        117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Although
        satisfied that the adults in the  Respondent's  life  conspired  to
        bring him to the UK with the intention that he remain here the  FtJ
        found that the Respondent should not  be  punished  for  this.  The
        Respondent had established a family life in the  UK,  when  he  was
        here lawfully, and that the family life made him happy  and  within
        which he was settled.  The  Respondent's  family  in  the  UK  were
        willing and able to financially support him and his parents in  the
        USA were in agreement with this. The FtJ concluded that it  was  in
        the Respondent's best interests to remain with "a family who  loved
        him, with whom he is happy and  where  he  can  prosper."  Although
        acknowledging the public interest in the maintenance of immigration
        control and the fact that the Respondent had only been  in  the  UK
        for a relatively short period of time, the FtJ was  satisfied  that
        he could be maintained by his family  in  the  UK,  that  he  spoke
        English and was integrated here. Given the particular facts of  the
        case, given that it was  in  the  Respondent's  best  interests  to
        remain in the UK, and given his age, when weighed  up  against  the
        public interest factors the FtJ concluded that  his  removal  would
        constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  article  8.  The
        appeal was allowed.

The grounds of appeal

     8. The grounds contend that the FtJ failed to  properly  consider  the
        best interests of the Respondent and that she  misdirected  herself
        given that the Respondent had only lived in  the  UK  for  a  short
        space of time and that his parents resided in the USA. The starting
        point in a 'best interests' assessment  would  be  that  the  child
        should remain with his parents and the fact that a 15-year-old  did
        not  get  on  well  with  his  mother  and  younger   sibling   was
        insufficient  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   immigration
        control. The grounds also argued that the FtJ failed to  take  into
        account the expense of providing education to the  Respondent  when
        assessing the public interest considerations and that he failed  to
        make any findings as to why the Respondent could not attend a  high
        school in the USA.  There were said to be no findings as to why the
        Respondent could have integrated into the UK so quickly.


     9. At the hearing Mr Nath expanded upon the grounds arguing  that  the
        'best interests' consideration was  inadequate  and  that  the  FtJ
        should have taken into account the additional strain on the  public
        purse of having to educate the  Respondent  as  a  relevant  public
        interest factor. Mr  Sharma  submitted  that,  whilst  this  was  a
        generous decision, it disclosed no legal error.  The  FtJ  properly
        directed herself as to the applicable legal principles,  there  had
        been no challenge to the FtJ's factual findings, and  the  FtJ  was
        rationally entitled to find that the public interest  factors  were
        outweighed by the very unusual facts of this case. The issue of the
        additional educational costs was not taken by the Respondent in her
        decision and had never been raised before the FtJ.  In  any  event,
        the FtJ considered the general public  interest  factors  including
        any additional weight on the public purse. Everything  was  weighed
        in the round.


    10. I indicated that I would dismiss the Appellant's  appeal  and  that
        written reasons would follow.

Discussion

    11. There is no doubt that the FtJ's decision was a generous  one.  The
        issue I have to determine is whether it was a lawful decision,  one
        in which she properly directed herself as to the law, one that  she
        was rationally entitled to reach on the basis of the factual matrix
        found  by  her,  and  one  that  took  into  account  all  relevant
        considerations, including the relevant public interest factors.


    12. I am in  no  doubt  that  the  FtJ  properly  considered  the  best
        interests of the Respondent. The Respondent's credibility has never
        been doubted. The  FtJ  found,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  the
        Respondent had a very fractious relationship with  his  mother  and
        that although he  got  on  better  with  his  father,  his  parents
        constantly argued, and the arguments sometimes became  violent.  In
        his statement the Respondent claimed that his parents  never  cared
        for his health, education and well-being, that he sometimes had  to
        sleep without food, and that he believed his life was seriously  at
        risk. The FtJ  found  that  the  Respondent  enjoyed  a  very  good
        relationship with his paternal aunt and her  husband,  so  much  so
        that this relationship  could  be  categorised  as  a  family  life
        relationship. This was a conclusion rationally open to the  FtJ  on
        the evidence before her. Private life and family  life  rights  are
        composite rights (see Nhundu and Chiwera v The Secretary  of  State
        for  the  Home  Department  (01TH00613)).  One  must  look  at  the
        substance of a relationship rather than  the  form.  Regardless  of
        whether it is categorised  as  a  family  life  relationship  or  a
        private life relationship, the  FtJ  found  that  the  relationship
        between the Respondent and RS and AS was akin  to  that  between  a
        child and his parents. In determining the  best  interests  of  the
        Respondent the FtJ took into account the circumstances in which the
        Respondent lived in the USA,  the  relationship  he  had  with  his
        biological parents, the relationship between him and RS and AS, the
        Respondent's own view of his best interests (a relevant  factor  to
        take into account, see HH (Appellant) v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
        Italian Republic, Genoa  (Respondent)  [2012]  UKSC  25),  and  the
        finding that the Respondent, having lived in the UK  for  2  years,
        was settled and integrated into his new family unit.  The  FtJ  did
        not misdirect herself when considering the best  interests  of  the
        Respondent and  she  manifestly  took  into  account  all  relevant
        circumstances when assessing the relationship between  him  and  RS
        and AS.


    13. The thrust of the Appellant's 2nd ground is that the FtJ failed  to
        attach proper weight to the public interest because she didn't take
        into account the additional public expense of having to educate the
        Respondent. Mr Nath submitted that the FtJ should  have  considered
        the additional public expense of having to educate  the  Respondent
        when weighing up public interest factors.


    14. I note at the outset that the Appellant did not place any  specific
        reliance on the additional public cost of educating the  Respondent
        in the decision under appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Nor
        was this  raised  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  itself.  I
        appreciate that the Appellant was not represented at that  hearing,
        but  it  was  open  to  the  Appellant  to  have  provided  written
        submissions supporting her decision and what she  regarded  as  the
        principle public interest factors at play in this particular  case.
        The FtJ was not invited to  specifically  consider  the  additional
        public  expense  as  a   significant   factor   weighing   in   the
        proportionality assessment.


    15. Because this matter was not raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal
        there was no evidence as to the size of the  additional  cost,  nor
        was there any evidence as to whether the Respondent's aunt or uncle
        had or would contribute financially in any way  to  his  education.
        The FtJ did take into account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
        financially supported by AS and RS and no issue was raised  by  the
        Appellant in respect of any other additional costs to the public as
        a result of the Respondent's residence.


    16. When assessing the proportionality of the Appellant's decision  the
        FtJ properly directed herself as  to  the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
        approach and took into account the factors in section 117B  of  the
        2002 Act. The FtJ  specifically  considered  the  relatively  short
        period of time in which the Respondent resided in the UK  and  that
        the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
        interest. The public  interest  in  effective  immigration  control
        identified in s.117B (1) encapsulates and reflects a wide range  of
        factors that flow as a result of public concern at the consequences
        of large scale immigration.  In these circumstances I am  satisfied
        that the FtJ's general consideration  of  the  public  interest  in
        effective immigration control would have necessarily  included  any
        additional financial burden on the state.


    17. It is clear from a holistic reading of the decision  that  the  FtJ
        considered the best  interests  of  the  Respondent  as  a  primary
        consideration, and that she weighed his  best  interests,  and  the
        strong relationship he had with his aunt  and  uncle,  against  the
        public interest factors supporting his removal. In so  doing  I  am
        satisfied that the FtJ did take into account  all  relevant  public
        interest considerations that were relied on by the  Appellant,  and
        that, in the absence of any explicit reference by the Appellant  to
        the additional costs  of  educating  the  Respondent,  it  was  not
        necessary for the FtJ  to  explicitly  refer  to  this  as  it  was
        necessarily and implicitly included in her assessment of the public
        interest in the maintenance of effective immigration  controls.  In
        the end the FtJ was dealing with a minor who had experienced a very
        difficult childhood  with  parents  who  did  not  look  after  him
        properly, and who had established a loving and caring  family  unit
        in the UK. The fact that the Respondent  could  have  theoretically
        undertaken education in the USA was not at  the  forefront  of  his
        reasons for remaining in this country. The FtJ reached a conclusion
        taking full account of all relevant public  interest  factors  and,
        although generous, her conclusion is not vitiated by any perversity
        or other public law error. In the circumstances I find  that  there
        was no material error of law.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a  material  error.  The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  (as
he was before the First-tier Tribunal) is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


[pic]                               4 July 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
