
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th June 2015                    |On 10th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                           MR. JHONELLE MAQUILING
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Jhonelle Maquiling, In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood;  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      O'Hagan promulgated on 6th March 2015, in which he  dismissed  appeals
      against decisions made on 29th April 2014 by the Secretary of State to
      refuse the appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to give
      directions for his removal from the UK.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Shaerf on 1st April 2015.  In granting permission to  appeal  it
      is said:

         "The  judge  noted  at  paragraph  4  of  her  decision  that   the
         Appellant's wife and child had been registered as British  Citizens
         before  the  Respondent's  decision  under  appeal.   At  paragraph
         28(iii) she addressed ss.117A-117D of the 2002 Act but did not take
         into account that the appellant had a British Citizen child,  which
         arguably would have required the Judge to consider the  Appellant's
         position in the light of this under s117B(6).  This is an  arguable
         error of law..."

   3.  The  matter  comes  before  us  to  consider  whether  or   not   the
      determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan involved the making
      of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.

Background

   4. The material background is set out in the determination of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge O'Hagan as follows;

         "The Appellant was born on 12th February 1980 and is now  aged  35.
         He is married to Rochel Dichoson Maquiling.  The  Appellant's  wife
         was born on 14th April 1979 and is now also aged 35.  They  have  a
         son, Jayden Kyle Maquiling born on 19th August 2010  and  now  aged
         four. The Appellant's son was registered as a  British  citizen  on
         3rd February 2014. His wife was registered  as  a  British  citizen
         just over a month later on 14th March 2014. The  Appellant  himself
         has not been registered as a British citizen and continues to be  a
         citizen of the Philippines. [4]

         The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 6th November 2007
         with entry clearance conferring leave for him to enter  and  remain
         until 15th December 2011. The Appellant's application  for  further
         leave to remain as a dependent of his wife,  who  was  not  then  a
         British citizen but was a Tier 2 (General) Migrant, was refused  on
         2nd February 2012. The application was  refused  because,  on  13th
         January 2012, the Appellant was convicted of an offence  of  sexual
         assault, specifically  intentionally  touching  a  female  with  no
         penetration. The offence had been committed on 12th December  2010.
         The Appellant was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment suspended for
         a period of 24 months. He was also ordered to participate in a  sex
         offender program and was made subject to a sex offenders notice for
         a period of five years." [5]

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan considered whether the appellant was
      able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  He
      considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and found that  the  appellant  was
      aged 18 years or above and that he had lived continuously  in  the  UK
      for less than 20 years.  He noted that the issue  in  the  appeal  was
      whether there would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
      integration in the Philippines, if  he  were  required  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom.  To that end, he was not  persuaded  by  the  evidence
      that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
      integration in the Philippines.

   6. Having concluded that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), could
      not be met, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan  reminded  himself  that
      the appellant is part of a family with his wife and son, and  he  went
      on to consider the position  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration
      rules.  He found that the  application  falls  for  mandatory  refusal
      under Appendix FM.

   7. As to whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  the  family  life
      continuing outside of the UK, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan  found
      as follows;

         "On the facts of this case, I did  not  consider  that  there  were
         insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  continuing  with  his
         family life outside of the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  retains
         family ties in the Philippines in the  form  his  mother.  For  the
         reasons which I have already set out above, I do not consider  that
         there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration  into
         the Philippines.  Those  points  apply  with  equal  force  to  the
         Appellant's wife.  Indeed,  in  many  ways,  her  position  is,  if
         anything, better than his since she has continued to work and  will
         have gained experience by so doing which  will  assist  in  finding
         employment in the Philippines. She also does not have the burden of
         criminal conviction in this country and a former  association  with
         gang members in the Philippines.";  [22]

   8. Having satisfied himself that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
      the rules, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan considered the article  8
      rights to a family and private life by reference to the five steps set
      out in the well-known decision of the House of Lords in Razgar.  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan, found that the  Appellant  enjoys  family
      life in the UK with his wife and his son.   He  also  found  that  the
      removal  decision  would  interfere  with  that  life,  and  that  any
      interference clearly pursues the legitimate aim of maintaining  proper
      and firm immigration control.

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan  then  turned  to  the  question  of
      proportionality  and  the  needed  to  balance  the  public   interest
      imperative  of  maintaining  immigration  control,  with  the  private
      interests of the appellant.  He concluded that the decisions  made  by
      the respondent in respect of the appellant were proportionate for  the
      various reasons that are set out in paragraphs 28(i)  to  (v)  of  the
      determination.

The Ground of appeal

  10. In his grounds of appeal,  the appellant appears  to  have  recognised
      that the issue at the heart of the appeal was the balance between  the
      public interest and his own private interests. Insofar as  the  latter
      is concerned, he contends about he has meaningfully engaged  with  the
      programs undertaken  and  that  there  is  now  a  low  likelihood  of
      reconviction for both sexual and violent offences. He contends that he
      is now a different  person  and  that  various  people  including  his
      friends and family, and  perhaps  most  importantly,  his  wife,  have
      helped him to reach his goal to focus upon his family life. He  states
      that he has made a mistake in his life but that insofar as the  public
      interest or safety of others is concerned, he has been dealt with, and
      helped by professional people. He draws attention to the fact that  is
      in the last five  years  since  his  conviction,  he  has  never  been
      involved in any further offending.

Discussion

  11. In the grant of permission to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Shaerf, it is said that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan  did
      not take into account that the appellant had a British Citizen  child,
      which  arguably  would  have  required  the  Judge  to  consider   the
      appellant's position in the light of this under s117B(6).

  12. s117B Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  sets  out  the
      application of the public interest requirements in  Article  8  cases.
      It provides as follows;

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

            (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

            (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

            (a)  a private life, or

            (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

            that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
            the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

            (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
            relationship with a qualifying child, and

            (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
            the United Kingdom.

  13. It is right to note that the appellant is not  liable  to  deportation
      and so a literal reading of  s117(B)(6)  might  on  the  face  of  it,
      suggest that the public interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
      removal.  However,  s117B  must  be  read  in  light  of  s117A  which
      provides;

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

            (a)  breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
            family life under Article 8, and

            (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
            Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

            (a)  in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
            117B, and

            (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
            to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

  14.  The  public  interest  provisions  are  now  contained   in   primary
      legislation.  s117A(2) requires that a  court  or  tribunal  must  (in
      particular) have regard, in all cases, to the considerations listed in
      section 117B.  That is not to say that there is a duty upon the  court
      or tribunal to reach any specific conclusions  or  findings  upon  the
      factors set out. What is required is that the court  or  tribunal  has
      regard, inter alia, to the factors set out  in  s177B,  and  where  it
      applies, the additional factors set out in s117C.

  15. In Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC), this  Tribunal  confirmed
      that whilst s117B is expressed in mandatory terms, the  considerations
      specified in s117B are not expressed as  being  exhaustive.   S117A(2)
      requires that in considering the public interest question,  the  court
      or  tribunal  must  (in  particular)  have  regard  to   the   factors
      identified.  The use of the words "in  particular"  in  the  statutory
      framework makes it plain, that the considerations are not exhaustive.

  16. In AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), this  Tribunal  confirmed
      that the statutory duty to consider the matters set out  in  s117B  of
      the 2002 Act is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has
      had regard to such parts of it, as are relevant.   When  the  question
      posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed in relation  to  children
      by paragraph 276ADE(l)(iv) it must be posed and answered in the proper
      context of whether it was reasonable to expect the child to follow its
      parents to their country of origin.

  17. We have carefully read the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      O'Hagan and it cannot be said that the judge failed to have regard  to
      any material circumstance relating the child. The mere presence of the
      child in the UK, was not a "trump card" which his parents could deploy
      to demand immigration status for the whole family.

  18.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan  addressed  the  matter  in  the
      following way;

         "...I did not consider that the effect of  the  decision  would  be
         unduly harsh on his wife and son having had regard to  all  of  the
         circumstances, including the nature and severity of the offence and
         the  risk  of  reoffending  and  also  having  had  regard  to  the
         circumstances to  which  the  family  would  be  returning  in  the
         Philippines if his wife chose to go with the appellant and to  take
         their son with her.";  [28(iii)]

         "I considered the impact of  the  decision  on  the  child....  The
         question is the proportionality of expecting the child to leave the
         United Kingdom to continue family life with his father.  There  are
         weighty factors which would point towards it not been reasonable to
         expect the child to leave United Kingdom. In particular,  he  is  a
         British citizen, he has lived in this country for the  entirety  of
         his life and he has not done anything wrong.  There  are,  however,
         also significant countervailing factors. The child  is  of  an  age
         where the locus of his life will be with his parents. It is not  in
         dispute that his best interests will be served  by  remaining  with
         his parents. Similarly, their capacity and commitment to  meet  his
         needs is not in  question.  There  is  a  functioning  health   and
         education  system  in  the   Philippines,    albeit  that  payments
         have to be made for  hospital  care.  If  he  were  to  go  to  the
         Phillippines with his parents, the child  would  be  together  with
         them as part of a family in a country where they are familiar  with
         the language, culture and society and could  meet  his  needs.  His
         education would not be disrupted  since  he  has  not  yet  started
         formal education. He would not lose  the  benefit  of  his  British
         citizenship and he could return to  this  country  in  the  future,
         alone when he is old enough to do so or with his mother or,  should
         circumstances change and his father is readmitted  at  some  future
         point,  with  his  mother  and  father.  Whilst  I  recognise  that
         relocating to the Philippines  will  not,  initially,  be  easy,  I
         consider his young age where the locus of  his  life  is  with  his
         parents and, most importantly, the love and care of  their  parents
         will assist in that process. I have reminded  myself  that  section
         117B(6) requires me to consider whether it would not be  reasonable
         to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. Having had  regard
         to all the circumstances of this case, I am not persuaded  that  it
         would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave United  Kingdom.
         I do not consider his interests in remaining in the United  Kingdom
         with his father sufficient to outweigh the other considerations  in
         the Respondent's favour. [28(iv)]

         "I finally move to consider the impact of an  adverse  decision  on
         the Appellant's partner and son. They are,  I  recognise,  entirely
         innocent of any wrongdoing in relation to the Appellant's  actions.
         The  situation  which  the  Appellant's  wife  and  son  now   find
         themselves is one for  which  the  Appellant  and  not  the  United
         Kingdom  must  ultimately  bear  responsibility.  It   leaves   the
         Appellant's wife with a stark choice to make for herself and  their
         son:  she  may  decide  that  the  Appellant's  actions   and   the
         consequences of them are too great to be borne, or she  may  decide
         that the strength of their relationship  is  such  as  to  overcome
         those things. If the former, she may choose to remain in the United
         Kingdom as is her right. If the latter, she may choose to  relocate
         to her country of origin, the Philippines, so that she can be  with
         the Appellant. It is a sad and deeply  regrettable  situation  that
         she has to make such  choice,  but  it  is  one  which  is  of  the
         Appellant's making."; [28(v)]

  19. It is clear from the extract of paragraph 28(iv) of the  determination
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan that we have set out above,  that
      the Judge did make specific reference to s117B(6).  Whilst he did  not
      set its provision out in full in the determination, it is  plain  from
      the terms of his determination, that he did consider  at  some  length
      the circumstances of the appellant's child and  whether  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom.  and  his
      ability to relocate to the Philippines.  He  did  so,  making  express
      reference in the same paragraph to the fact that the  appellant's  son
      is a British Citizen.

  20. That being so, it is  clear  to  us  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Hagan did take into account that the appellant had a British Citizen
      child, and considered the Appellant's position in the light  of  this,
      under s117B(6).  It was open to First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hagan  to
      find that the appellant had not  established  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
      dismiss the appeal for the reasons provided.

      Decision:

  21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
      outcome of the decision.  We find no error of law and  the  appeal  is
      dismissed.



Signed:     Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

