
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25655/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 18th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mr Rafiqullah Fida Mohammad
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Skinner (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge K W Brown, promulgated on 2nd March 2015, following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on 18th February 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  Rafiqullah  Fida  Mohammad,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 20th
    June 1988.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent Secretary
    of State to refuse his application for leave to remain under the points-
    based system by a decision dated 5th June 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  there  are  insurmountable  "obstacles"
    under paragraph EX.1 to family life with his partner continuing outside
    the UK, in that he is married to Ms Shameela Jan, a British citizen who
    has lived in the UK since the age of 2, and who has  a  mother,  father
    and six younger siblings in this country.  The judge  heard  that  both
    the Appellant's family and his wife's family come from Jalalabad, which
    is the second city in Afghanistan.  Although life for  the  Appellant's
    wife would be different in Jalalabad than it would in the UK, it is the
    case that,

         "Many marriages  have  to  face  difficult  challenges.   Both  the
         Appellant and his wife are well-educated.  They are  able  to  face
         challenges together.  There are no children.  I have no doubt  that
         they  will  receive  the  support  of  close  and  extended  family
         members".

    The judge went on to say that,

         "I accept that  the  culture  and  general  way  of  life  will  be
         different for the Appellant's wife but that is something  that  she
         may have to come to terms with if the marriage is  to  continue  in
         Afghanistan.  It is the truth that she entered  the  marriage  with
         her eyes wide open  with  knowledge  of  the  Appellant's  lack  of
         immigration status as a student ...." (paragraph 32).

 4. The judge considered that if the Appellant and his wife had to separate
    for a while until he made an application to re-enter again  this  would
    not amount to insurmountable obstacles because:

         "Living apart is a feature at some stages  during  many  marriages.
         It may be that the Appellant would seek to make an application  for
         entry clearance on the basis of his marriage to a British wife.  In
         this, once again I am sure he would be supported not  only  by  his
         wife but his own and wife's family ..." (paragraph 33).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  considering
    that the Appellant would face no insurmountable obstacles, particularly
    in light of the fact that his wife as a woman  would  have  no  support
    provided for her in Afghanistan,  and  that  family  life  there  would
    indeed be unduly harsh for them to maintain.

 7. On 7th July 2015, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the judge may have had regard to immaterial considerations in  reaching
    his decision.

 8. On 13th August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary of
    State to the effect that, the  Appellant's  application  under  Tier  4
    (General) was bound to fail and the appeal was only pursued on  Article
    8 grounds on the basis of family life with the Appellant's new wife and
    the judge considered all the submissions and made  a  decision  on  the
    material facts.  The judge did consider that family life could continue
    in Afghanistan with the support of the Appellant's family.   There  was
    no error.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Skinner, appearing as Counsel on behalf  of
    the Appellant, made three broad submissions.  First, the terms of  EX.1
    makes it quite clear that this applies if,

         "(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

10. In considering EX.1(b) the possibility of return is not relevant.   The
    obstacles must plainly be considered on the basis that the family  life
    is to continue outside the UK.  Accordingly, the judge erred in  taking
    into account the possibility of the Appellant's return to the UK  as  a
    spouse.

11. Second, the judge wrongly took into account, and gave undue  weight  to
    the fact that the Appellant and his wife had married knowing  that  the
    Appellant's  immigration  status  was  precarious.   The  question   of
    insurmountable obstacles  is  a  discrete  question  of  fact  and  the
    immigration status of an Appellant is an entirely irrelevant to it.

12. Third, in considering whether there are insurmountable  obstacles,  the
    judge gave no consideration to the position of  women  in  Afghanistan.
    This was important because the COI Report  on  Afghanistan  dated  15th
    February 2013 (reissued on 8th May 2013), which refers to the  position
    of women in Afghanistan as, "one  of  the  worst  in  the  world",  and
    confirms that "sexual  and  gender  based  violence  against  women  is
    endemic ... and women cannot currently  rely  on  protection  from  the
    Afghan authorities".

13. Mr Skinner submitted that,  given  that  this  was  the  case,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to consider whether or not  these  aspects  of
    life in Afghanistan  would  present  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    continuation of the Appellant and his wife's family  life  there.   The
    judge failed to do so.  He  fell  into  error.   This  is  because  the
    Appellant's wife, being a British citizen, and given that she had  been
    living in this country from a very young  age,  was  a  western  styled
    woman.

14. For her part, Miss Everett submitted that there is no material error of
    law.  The judge had given proper consideration (at paragraph 32) to all
    the issues.  He had taken the view that Jalalabad was a second city  of
    Afghanistan and, with a population of 250,000 people,  it  had  various
    styles of life, in which the Appellant and his wife could easily have a
    subsisting and viable family life, with the  support  of  close  family
    members.  Second, the Appellant's wife had ties  with  Afghanistan  and
    had gone and lived there for three months previously.  She  had  family
    support there.

15. In reply, Mr Skinner submitted that the facts were not in dispute.  The
    only question was whether the proper consideration had  been  given  to
    the test of "insurmountable obstacles" to get the  Appellant  over  the
    threshold.  The "insurmountable"  test  was  an  objective  test.   The
    question was not whether  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  would  go  to
    Afghanistan.  The question was whether they could  go  to  Afghanistan.
    The judge had confused the two.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.   First,  the  judge  should  have  considered   whether   the
    Appellant's wife could have gone to Afghanistan in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances that she would face as a westernised  Afghan  woman  upon
    return there.  These circumstances are well set  out  in  Mr  Skinner's
    skeleton argument (see paragraphs 7 to 8).  It was incumbent  upon  the
    judge  to  consider  whether  these  circumstances  would   present   a
    "insurmountable obstacle" to the continuation of  the  couple's  family
    life in Afghanistan.  It is not enough to say that  continuous  support
    from family members would enable her to overcome such obstacles.   This
    is a fact-sensitive exercise and should have been properly  undertaken.



17. Second, the fact that the Appellant's immigration status was precarious
    is irrelevant to the question  of  whether  there  are  "insurmountable
    obstacles" and the suggestion that the Appellant's wife went  into  the
    marriage  with  her  eyes  open  obscures  this   fact.    That   leads
    correspondingly to an error of  law.   The  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    test must be objectively analysed in its own right.  In  short,  it  is
    insufficient answer to the Appellant's claim to say that,  "I  have  no
    doubt that they will receive the support of close and  extended  family
    members" (paragraph 32).

18. Equally, it is insufficient to say that, "it may be that the  Appellant
    will seek to make an application for entry clearance on  the  basis  of
    his marriage to a British wife" and to proceed to  assume  that,  "once
    again, I am sure he will be supported not only by his wife but  by  his
    own and his wife's family ..." (paragraph 32).

Re-Making the Decision

19. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    refer to today.  I am allowing this appeal to the  extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  decided  by  a  judge
    other than Judge K W Brown because under practice statement 7.2(b)  the
    nature or extent of any fact-finding which is necessary  in  order  for
    the decision in the appeal to be remade it such that, having regard  to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. This is because "insurmountable obstacles," is a  fact-sensitive  issue
    on which evidence must further be heard in relation to the question  of
    whether the Appellant's wife's return to Afghanistan is feasible  given
    the risks that the COI highlights in the very recent report.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This  matter  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than  judge  K  W  Brown  at  the  earliest
    opportunity.

22. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    8th December 2015

