
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25712/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons                   |
|On 1 April 2016                      |On 28 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Henry Rudolph Lewis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT  MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  The respondent is Mr Rudolph Lewis,  a  Jamaican  national
    born on 6 January 1966.  However, for the sake of convenience  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they were referred  to  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State will continue to be called
    the respondent and the appellant, Mr Lewis, who is the respondent, will
    continue to be called the appellant.

2.   The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    to allow him further leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship
    with  a  British  citizen  and  it  was  found  that   it   constituted
    insurmountable obstacles of them being  removed  as  a  couple  and  to
    continue their family life  outside  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond allowed the appellant's appeal on  10  September
    2015.

3.   The respondent was granted permission to appeal by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Frankish on  22  January  2016  who  stated  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge materially erred in  law  by  finding  that  an
    illegal immigrant's relationship with a British citizen grown-up  child
    amounted  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their   continuing   their
    relationship in his home country

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge in  his  findings  in  his  determination
    dated 28 August 2015 stated the following, which I  summarise.   It  is
    not disputed that the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  20
    January 2003 with leave to remain as a  visitor  valid  until  14  July
    2003.  The appellant relied on his application for the  present  appeal
    upon  his  relationship  with  Mrs  Faith  Marcia  Forbes-Johnson,  his
    sponsor, who is a naturalised British citizen as of 19  July  2005  but
    was born in Jamaica on 19 July 1970.

 5. The judge found at paragraph 32 that whilst the immigration history  of
    the appellant is not to his credit and not least because he would  seem
    to have formed a previous relationship with a woman  called  Ruth  from
    whom he claims to have hidden his immigration status because he did not
    trust her in this regard that overlapped to some extent with the one he
    has since formed with the sponsor.  Given that the respondent  concedes
    the genuineness of the present relationship which meets the criteria of
    suitability  and  eligibility  under  the  Rules  save  that  of  being
    illegally in the United Kingdom  (E-LTRP.2.2)  his  position  therefore
    falls for consideration under EX.1, which is not freestanding,  and  he
    referred to the case of Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1  not  free  standing)
    [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC).

6.   At paragraph 33 the judge states the following:
         "I accept that there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
         sponsor relocating to Jamaica with the appellant if he were removed
         so as to continue to enjoy their family life together as a  couple.
         The sponsor Ms Forbes-Johnson has obviously built her core economic
         life in the UK where she has lived for some seventeen  years  since
         1998, as evidenced by her 2013 P60s, and where her  daughter  Anna-
         Kay born in 1988 has grown up since age 12 with whom I  accept  she
         has a very close bond facilitated by their close proximity to  each
         other, even if her daughter is living a  separate  adult  life  and
         where they both have very extensive family connections as evidenced
         by the letters of support cited in the preceding."

7.   At paragraph 34 the judge stated that in the circumstances she  accepts
    that it would be unduly harsh and unreasonable to expect the sponsor to
    turn her whole world upside down so as  to  be  able  to  continue  her
    family life with the appellant  in  Jamaica  where  it  must  be  quite
    evident on any commonsense basis that she would not  be  able  to  rely
    upon the substantial economic and emotional  roots  that  she  has  the
    benefits  of  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  agreed  with  the
    respondent that the appellant cannot qualify under paragraph 276ADE(vi)
    as to private life on the basis that he has lost all ties with Jamaica.

8.   The judge stated that as already observed the appellant has  chosen  to
    stay illegally in the United Kingdom for some ten years which he  could
    have used to re-establish himself in Jamaica.  He did not  accept  that
    the appellant had to stay in the United Kingdom.  Many  people,  around
    the world, the judge stated have to rebuild their lives  after  natural
    catastrophes.  The judge stated that the appellant had succeeded  under
    the Immigration Rules and he  did  not  consider  that  there  are  any
    exceptional circumstances to justify consideration of  the  appellant's
    position outside of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

9.   The respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  state  that  the  judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law.  The reasons given by the judge  are  not
    adequate to amount to a finding that there are insurmountable obstacles
    that would prevent the sponsor and the appellant leading  their  family
    life outside the United Kingdom.  These amount to the  facts  that  the
    sponsor is British, has family and a job here and that they  both  wish
    to continue to live in the UK.  The sponsor has an  adult  daughter  in
    the UK but as the judge states she  is  "living  in  a  separate  adult
    life".  There was no evidence of ties beyond normal emotional  ties  or
    of any individual dependency.

10.  The Secretary of State relied on the case of VW and MO (Uganda) v  SSHD
    [2008] UKAIT 00021 at paragraph 34 where it is stated:
         "Again and again the court has emphasised that an applicant  cannot
         normally succeed if all he can show is that he or she would  prefer
         to conduct his family life in the host member state.  More must  be
         shown  than  that  relocation  abroad  would  cause  difficulty  or
         hardship."

11. The judge continued that the appellant and his wife have sought to rely
    on the fact that his wife is British and has family and a job  here  as
    insurmountable obstacles.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  agrees
    with this.  It is respectively submitted that in  making  this  finding
    the  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   erred   in   law   because
    insurmountable obstacles  is  a  high  threshold  and  an  individual's
    preference or choice does not meet the requirements. The sponsor  could
    maintain her relationships with the appellant albeit  with  the  modern
    modes of communication would be a little different.  Furthermore, these
    relationships could be maintained through visits.

12.  At the hearing I heard arguments from both parties as to whether  there
    is an error of law in the determination.  Mr Avery said that the key is
    insurmountable obstacles and what exactly that means.  He said that the
    judge's findings are at paragraph 33 of the determination and  accepted
    that they are very brief.  The judge found that the sponsor  has  built
    her life in this country with an adult  daughter.   This  is  the  only
    reasoning of the judge.  The judge has not properly applied the test or
    given sufficient reasons as to why this test was met given that it is a
    high test.  He has referred to the case of Agyarko &  Ors,  R  (on  the
    application of) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWCA Civ 440.  Mr Avery said that it  is  difficult  to  see  that  the
    factors identified in the appellant's appeal can satisfy  the  test  as
    set out in Agyarko.

13.   Mr  Sharma  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  said  that   the
    respondent's appeal is a veiled rationality challenge.  He agreed  that
    the key issue in this appeal was insurmountable obstacles.  The  judge,
    he said, identified the full test at paragraph 19 of the  determination
    where he states: "Whether the sponsor faces insurmountable obstacles to
    continuing her claimed relationship with the appellant  in  Jamaica  is
    the core issue in this appeal."

14.  The judge took  into  account  all  relevant  factors.   He  took  into
    account that the  sponsor  has  a  close  relationship  with  an  adult
    daughter.  At paragraph 33 the judge noted that they have a very  close
    bond.  He took into account that the sponsor's core economic life is in
    this country.  She has lived in this country for seven years.  She  has
    a daughter born in 1988 who has lived in this country since the age  of
    12.  The judge made clear findings which are sustainable.

15.  The  judge  has  taken  into  account  all  relevant  factors  and  the
    respondent has not pointed to any irrelevant factors taken into account
    by the judge.  He noted that in the case of Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL 49 the  House  of  Lords
    clarified the test to be applied when interfering with the decision  of
    the specialist Tribunals, which  essentially  states  that  the  judges
    alone are the judges of the facts and  it  is  not  enough  that  their
    decision on those facts may seem harsh to people who have not heard and
    read the evidence and arguments which they have heard and read.   Their
    decisions should be respected unless it is quite clear that  they  have
    misdirected themselves in law.  It was further noted in the  case  that
    Appellate Courts should not rush  to  find  such  misdirections  simply
    because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts  or
    expressed themselves differently.

16.  He also relied on the case of MA (Somalia) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKSC 49 at paragraphs 44  and  45  which  in
    essence states that:
         "The role of the court is to correct errors of  law.   Examples  of
         such  errors  include  misinterpreting   the   ECHR;   misdirecting
         themselves by propounding the wrong test  on  some  legal  question
         such as the burden or standard  of  proof;  procedural  impropriety
         such as a breach of the rules of natural justice; and the  familiar
         errors of omitting a relevant factor  or  taking  into  account  an
         irrelevant factor or reaching a conclusion on the  facts  which  is
         irrational."

17.   He  noted  that  in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:   set   aside)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) that when reaching a final  conclusion
    it can be seen that the Upper Tribunal addressed whether  the  decision
    was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the  evidence  heard,  in
    essence whether the decision was rational.  It is  submitted  that  the
    ground of appeal in  this  matter  ought  to  have  been  considered  a
    rationality challenge.  He also referred to the case of  Nagre,  R  (on
    the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) where the following  could  be  said  to  be  true  at
    paragraph 50.

My Finding as to whether there is an Error of Law in the Determination

18.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning is essentially  at  paragraph
    33 and it would be helpful if I set it out in full:
         "I accept that there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
         sponsor relocating to Jamaica with the appellant if he were removed
         so as to continue to enjoy their family life together as a  couple.
         The sponsor Ms Forbes-Johnson has obviously built her core economic
         life in the UK where she has lived for some seventeen  years  since
         1998, as evidenced by her 2013 P60s, and where her  daughter  Anna-
         Kay born in 1988 has grown up since the age  of  12,  with  whom  I
         accept she has  a  very  close  bond  facilitated  by  their  close
         proximity to each other, even if her daughter is living a  separate
         adult  life,  and  where  they  both  have  very  extensive  family
         connections as evidenced by the letters of  support  cited  in  the
         preceding."

19.  At paragraph 34 the judge states:
         "In the circumstances I accept that it would be  unduly  harsh  and
         unreasonable to expect the sponsor to turn her whole  world  upside
         down so as to  be  able  to  continue  her  family  life  with  the
         appellant in  Jamaica  where  it  must  be  quite  evident  on  any
         commonsense basis that she would not  be  able  to  rely  upon  the
         substantial economic and emotional roots that she has the  benefits
         of in the United Kingdom."

    The complaint made  by  the  respondent  essentially  is  the  lack  of
    reasoning  and  not  applying  the  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles
    correctly, which is where the error in fact lies.

20.   In  the  case  of  Agyarko  at  paragraph  21  I  am  guided  by  what
    insurmountable obstacles as used in the Rules says.  It states that  it
    clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome by an applicant for  leave
    to remain under the Rules.  The test is  significantly  more  demanding
    than a mere test of whether it would be reasonable to expect  a  couple
    to continue  their  family  life  outside  the  United  Kingdom.   This
    indicates to me that the submissions  of  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer have  merit  that  there  must  be  something  over  and  above
    inconvenience to the appellant's sponsor.

21.  I agree that the considerations taken into  account  by  the  judge  to
    find that insurmountable obstacles are present can satisfy the test  as
    set out in Agyarko.   Essentially  the  reasons  given  were  that  the
    sponsor has her core economic life in this country, that she has  lived
    here for seventeen years and her adult daughter was born  in  1988  and
    has lived in this country since the age of 12 and that they have a very
    close bond with each other.  Arguably these factors do  not  reach  the
    very high  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    established in the appellant's home country. The test must  be  applied
    in a  sensible  and  practical  way  as  the  insurmountable  obstacles
    criteria as used in the Rules to define one of  the  preconditions  set
    out in Section Exhibit 1(d).  They  need  to  be  satisfied  before  an
    applicant can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to remain  under
    the Rules.  In that context it is not simply a factor to be taken  into
    account.

22.  I find that the circumstances of the  appellant's  sponsor  are  really
    weak and cannot amount to insurmountable obstacles, even at a  stretch.
    The mere fact that she has lived in this country and has a job in  this
    country and is obviously reluctant to relocate to Jamaica  to  continue
    her family life with the  appellant  cannot  constitute  insurmountable
    obstacles or that it would be particularly harsh for her to  do  so  as
    identified in the stringent test.

23.  The upshot is I find that the  judge  has  made  an  error  of  law  in
    allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   I
    therefore set aside the decision  and  remake  it.   I  find  that  the
    appellant has not satisfied the test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  in
    EX.1 in order for the appellant to be granted further leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  It will be her choice if she wants to accompany
    the appellant to Jamaica and continue with family life with him in that
    country or they can continue with their relationship  by  her  visiting
    the appellant in Jamaica and through  modern  means  of  communication.
    There are no insurmountable obstacles such that they cannot continue to
    continue to enjoy family life together in Jamaica.

24. It has been accepted that the  sponsor's  daughter  living  a  separate
    adult life and there has been no suggestion or evidence that  her  ties
    with the sponsor and the appellant go beyond normal emotional  ties  or
    of any individual dependency and has her own life.

25.  I therefore remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 6th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 6th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

