
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2015                  |On 4 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                                mercy obodai
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Malik, of MQ Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana,  is  a  long-term  overstayer  of  a
    visit visa.  Whilst here as an overstayer she had two children, neither
    of whom are British citizens, who were born in the UK in 2006 and 2008.
     Her appeal against the refusal of  an  application  for  her  and  the
    children to have leave to remain on human rights grounds was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill, in a decision promulgated on  12
    November 2014.  The judge found that the children had no contact of any
    sort with their father, and that it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK with their mother,  taking  into  account  the
    ages of the children, and all of the other circumstances.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
    on 31 December 2014.  The grounds of appeal  had  raised  a  number  of
    different points, but the only one mentioned in the grant of permission
    was that it was arguable that the judge had erred in law by considering
    the appeal under the post-2012  Immigration  Rules,  when  the  initial
    application had been made in 2011.

3.   At the  start  of  the  hearing  I  checked  with  Mr  Malik,  for  the
    appellant, whether he was aware of the recent Court of Appeal  decision
    in Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.   Since  he  was  not  I
    explained the relevance of the judgment, and gave him some time to read
    it.  He subsequently accepted that this judgment meant that he could no
    longer pursue the time point.

4.   This is because the Court of Appeal held that  the  pre-July  2012  law
    only applied to pre-2012 applications for  decisions  taken  between  9
    July 2012 and 6 September 2012.  For  those  decisions  taken  after  6
    September 2012 the new law, introduced as  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE, was applicable.  In this appeal the  decision  was  taken  well
    after 6 September 2012 (28 May 2014).

5.   Mr Malik did not seek to put  forward  any  alternative  error  of  law
    challenge.  He did not seek further time to consider the impact of  the
    recent Court of Appeal decision.

6.   I have looked at  the  determination,  and  also  at  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It appears to me that  the
    position taken by Mr Malik at the hearing  was  inevitable.   The  only
    arguable legal point in the grounds was the time point addressed above.
     The rest of the grounds really amount to an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    case, putting forward the same submissions about the reasonableness  of
    expecting the children  to  leave  the  UK  that  were  considered  and
    rejected by the judge.

7.   The judge placed particular emphasis on the age of  the  children.   It
    is well-established that children who have spent the first seven  years
    of their life in the UK will not have such significant ties  as  those,
    for example, that came to the UK at a young age  but  are  involved  in
    important examinations such as GCSEs or A-levels.  The judge also  paid
    particular attention to the fact that the appellant  and  the  children
    were supported by public funds, in that they relied on local  authority
    assistance, and he also noted that the appellant had significant family
    ties in Ghana, including her mother and siblings.

8.   No other arguments having been put forward at the hearing to  challenge
    the decision, and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  point  on  which
    permission to appeal was granted can no longer be argued, there  is  no
    challenge to the judge's determination dismissing the appeal.

9.   I have considered whether there is  any  need  for  anonymity,  despite
    this not having been mentioned by the parties,  and  I  can  see  none,
    despite the fact that children are involved.  No issue as  to  any  fee
    award arises.

Notice of Decision

10.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  No error of law  having
    been  shown,  the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appeal   remains
    undisturbed.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

