

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25331/2012
     IA/25334/2012
     IA/25333/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June, 2013                              |On 27 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

               THE PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE BLAKE


                                   Between

                          mohammed hamzah alnakhli
                               and dependants

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K. McGuire, instructed by Drummond Miller
(Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.    Mr Alnakhli is a citizen of Saudi Arabia  who  entered  the  United
      Kingdom in October 2008 with leave as a student.  The other appellants
      are his dependants and their position is  entirely  reliant  upon  the
      outcome of his appeal. I will refer to Mr Alnakhli as the appellant.


   2.    The appellant applied in 2009 for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      general student migrant but that application was refused in July  2010
      such refusal being in accordance with the Rules having  regard  to  an
      unauthorised change of course and other  relevant  matters  that  were
      then considered.  He appealed the decision on the basis that,  at  the
      time of the refusal, he had been  accepted  at  the  Edinburgh  Napier
      University on a course that was due to be begin on  6  September  2010
      and would lead to a qualification of a MSc in Transportation  Planning
      and Engineering. This was the qualification he needed to complete  his
      course of study in the United Kingdom.

   3.    His appeal was heard by Judge Reid on  the  3  November  2010,  who
      allowed it on Article 8 grounds on 21 December 2010.   The  basis  for
      her decision was that it would be a disproportionate interference with
      the private life of a person admitted as  a  genuine  student  not  to
      afford him the opportunity to complete the course of study  for  which
      he had originally been accepted for admission.  In  her  decision  the
      Judge gave no details of when the  course  of  study  upon  which  the
      appellant was then embarked would conclude, or what  period  of  leave
      she considered appropriate to give effect to her decision.   She  left
      the last matter to the Secretary of State.


   4.   The position established  during  the  during  before  me  was  that
      following Judge Reid's decision, on 28 March 2011   the  Secretary  of
      State enquired of the appellant's  solicitors  when  the  course  upon
      which he was enrolled at the Napier University was due  to  end.   The
      response was given on 2 May  2011  and  enclosed  a  letter  from  the
      Student Affairs Officer at the University  stating  that  the  details
      were correct as of 6 April 2011.  The start date  of  the  course  was
      given as 10 January 2011 and the expected end date was given as 12 May
      2012.   It  was  thus  not  surprising  that  shortly  thereafter  the
      appellant was  given  leave  to  remain  until  26  May   2012,  on  a
      discretionary basis with the observation that no  other  extension  of
      stay would be granted.

   5.    In due course, the appellant applied for an extension of stay  that
      was refused and the appeal against this refusal then came before Judge
      Morrison on 7 February 2013.  At  that  hearing,  a  letter  from  the
      Edinburgh Napier University was produced  dated  May  2012  indicating
      that the end date for the appellant's course was  21  September  2012.
      The earlier letter noted at [4] above was not before the  judge.   The
      start date for the course was still given as January 2011.

   6.    The judge concluded that on the basis that that  documentation  the
      Secretary of State had not  given  effect  to  Judge  Reid's  decision
      because a reasonable opportunity  to  enable  the  appellant  to  have
      completed the course would have required the  Secretary  of  State  to
      give him leave to the 21 September 2012 rather than  the  end  of  May
      2012.  The difference between the two letters from the University  was
      not explored at the hearing.

   7.    It was further apparent that the appellant had still not  completed
      his course either in September 2012 or by the date of the hearing.

   8.   The judge took the view that Judge Reid had intended  the  appellant
      be granted leave to the  21  September  2012.  There  was  nothing  to
      indicate that she intended that the appellant be  given  such  further
      leave as would enable him to complete the course whenever that may be.
       He rejected the submission made by the  advocate  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that what Judge Reid had intended was that the appellant  be
      given leave and any further extensions of stay necessary to enable the
      appellant to complete those parts of the course that were outstanding.
       In fact, if the matter had been fully  investigated,  it  would  have
      been seen that Judge Reid's decision was sufficiently given effect  to
      by the grant of permission by the Secretary of State until May 2012.


   9.    The application of Article 8  to  extensions  of  stay  by  genuine
      students is a somewhat fragile jurisprudence, but in my judgment,  can
      only require, at the highest,  no more than the grant of a  reasonable
      opportunity to complete a course  for  which  an  appellant  had  been
      accepted and was able to fund and which had reasonable expectations of
      completing in time.  It cannot extend to  an  indefinite  sequence  of
      extensions of stay that subsequently proved necessary  to  enable  the
      appellant to actually complete the course if he fails to  complete  it
      in such period as is reasonable in all the circumstances.

  10. The appellant's history of change of course  before  the  decision  of
      Judge Reid, meant that he had fallen outside the strict terms  of  the
      points based rules before then. Thereafter he  was  reliant  on  human
      rights grounds. It was consistent with those grounds that he be  given
      one final opportunity to complete his current course. The Secretary of
      State was acting lawfully in given him  leave  for  one  final  period
      commensurate with what was mutually understood to have been  the  date
      for completing the course and that effectively gave  effect  to  Judge
      Reid's decision.


  11. Judge  Morrison  refused  the  appeal  in  February  2013  because  he
      understood the grounds  of  the  appeal  were  entirely  connected  an
      entitlement under the points based system of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      He stated:

         "given that all the appellant is asking  for  is  a  further  short
         period of leave until May 2013 I might have been inclined to  allow
         the appeal based on Article 8  if that had been argued".

  12. If the judge had reminded himself what  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
      before him he would have seen that Article 8 was relied on. Indeed  it
      would appear that is all the appellant could have relied upon as  ever
      since the decision of Judge Reid he had fallen outside  the  terms  of
      the rules.


  13. Accordingly  I  accept  the  appellant's  submission  that  there  are
      material errors of law in Judge  Morrison's  decision.  He  failed  to
      understand that Article 8 was a matter for  him.   I  accordingly  set
      aside his decision and remake it.

  14.  The present position is that I was told that the  appellant  has  now
      succeeded in obtaining his MSc and that  his  graduation  is  to  take
      place on the 26 June and he has booked  his  return  ticket  to  Saudi
      Arabia to travel there with his  family  on  the  following  day.   He
      presently has leave pending the determination of this appeal  pursuant
      to Section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  as  amended.   Upon  the
      determination of this appeal his leave will expire.

  15. In my judgment  the  appellant  was  only  entitled  to  a  reasonable
      opportunity to complete his course of studies and that opportunity had
      been afforded to him by the Secretary of State.  It is unclear on  the
      evidence why the period of study was extended from  May  to  September
      2012.  It may be, as was alleged before me, that this was  because  he
      was  unable  to  start  his  study  until  the  College  had  received
      confirmation of the grant of leave to remain in May 2011.  If that had
      been the explanation then that  could  have  been  placed  before  the
      Secretary of State promptly by   those  instructed  by  the  appellant
      indicating that their previous answer needed  to  be  amended  in  the
      light of that fact.

  16. In those circumstances it might well have been fair  to  have  granted
      the period until September 2012, which  was  the  earliest  reasonable
      opportunity to have completed the course.  On the other hand,  it  may
      be that the course was  extended  because  the  appellant  was  having
      difficulties in completing the course. This  appears  to  explain  the
      further delay in the period from September 2012 to May 2013.  If  that
      had been the explanation there was no obligation on the  Secretary  of
      State to permit him a further opportunity to complete the course.

  17.  As the burden of proving the relevant facts is on the  appellant  and
      the position was evidentially unclear before me, in  my  judgment  the
      Secretary of State was not bound to grant any further period of  stay.
      The  decision  refusing  an  extension  was  accordingly  lawful   and
      compatible with the appellant's human rights.

  18.  I remake the appeal by dismissing it.


                               Signed


                               Date 26 June 2013




                                Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal
