

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                  |Determination issued              |
|on 13 January 2015                |On 16 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             SAJID HUSSAIN SHAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He came to the UK as a visitor
    in 2006 and overstayed.  Since March  2010  he  has  been  involved  in
    various unsuccessful applications and appeals with a view to  remaining
    as the unmarried partner and since 18 May 2011 as  the  spouse  of  the
    sponsor, a UK citizen.   On  21  June  2013  he  made  a  further  such
    application.  The respondent refused it  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    letter dated 9 June 2014.

 2. Designated Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal by determination promulgated on 8 September 2014.

 3. The appellant's first ground of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  that
    the judge erred in relation to Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 by failing to
    note that there  needs  to  be  a  sensible  reason  for  requiring  an
    appellant to re-apply from another country, peculiar to the  facts  and
    circumstances of the case,  and  that  the  public  interest  does  not
    require that as a generality.

 4. Mr Byrne submitted that the error could  be  described  as  failing  to
    embark on a crucially fact-sensitive analysis.  There was  no  reasoned
    finding on where the appellant fell on the spectrum of  possible  cases
    as illustrated between the appellant in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  (with
    nothing against her except the formal requirement to apply from abroad)
    and the appellant Ekinci (mentioned in Chikwamba as an  example  of  an
    appalling immigration history).   He  said  that  the  judge's  overall
    approach to proportionality was confused.

 5. The second ground of appeal proposes that the  test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles in paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM of the Rules is correctly one
    of whether it would be reasonable for parties to carry on their  family
    life in the appellant's country.  It  also  proposes  (perhaps  in  the
    alternative?) that the Rules in this respect are not a  complete  code,
    and that  if  the  judge  applied  only  the  Rules  on  insurmountable
    obstacles, there was an error of not going  on  to  consider  the  case
    outside the Rules.

 6. The further submission on this ground was that EX1 as to insurmountable
    obstacles does not provide for the full scope of Article 8 and that the
    judge should have asked, outside the Rules, whether it  was  reasonable
    to expect the appellant's wife to move to Pakistan for family  life  to
    be carried on there.

 7. Mr Byrne said that the first ground identified a specific error on  the
    basis of Hayat and the second a more general error of  failing  to  ask
    and  answer  an  overall  question  of  what  it  was  reasonable   (or
    proportional) to expect.  If error were to be found, the Upper Tribunal
    should not proceed to make a fresh decision, but should  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.   The  full  nature  of  an
    appellant's evidence could not be reflected in a determination  and  an
    appellant should have the advantage of all stages of procedure.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response to the grounds of  appeal  makes  the
    following points.  The judge applied the  correct  test,  derived  from
    case law, to the question of insurmountable obstacles  and  made  sound
    findings of fact on the ability of the parties to live in Pakistan.  It
    was  open  to  her  to  find  no  good  arguable   case   for   further
    consideration.  Hayat predates codification of Article 8.  There are no
    compelling circumstances  in  the  case.   It  has  been  open  to  the
    appellant to return and apply for some time.  It appears that the major
    reason for not  doing  so  is  inadequacy  of  income  to  support  the
    application.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted further that the criticisms  made  are  of  the
    form not the substance of the judge's decision.  From paragraph 77  on,
    she made clear findings on the actual circumstances.  At  paragraph  81
    she correctly took the outcome of a previous  appeal  as  her  starting
    point.  That determination had been outside the Rules as  EX1  did  not
    then exist.  The judge correctly gave insurmountable obstacles a  wider
    than literal interpretation.  There was then nothing to take  the  case
    beyond the codification of article 8 in the Rules.  The judge reached a
    clear conclusion both on the appellant returning to apply  and  on  the
    alternative of the parties moving to Pakistan to stay.  She found  that
    despite the difficulties involved that would not  be  disproportionate.
    Her  conclusions  were  open  to  her  and  properly  explained.    The
    determination should not be set aside.

10. If the determination were to be  set  aside  for  any  error  of  legal
    approach, Mrs Pettersen pointed out that no  complaint  had  been  made
    about any factual findings and  no  question  of  further  evidence  or
    change of circumstances had been raised.  The facts  were  clear.   Any
    further decision should be to  dismiss  the  appeal.    This  could  be
    reinforced by reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. As to applying from abroad, the judge  noted  that  was  sometimes  the
    proportionate course and found no reason to differ  from  the  previous
    determination (paragraph 83).  I see no misconception that  the  public
    interest generally requires application from abroad.  There  is  no  in
    error in holding that with his poor immigration history  the  appellant
    is a person who should comply with the formalities prescribed.

13. In any event, although the judge was led on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    into considering Chikwamba / Hayat matters in a way rather muddled with
    the real issues, I do not think such points could be  of  any  eventual
    importance.  The appellant made no  case  that  he  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules  but  for  the  formality  of  applying  from
    abroad.

14. The judge did not take insurmountable obstacles as a literal test.  She
    put this at paragraph 80 in terms of  "very  significant  difficulties"
    and "very serious hardship". She analysed the  particular  difficulties
    contended for at paragraphs 81, 84,  89  and  90.    No  criticism  was
    directed at any part of that consideration.  Although the judge says at
    the end, paragraph 92, that she finds no good arguable case  for  going
    outside the Rules that is a final wrapping of a quite  fully  explained
    proportionality conclusion.  I  agree  with  the  submission  that  the
    criticisms made at best go to the form rather than the substance of the
    decision.  They do not show any error on the basis of which  the  Upper
    Tribunal ought to interfere.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            14th January 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
