
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25140/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th June, 2014                            |On 21st July 2014            |
|Given extempore                               |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ms Awja Penaflor

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S L Ong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Bustani, Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, to whom I shall refer as "the claimant".  The respondent is
    a citizen of the Philippines born on 2nd June, 1985.

2.    On  25th  February,  2013  the  respondent  made  application  to  the
    Secretary of State for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of her relationship with Tracey Arthur Payne.   She  had  entered
    the United Kingdom on 29th September, 2009, with leave to remain  until
    28th February, 2013, as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   The  claimant
    refused the respondent's application and the respondent appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walters  at  Taylor
    House on 3rd March, 2014.  He found that the respondent succeeded under
    EX.1(a) and that the respondent met the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2. and
    1.12.  He found also that the respondent also met the requirements of E-
    LTRP.2.1. and  he  noted  the  submission  made  by  Counsel  that  the
    respondent had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her
    son Tyler, who is under the age of 18, who is in the United Kingdom and
    who  is  a  British  citizen.   The  judge  found  those  facts  to  be
    established and found that it would not be reasonable for  her  son  to
    leave the United Kingdom, because the respondent's  partner  had  never
    been to the Philippines, has adult children and all  his  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom  and  is  in  full-time  employment  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

4.   The judge found that it would not be reasonable to expect a child,  who
    is a British citizen, to have to leave the United Kingdom and therefore
    forfeit the benefits of free education and the welfare state.

5.   The claimant  challenged  the  determination  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicholson granted permission on the basis that  the  judge  erred
    because the evidence before the judge was that the respondent  and  her
    British partner Mr Payne only started living together in May, 2013.

6.   Counsel accepted that the judge had  erred  in  law,  by  allowing  the
    appeal under EX.1(b) because, the respondent did not qualify.  However,
    she  did  qualify  under  EX.1(a)  and  the  judge  had   allowed   the
    respondent's appeal under EX.1(a).

7.   Ms Ong accepted that whilst there had been an error on a point  of  law
    in the determination made by the judge,  the  error  was  not  material
    since it appeared that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  succeed  in
    respect of EX.1(a).

8.   I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in law, but that  his
    error of law was not material.  On the evidence before the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge the respondent was entitled to succeed  in  her  appeal,
    given that she met the requirements of EX.1 (a). I uphold the  decision
    of the First Tier Tribunal Judge, but for different reasons. The appeal
    is allowed.  I uphold his decision to make a fee award.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
