
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25169/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 November 2014                    |On 20 November 2014                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                ghulam fatima
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan Counsel instructed by M J Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK as the  wife  of  her  husband.   Her  ensuing  appeal
    against the refusal of her application was determined at  her  election
    on the papers by Judge Kempton sitting at North  Shields  on  6  August
    2014 and dismissed in a determination promulgated the following day.

2.    Permission  to   appeal,   supplemented   by   subsequent   procedural
    directions, was granted on  6  October  2014  by  Judge  Lever  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kempton) who, in  a
             determination promulgated on  13  Aug  2014  -  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal to remain as a spouse.


         2.   This application is a few days late  and  no  explanation  has
             been given.  However in  the  interests  of  fairness  I  have
             extended time.


         3.   The Appellant had entered the UK in April  2012  on  a  spouse
             visa valid until April 2014.  Her application dated  23  April
             2014 to remain had been refused on the single basis  that  she
             had not passed an English language test.  When  the  Appellant
             had entered the UK in April 2012 no language  requirement  was
             needed.  It is arguable that in those circumstances  when  she
             came to apply having been given limited leave to remain  prior
             to 9 Jul 2012, there was no need for her to  pass  an  English
             test.


         4.   The judge had not looked at A8 ECHR.  He had made reference to
             the Appellant claiming to have a 16 month child in the UK  but
             noted that no evidence had been produced.  I find no reference
             within the documents including the application in 2014 to  the
             existence of a child and it is unclear  as  to  this  specific
             reference to a child.  In respect of the language  requirement
             and possibly in respect of the confusion or lack of clarity in
             respect of a child there were arguable errors of law.


         5.   There were arguable errors of law in this case."

3.   On 10  October  2014  the  Respondent  submitted  a  Rule  24  response
    submitting that there was no error of law in relation  to  the  English
    language requirement or Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing, which  took  the  form
    of submissions, which  I  have  taken  into  account.   I  reserved  my
    determination at 2:20pm and returned at 3:55pm to give it  and,  should
    that have been my decision, to re-hear the appeal.

Determination

4.   The Appellant was granted entry clearance as the wife  of  her  husband
    for the period from 26 January 2012 until 26 April 2014.  On this basis
    she entered the UK on 2 April 2012.  On 23 April 2014, which was  three
    days before the expiry of her leave to enter it, she  applied  to  vary
    it.  Her application was refused on 28 May 2014.

5.   Since her first application had been made before  the  introduction  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  on  12  July
    2012, it fell to be  decided  not  under  those  provisions  but  under
    paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.   The  Respondent  decided  it,
    correctly under paragraph 284 and also, incorrectly, under Appendix FM.
     Paragraph 284(ix)(a) required  her  to  provide  an  original  English
    language test certificate in speaking and  listening  from  an  English
    language test provider approved by the Respondent  for  these  purposes
    clearly showing her name and the  qualification  obtained,  which  must
    meet or exceed level A1 of the Common European Framework of  Reference.
    The Refusal Letter considered the documents which she had submitted and
    stated that the institution which had issued them was not on  the  list
    of approved English language test providers under  Appendix  O  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  None of the  exceptions  within  paragraph  284(ix)
    applied, so that the Appellant did not meet its requirements.

6.   Determining the appeal on the papers and  so  without  the  benefit  of
    representation, the judge did not consider it under  paragraph  284  of
    the Immigration Rules.  This was an error of law.  He did  consider  it
    under Appendix FM which, as it happened, was also an error of law, into
    which the Refusal Letter had led him.  In Appendix 9 he set out various
    requirements of Appendix FM, including E-LTRP4.1  relating  to  English
    language.  At paragraph 10 he narrated the evidence, which was that the
    Appellant had not yet taken the English language  test.   At  paragraph
    11, he therefore concluded that she had not satisfied this  requirement
    of appendix FM.

7.   The requirements in Appendix FM about the  English  language  test  are
    identical to those in paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.   So  the
    judge asked the right question, but  in  the  wrong  context.   On  the
    evidence, he came to the  only  conclusion  which  he  could.   Had  he
    considered the question in the proper  context  of  paragraph  284,  he
    would inevitably have reached the same conclusion.  So  his  error  was
    not material to his decision.

8.   At the  hearing  Mr  Chohan  submitted  and  made  submissions  on  the
    document issued by the Home Office entitled "Changes to  the  knowledge
    of  language  and  life  in  the  UK  requirement  for  settlement  and
    naturalisation".   These  changes  were  made  on  28   October   2013.
    Recognising at page 4 that they might  be  challenging  for  some,  the
    document   permitted   transitional   arrangements    for    settlement
    applications, by granting further periods of limited leave  to  certain
    categories of applicants including partners applying under Appendix  FM
    or subject to transitional arrangements under Part 8 of the Immigration
    Rules.  I have concluded that this document is  not  in  point  in  the
    present appeal, since it relates to applications for settlement,  which
    that of the Appellant was not, based upon changes to the  knowledge  of
    language and life in the UK requirement, which was not in point,  since
    the requirements to  be  met  by  the  Appellant  were  identical.   So
    although  the  document  envisaged  allowing  certain   categories   of
    applicant to apply for further periods of limited leave,  this  was  in
    the different contexts of settlement applications and  changes  to  the
    knowledge of language and life requirement.

9.   As to Article 8 of the ECHR, the judge noted at paragraphs  12  and  13
    the paucity of evidence about the Appellant's  child,  which  precluded
    him from considering Article 8.  He could not have done otherwise,  and
    committed no error of law.  Doubtless seeking to assist the  Appellant,
    he counselled her at paragraph 14 to make a new  application  once  she
    had passed the English language test and to consider utilising a  legal
    representative and to apply for an oral hearing.

10.   No  error  of  law  has  been  established.   The   determination   is
    accordingly upheld.

Decision

11.  The original determination does not contain any error of law  which  is
    material, and is upheld.



Signed        Date 17 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

