
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25115/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd February 2016                |On 3rd March 2016                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                MONEEBA ROUF
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

    1. The Respondent, who was born on 21 September 1991, is a  national  of
       Pakistan. She entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
       Student Migrant with leave to remain until 17 July 2014. However,  on
       6 December 2013 she was served with an IS151A after being encountered
       breaching the restrictions on her right to take up employment.

    2. On 28 April 2014 the Respondent applied for leave on the basis of her
       rights under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.
       Then on 8 May 2014 she applied for  an  EEA  residence  card  as  the
       spouse of a national of Portugal. This application was refused  on  6
       June 2014 on the basis that she had not  provided  a  valid  marriage
       certificate and that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish
       that she was in a durable relationship.

    3. The Respondent appealed against this decision on 12 June 2014 and her
       appeal was allowed on a limited basis by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Moore on 4 August 2015. The Appellant appealed on 13 August 2015  and
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid granted her permission to appeal on  7
       January 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

    4. The Respondent was not represented at the error of  law  hearing  and
       did not appear at the hearing herself. I  note  that  notice  of  the
       hearing was sent to the Respondent on 29 January 2016 and she has not
       sought an adjournment or written to say that she could not attend the
       hearing. Therefore, I am satisfied that she has been notified of  the
       hearing and consider that it  is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
       proceed in her absence pursuant to  regulation  38  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008..

    5. The Home Office Presenting Officer informed me  that  the  Respondent
       has applied for asylum in the United Kingdom. She also said that  she
       relied on the Respondent's grounds of appeal, which submitted that it
       was not necessary to consider regulation  17(4)  of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 if it had been  found  that
       the Respondent was not an extended family member of an EEA national.

Findings

    6. At paragraph 19 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore
       found that at no stage had  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department considered her discretion under regulation  17(4)  of  the
       2006 Regulations and "that in those circumstances and  in  accordance
       with case law [Ihemedu (OFMs-  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340
       (IAC) the proper approach is to  allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited
       extent that it is remitted back to the [Secretary of State] to make a
       lawful decision".

    7. However, regulation 17(4) states that:

       "The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an  extended
       family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is  not  an  EEA
       national on application if-

             a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
                member is a qualified person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
                permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

             b) in all the circumstances it  appears  to  the  Secretary  of
                State appropriate to issue the residence card".

    8. I find that the wording of regulation 17(4)  clearly  indicates  that
       the Secretary of State is only required to  exercise  her  discretion
       under regulation 17(4)(b) and consider whether it was appropriate  to
       issue the Respondent with a residence card, if she had firstly  found
       that the Respondent was an extended family member of an EEA national.
       In paragraph 14 his decision the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  reminded
       himself that in order to qualify as an extended family member for the
       purposes of regulation 8, the Respondent had to  establish  that  she
       was in a durable relationship with an EEA national. Then in paragraph
       15 of his decision he found that there was no credible  and  reliable
       evidence before him demonstrating that there  was  any  such  durable
       relationship and in paragraph 16 he found that he was  not  satisfied
       that  the  Respondent  met  the  requirements  of  regulation   8(5).
       Therefore, there was no such preliminary finding which would  require
       a consideration under regulation 17(4).

    9. I also note that in paragraph 12 of Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria
       [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  regulation
       17(4)  of  the  2006  Regulations  confers  on   the   decision-maker
       discretion as to whether a person found to be an OFM/extended  family
       member is to be granted a residence card.

   10. For these reasons I am satisfied that there were material  errors  of
       law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision to remit the case and
       that his decision should be set aside.

   11. The Respondent has not challenged any of the findings of fact reached
       by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to the substance of  the
       appeal.  Neither  has  she  cross-appealed  against  his  finding  in
       paragraph 13 of his decision that the Respondent was not entitled  to
       a residence card as a family member of an EEA national or his finding
       in paragraphs 14 and 16 that she was not entitled to a residence card
       as an extended family member.  Therefore, these findings  stand  and,
       acting as a first-tier tribunal judge, I confirm on the basis of  the
       findings  of  fact  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  that  the
       Respondent is not entitled to an EEA residence card.

Decision

  1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore's decision to remit the case  back  to
       the Appellant to make a lawful decision did include  material  errors
       of law and I set this aside.

    2. There was no cross-appeal against  the  findings  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge that  the  Respondent  was  not  entitled  to  an  EEA
       residence card and I uphold this decision and dismiss the  appeal  by
       the Respondent against the decision made by the  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department on 6 June 2014.




       Nadine Finch


       Upper Tribunal Judge Finch   Date: 22 February 2016
