
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/25887/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 November 2017                    |           On 28 November 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    M I C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

     THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a  national  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  5
    January 1992,  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 2 July 2015 to  refuse  the  appellant
    leave to remain under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  In a decision promulgated on 19 December  2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Haria dismissed the appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission.  The respondent  in  a  Rule  24
    notice dated 3 October 2017  confirmed  that  the  respondent  did  not
    oppose the appellant's application for permission to appeal and invited
    the Tribunal to determine the appeal with a  fresh  oral  (continuance)
    hearing to consider whether the appellant should have  the  benefit  of
    the policy outlined in SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act)  Albania
    [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).

 3. That is the correct approach.  The judge failed to adequately  consider
    the  status  of  the  appellant's  child  as  a  British  national  and
    specifically the respondent's guidance in relation to the treatment  of
    cases involving British children.  That was an error of law.

 4. It was not disputed by either party that I could remake the  Article  8
    decision in the  Upper  Tribunal  or  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    factual  findings  including   regarding   the   genuineness   of   the
    relationships should be preserved.

    Remaking the Decision under Article 8

 5. Mr Jarvis made detailed submissions in relation to Appendix FM.  It was
    not disputed that this was a ten year case under the partner route.

 6. Appendix FM R-LTRP provides:

         "Requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner

         R-LTRP.1.1.   The requirements to  be  met  for  limited  leave  to
                    remain as a partner are:

                    (a)    the applicant and their partner must  be  in  the
                        UK;

                    (b)    the applicant must have made a valid  application
                        for limited or indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
                        partner; and either

                    (c)

                        (i)    the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                             under  Section  S-LTR:  Suitability  leave   to
                             remain; and

                        (ii)   the applicant meets all of the  requirements
                             of Section E-LTRP:  Eligibility  for  leave  to
                             remain as a partner; or

                    (d)

                        (i)    the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                             under  Section  S-LTR:  Suitability  leave   to
                             remain; and

                        (ii)   the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
                             paragraphs   E-LTRP.1.2.   -   1.12.   and   E-
                             LTRP.2.1.; and

                        (iii)  paragraph EX.1. applies."

 7.  It  was  not  disputed  by  Mr  Jarvis  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) and (ii).  In relation to
    (iii) Mr Jarvis submitted that paragraph EX.1. does not apply in a case
    such as the appellant's.  Paragraph EX.1. provides as follows:

         "Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain
         as a partner or parent

         EX.1.    This paragraph applies if

                (a)

                    (i)     the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental  relationship   with   a   child   who   -



                        (aa)   is under the age of 18, was under the age of
                             18 years when the applicant was  first  granted
                             leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                        (bb)   is in the UK;

                        (cc)   is a British citizen or has lived in the  UK
                             continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years
                             immediately preceding the date of  application;
                             and

                    (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom or

                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.    For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life outside the UK and which  could
                not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship  for
                the applicant or their partner."

 8. It was Mr Jarvis' submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    expecting the child to leave in this case and therefore  the  appellant
    could not qualify under EX.1.  I do not agree with  the  argument  that
    the appellant cannot succeed under EX.1.  In assessing whether it would
    be reasonable for the appellant's child to leave the  UK  I  must  take
    into consideration that it is accepted that it is unreasonable  by  the
    respondent in the guidance.  I must consider the best interests of  the
    appellant's British citizen child.  I  accept  that  citizenship  is  a
    weighty factor.  The appellant's child is still  relatively  young  but
    there is evidence of her extended family in the UK including her  aunts
    and uncles and that she had a special bond with her family as the child
    was the first grandchild and nephew of the family.  I am satisfied that
    the best interests of the child would be best served  by  remaining  in
    the UK.  Whilst she is sufficiently young to be able to adapt  to  life
    in Bangladesh with the support of her parents, given that the  majority
    of the appellant's wife's family are living in the UK it is  likely  to
    be difficult to re-establish life in Bangladesh, particularly given the
    young age of the British citizen child.

 9. When considering the reasonableness, whether it be  under  Appendix  FM
    or, if I am  wrong  in  relation  to  the  appellant  succeeding  under
    Appendix FM, under Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the considerations are the same.

10. Section 117B(6) provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

11. As already noted, it was not disputed that the appellant has a  genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  British  citizen  child   and
    therefore Section 117B(6)(a) is satisfied.  I therefore  must  consider
    whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK  in
    accordance with Section 117B(6)(b).  I have taken into account all  the
    relevant factors when assessing reasonableness and not just the  impact
    upon the children, MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 applied.  I
    must take into account, although not a factor in  the  best  interests'
    assessment above, the appellant's immigration history as relied  on  by
    Mr Jarvis, including that he arrived in 2007 and  remained  in  the  UK
    without regularising his leave for some eight years.  I did  take  this
    into account.  However, I have also considered, as not disputed  by  Mr
    Jarvis, that the appellant was 15 years old and a minor when  he  first
    arrived in the UK and was brought by his mother.

12. I must take into account the respondent's policy and its  relevance  to
    the reasonable test, which was addressed in both MA (Pakistan)  and  SF
    and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).  It
    was held in SF and others that the Tribunal ought to take the Secretary
    of State's guidance into account if it points clearly to  a  particular
    outcome.

13.  Paragraph  11.2.3  of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction   on
    "Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:
    10-Year Routes, August 2015" (and Mr Jarvis confirmed that this  policy
    was still in force and was not yet updated although it was likely to be
    updated in the near future) provides as follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

14.  I  have  taken  into  account  that   this   policy   envisages   that
    countervailing circumstances may mean that it is appropriate to  refuse
    leave and I have noted  that  the  appellant  has  a  poor  immigration
    history; although, as also  noted,  this  must  be  considered  in  the
    context that he was brought to the UK as a child, albeit unlawfully, in
    2007 with the assistance of an agent.

15. I accept the appellant's evidence in his witness statement,  which  was
    not specifically disputed, that  his  family  members  from  Bangladesh
    arranged his travel and he had no knowledge of  anything  and  did  not
    know any better as a child.  Upon his arrival in the UK he  lived  with
    his uncle, who helped to financially maintain him.  He subsequently met
    his wife, R B, in 2013, a  British  citizen,  who  has  never  been  to
    Bangladesh.  The genuineness of this relationship and the  relationship
    with his child is not disputed.  I have taken into account  that  there
    are mitigating factors for  the  appellant's  behaviour  including  his
    young age and that he was relying on family relatives, albeit  that  he
    was an adult for some time in the UK prior to seeking to regularise his
    status.

16. I do take into account when considering  reasonableness  therefore  the
    appellant's poor immigration history.

17. I have also considered that the appellant's wife is a  British  citizen
    and has never visited Bangladesh, let alone lived there.   In  all  the
    circumstances therefore, even when the appellant's immigration  history
    is taken into account, it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave  the  UK  and  therefore  paragraph  EX.1.  is  met.   In  the
    alternative, if I am wrong  I  am  satisfied  that  Section  117B(6)(b)
    applies and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    UK.

18. Considering the appellant's appeal outside of the Immigration Rules,  I
    have considered the public interest question.  Under Section 117A(2)  I
    must have regard to the considerations listed in Section 117B, which  I
    have as follows:

 a) Public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control  is
    engaged.  (if I am wrong in relation to my  consideration  of  Appendix
    FM, and EX.1).

 b) It was not disputed before me that the appellant can speak English  and
    therefore there is  no  infringement  of  the  English-speaking  public
    interest.

 c) However, I am satisfied that the economic interest is engaged as it has
    not been demonstrated that the appellant is financially independent  at
    this point.

 d) I must attach little weight to the appellant's private life, which  was
    established at a time when he was in the UK unlawfully.

19. However, having considered all the evidence in the round, together with
    the child's best interests which, I am satisfied, lie in  remaining  in
    the UK with both of his parents, the appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside to the extent outlined above.

    I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Appendix FM
    or, in the alternative, under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the appellant.  I  have  made  such  an  anonymity  order  as  this
decision involves the circumstances of the appellant's minor child.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

