

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25958/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport, Wales                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2014                              |On 12 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Vice President Arfon-Jones

                                   Between

                        BOBBY PREMARAJAN AMARASINGAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:     Mr Syedali (of Counsel), instructed by LG Law Chambers
Respondent:             Mr Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 7th June 2013, whereby the Appellant's application for settlement
    on the basis of 14 years continuous length of residence in  the  United
    Kingdom, coupled with his claim under Article 8 ECHR, was refused.   On
    appeal, the First-Tier Tribunal ("the FtT") overturned the Secretary of
    State's decision on both grounds.

Immigration Rules Framework

 2. The Appellant's application was made and determined  under  the  former
    version of paragraphs 276A and 276B of the  Immigration  Rules.   While
    these provisions of the Rules underwent significant alteration in 2012,
    since the Appellant's application pre-dated 09 July 2012 it was decided
    in accordance with the former paragraph  276B.  Under  this  provision,
    settlement in the United Kingdom could be sought  on  the  basis  of  a
    minimum of  14  years  continuous  residence.   The  second  qualifying
    condition was that there were no public interest reasons  for  refusing
    the application.   The third requirement was framed  in  the  following
    terms:

         "The applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English language and
         sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, unless he is
         under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over at the  time  he  makes  his
         application".

     The Appellant was aged 50 when  his  application  was  made.  Thus  the
    English language requirement applied to him.

 3.  The reference in the new decision letter to "ESOL"  certification  can
    be related to  paragraph  33B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was
    introduced originally on 02 April 2007 (HC398) and amended with  effect
    from 07 April 2010.   At  the  time  when  the  Appellant's  settlement
    application was submitted and determined,  paragraph  33B  was  in  the
    following times:

        "Knowledge of language and life in the United Kingdom


              33B. A person has sufficient knowledge of the English
             language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United
             Kingdom for the purpose of an application for indefinite leave
             to remain under these rules (unless paragraph 33BA applies) if
             -


               (a)    i)   he has attended an ESOL course at an accredited
college;
                     ii)   the course used teaching materials derived from
                           the document entitled "Citizenship Materials for
                           ESOL Learners" (ISBN 1-84478-5424);
                     iii)  he has demonstrated relevant progress in
                           accordance with paragraph 33F;  and
                     iv)   he has attained a relevant qualification; or


               (b)     he has passed the test known as the "Life in the UK
                     Test" administered by learndirect ltd or if taken in
                     the Isle of Man, the test known as the "Life in the UK
                     Test" or if taken in the Bailiwick of Guernsey or the
                     Bailiwick of Jersey, the test known as the
                     "Citizenship Test" administered by an educational
                     institution or other person approved for this purpose
                     by the Lieutenant Governor; or


               (c)     in the case of a person who is the spouse or civil
                     partner or unmarried or same sex partner of:


                     i)     a permanent member of HM Diplomatic Service; or


                     ii)    a comparable UK-based staff member of the
                         British Council on a tour of duty abroad; or
                    iii) a staff member of the Department for International
                         Development who is a British citizen or is settled
                         in the UK, a person designated by the Secretary of
                         State certifies in writing that he has  sufficient
                         knowledge of the English language  and  sufficient
                         knowledge about life in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                         this purpose".

     It is common ground that the Appellant does not  hold  a  qualification
    compliant with paragraph 33B of the Rules.

The Impugned Decision

4.   The Secretary of  State's  refusal  decision  rehearsed,  firstly,  the
    Appellant's immigration history, asserting that he had been  unlawfully
    present in the United  Kingdom  since  March  1994.   In  May  2012  he
    submitted an application for  settlement  on  the  basis  of  14  years
    continuous residence.  The letter continues:

         "On 01 April 2003, paragraphs 276  A-D  of  the  Immigration  Rules
           were introduced to reflect the  previous  Ministerial  statement
           concerning the question of normally regularising the immigration
           status of those who can demonstrate 10 years  continuous  lawful
           residence or who have resided in the United Kingdom for 14 years
           or more either lawfully or unlawfully."

     Continuing, the decision noted that, when requested, the Appellant  had
    provided certain further information.  However:

     ".... You have provided no evidence for the  following  periods,  2005-
           2012 and 1994-2003.  Therefore you have  not  demonstrated  that
           you have been continually resident here in the UK as you claim"

     In the immediately ensuing paragraphs, the frailties  of  the  evidence
    submitted  by  the  Appellant  were  highlighted.   The  decision  then
    addressed a quite separate issue:

     "In addition it is also noted that you have not  provided  a  knowledge
           of life/English speaking other  languages  (ESOL)  certification
           ... therefore  ....  you  cannot  meet  the  requirements  under
           paragraph 276B(iii)".

     This is a reference to the third of the cumulative  requirements  which
    must be satisfied by applicants under paragraph 276B.
   5. In summary, therefore, the Appellant's application for settlement  was
      refused on two grounds.  First, there was insufficient evidence of "at
      least 14 years continuous residence in the United  Kingdom".   Second,
      he did not satisfy the English language requirement.   On  appeal  the
      First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT"), firstly, reversed the first  of these
      grounds. Having considered the evidence of the  Appellant,  supporting
      witnesses and the documentary evidence, the Tribunal pronounced itself
      satisfied that the Appellant had been  continuously  resident  in  the
      United Kingdom as claimed, namely from March 1994  thereby  satisfying
      paragraph 276B(i) of the Rules.   The  Tribunal  then  considered  the
      various factors adumbrated in paragraph 276B(ii), holding  that  there
      were no public interest factors adverse to the Appellant's case.  This
      finding was juxtaposed  with  a  further  finding,  in  the  following
      passage:

     "On my findings the Appellant does not contravene the  requirements  of
           paragraph 276(iii). With respect to sufficient knowledge of  the
           English language and of life in this  country,  in  relation  to
           paragraph  276B(iv)  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
           appropriate knowledge and experience of both".

     This  is  an  abrupt,  unreasoned  and  unparticularised  finding.   In
    particular, the Judge did not address the terms of the  refusal  reason
    (supra) which stated that the Appellant had not provided the  requisite
    ESOL ("English Speaking Other Languages")  certification  or  paragraph
    33B of the Rules. Finally, the Tribunal found that the refusal decision
    represented a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's  right
    to respect for  private  and  family  life.   Accordingly,  the  appeal
    succeeded under both the Immigration Rules and  Article 8 ECHR.

The Issues


6.   The main ground on which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the
    Secretary of State was that  the  FtT's  finding  in  relation  to  the
    English language requirement was, arguably, unreasoned and  irrational.
    Before this Tribunal, both parties were agreed that the  central  issue
    raised by the grounds of appeal was whether the Appellant  had  adduced
    evidence that he had obtained  an  English  language  qualification  in
    accordance with the requirements prescribed in the  Immigration  Rules.
    The permission Judge referred specifically  to  paragraph  33B  of  the
    Rules (supra). This features nowhere in the decision of the FtT.

7.   It is common ground that  paragraph  33B  applied  to  the  Appellant's
    application.  It is agreed that there was no evidence  before  the  FtT
    that  the   Appellant   had   acquired   either   of   the   stipulated
    qualifications.  The effect of this is that the Appellant's application
    did not comply with paragraph 276B(iii) of the Rules and  the  FtT  was
    wrong to find the contrary. Mr Syedali, representing the Appellant, did
    not, realistically, contest this.

8.   In argument, Mr Syedali sought to uphold the decision of the FtT  on  a
    different basis.  This was set forth in paragraph 18  of  his  skeleton
    argument.  The gist of  this  submission  was  that,  at  the  time  of
    determining the  Appellant's  application,  there  existed  a  relevant
    policy which, if properly applied, would have entitled the Appellant to
    succeed in his Article 8 ECHR claim.  We  observed  that,  if  correct,
    this could render the Secretary of State's decision not  in  accordance
    with the law and could, in consequence, provide a sustainable basis for
    upholding the FtT's Article 8 decision.   The reasons for this is that,
    in certain circumstances, the failure of a public authority to  act  in
    accordance with a relevant policy  is  justiciable.   This  species  of
    failure is not confined to judicial review challenges.  Rather, it  can
    be considered by both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal under the "not  in
    accordance with the  law"  ground  of  appeal  enshrined  in  paragraph
    84(1)(e) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

9.   The argument was developed in a somewhat ad hoc manner and  it  plainly
    took the Secretary of State's representative by surprise.  Furthermore,
    it was apparently based on a more  recent  version  of  the  policy  in
    question, rather than the policy in force  at  the  material  time.  In
    these circumstances, with reluctance, we adjourned the hearing  of  the
    appeal, with the following directions:

     a. The Secretary of State was to respond to the Appellant's  argument,
        by 7th April 2014.


     b. The Appellant would rejoin, in writing, by 21st April 2014.

     c. This panel of the Upper Tribunal would then  consider  the  further
        written submissions lodged  and  make  any  additional  directions,
        including directions as to relisting, considered appropriate.

Our Conclusions

10. Although each party purported to  comply  with  these  directions,  the
    response  was unsatisfactory.  As  a  result,  on  11  June  2014,  the
    Tribunal promulgated further directions with a view  to  enhancing  its
    comprehension of the case made by both parties on the discrete, central
    issue which had materialised. While this elicited an improved  response
    on behalf of the Secretary of State,  the  panel  was  left  with  much
    groundwork to carry out.  In particular:

        a) The Applicant's  further  submission  purported  to  rely  on  a
           passage in a November 2011 UKBA policy ("Long Residence"), which
           was  not  attached.   The  policy  excerpts  attached  did   not
           correspond with the submission.  Furthermore, the passage quoted
           in  counsel's  submission,  under  the   Rubric   "Granting   an
           Extension" does not correspond to the relevant  passage  in  the
           November 2011 policy [page 43 of  51].   Thirdly,  we  find  the
           reference to a version of this  policy  from  11  November  2013
           obscure and uninformative.

        b) The further submission on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
           contends that the operative policy is that dated 10  April  2013
           and purports to quote from page 10 of this policy,  the  excerpt
           beginning with the heading "Extension  Requirements".   However,
           the quotation which follows in the submission differs  radically
           from the corresponding passages on pages 10 and 11 of the  April
           2013 policy.  We find this frankly bizarre.

11.   In these circumstances, we are driven to conclude that  the  Appellant
has not  placed    before  the  Tribunal  any  policy  or  guidance  of  the
Secretary of State which advances his case in any way.   In  particular,  we
can find nothing in  the  further  materials  submitted  supportive  of  the
contention that the English language and knowledge about  life  requirements
enshrined in the  former  paragraph  276B(iii)  were  either  disapplied  or
relaxed to the Appellant's advantage.

12.  The Appellant's further submissions also highlighted  that  the  appeal
    had succeeded before the FtT under Article 8 ECHR.  This was challenged
    by the Secretary of State in the permission to appeal  application  and
    was not excluded from the grant  of  permission  to  appeal.  The  sole
    question for the  FtT  was  whether  the  refusal  of  the  Appellant's
    application constituted a disproportionate interference with his  right
    to respect  for  private  and  family  life.   The  question  for  this
    Tribunal, on appeal, is whether the FtT committed any material error of
    law in its consideration and determination of this issue.  Taking  into
    account the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  in  force  when  the
    application was decided (on 07 June 2013), together with  the  guidance
    provided in the leading decision of MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and
    the impact of section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009, we conclude that while the terms of  the  Judge's  self-direction
    could have been more explicit and focussed, the correct test  has  been
    applied in substance.  Thus no error of law was committed.

  13. Accordingly to summarise:

       a) The FtT's conclusion that the  Appellant's  application  satisfied
          paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules is unsustainable.


       b) However, we find no error of law in the FtT's  further  conclusion
          regarding Article 8 ECHR.


 Decision

  14. We affirm the decision of the FtT to allow the appeal under Article  8
      ECHR. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed accordingly.

                                    Signed:      [pic]
                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                    Date:  08 September 2014
