
                                     [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25032/2015
                                                               IA/25034/2015
                                                               IA/25039/2015
                                                               IA/25041/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2016                  |On 24 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       RAM SINGH GILL (1st appellant)
                      BALJEET KAUR KAUR (2nd appellant)
                     GURWINDER KAUR KAUR (3rd appellant)
                       JASKARAN SINGH (4th appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Balroop, Malik Law Chambers Solicitors
(Southall)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (hereinafter referred to
      as the respondent) against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Whitcombe, promulgated on  29  June  2016,  allowing  an  appeal
      against a decision of 26 June 2015 refusing the  appellants  (who  are
      the respondents in the Upper Tribunal) leave to remain in  the  United
      Kingdom based on their private and family lives. The first  appellant,
      born on 4 April 1960, entered the UK illegally and clandestinely on 25
      February 2003 and was served with a form IS 151A that day. The  second
      appellant was born on 10 February 1966. She is the wife of  the  first
      appellant and they are the parents of the third and fourth appellants,
      born on 23 August 1998 and 30 March 1993, respectively. They were  all
      born in India and are citizens of that country. The second, third  and
      fourth appellants entered the UK as visitors on 24 March 2007 and have
      overstayed. Cutting a long story short, the First-tier Tribunal  found
      that the third  appellant  satisfied  the  residence  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) in that she was under 18, that she had  lived
      in the UK for at least 7 years and that it would not be reasonable  to
      expect her to leave the UK. Under reference to  Sections  117B(6)  and
      117D(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  the
      Judge found that the public interest did not require  the  removal  of
      the first and second appellants. Their appeal  was  allowed  on  human
      rights grounds as was that of the fourth appellant.

   2.   The main thrust of the respondent's arguments before us was that the
      Judge had wrongly considered the best interests of the third appellant
      in  isolation  in  considering  the  question  of  reasonableness.  No
      consideration was  given  to  the  family  as  a  whole  or  to  their
      immigration history. The submissions in reply came to be that when the
      determination was looked at as a whole there was no error.  A  further
      argument on behalf of the respondent was that since  the  third  named
      appellant had not been in the UK for 7 years as at  the  date  of  the
      application (7 September 2012) , the Judge should not have allowed her
      appeal under the rules. This was not a matter raised  earlier  and  it
      does not figure in the grant of permission to appeal.  We  propose  to
      say no more about it hereafter.


   3.   Having considered the principal submissions, we are  satisfied  that
      there is an error of law. The First-tier Tribunal appears to have been
      conflated the best interests of the appellant with reasonableness  and
      did not in fact conduct an appropriate balancing exercise.   Reference
      is made throughout the determination to the immigration history but it
      is not entirely clear that that was something which weighed  with  the
      Immigration Judge when deciding the question of reasonableness, as  it
      ought to have been. See MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


   4.   That being so the determination will require to be set  aside  since
      we take the view that the error was a material one.


   5.   In view of the fact that the third appellant, in respect of whom the
      whole appeal appears to hinge, on one view of it at least, is now over
      age 18, it appears to us that the  family  dynamic  may  have  changed
      considerably and further evidence about that will be required so  that
      the whole family situation can be considered anew.


   6.    In these circumstances we consider that the best course will be  to
      remit to the First-tier Tribunal in  order  that  the  matter  can  be
      revisited and the application reheard. Having  said  that,  the  basic
      findings of fact as to the past do not appear to be in issue and  they
      will be maintained.


Notice of Decision


   7.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  of  law
      such that it must be set aside and remade. So the respondent's  appeal
      is allowed. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at  the
      centre where the appeal was  previously  heard  (Judge  Whitcombe  not
      compatible). The basic findings of fact as to the past made  by  Judge
      Whitcombe are not controversial and will be preserved.


   8.   No anonymity direction is made.






                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 24 January 2017


