
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25287/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 September 2017                   |On 14 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                              mr MD TAZUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan dated 5 January 2017 against the decision of the respondent  dated
    14 July 2015 refusing the appellant further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington in the  decision  dated  5
    December 2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal.


 2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
    Hollingworth stating that it is arguable that the Judge,  in  light  of
    the credibility findings made  by  him  that  insufficient  weight  was
    attached to the matrix of factors derived from the evidence provided on
    behalf of the  appellant.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  attached
    insufficient weight to the availability or otherwise of family  support
    on return to Bangladesh. It is also arguable that  the  proportionality
    assessment has  been  affected  given  the  juxtaposition  between  the
    content of the immigration rules and the consideration of whether there
    would be a breach of Article 8 outside them. It is  arguable  that  the
    Judge fell into error in  construing  the  question  of  leave  in  the
    context of the effect of the  service  or  otherwise  of  a  notice  of
    curtailment.

   3. In his decision, Judge Harrington made the following findings which  I
      summarise. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  15  November
      2009 with valid leave as a student and remained with valid leave until
      30 September 2015. On 2 April 2015, whilst he still had  valid  leave,
      the appellant applied further leave to remain as the partner of  [RI],
      a Bangladeshi national present and settled in the United Kingdom.



   4. All the evidence  has  been  considered,  in  particular  the  medical
      evidence in relation to the sponsor. This  shows  that  the  fertility
      enquiries are at a fairly early stage and it is far from  clear  what,
      if any, treatment she would receive on the NHS and what the  prospects
      of success of such treatment would be. The medical evidence shows that
      the sponsor's irregular menstrual cycle is a long-standing  difficulty
      and one of which she was aware when she chose to marry the  appellant.
      It is further noted that there is no evidence from  objective  sources
      as to the medical provision, including costs, in Bangladesh.



   5. Insurmountable obstacles mean the very significant difficulties  which
      would be faced by the applicant and their partner in continuing  their
      family life together outside the United Kingdom and which could not be
      overcome would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
      partner. Both the appellant and sponsor allege they have no longer any
      meaningful contact with their family  in  Bangladesh  and  that  their
      families, including the sponsor's family in  the  United  Kingdom,  to
      integrate into Bangladesh.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor's
      family home has been sold as this is consistent with her relocating to
      the United Kingdom and that the appellant's parents  may  be  somewhat
      unimpressed with them marrying without their consent. However, if  the
      appellant and sponsor were return to Bangladesh, their entire families
      would not simply stand by and watch them fall into destitution. It  is
      noted that the sponsor claims to be very close to her  family  in  the
      United Kingdom and the appellant claims to be financially assisted  by
      his family in the United Kingdom and I  can  see  no  reason  why  the
      support would not continue.


   6. The Judge stated that he was far from convinced that support would  be
      necessary. The appellant and sponsor are both young, fit and  able  to
      work. The appellant has been able to relocate to the United Kingdom on
      his own, find accommodation and when he was permitted  to  do  so,  to
      find employment.  He  can  use  the  same  skills  together  with  the
      education that he has received in  the  United  Kingdom  to  establish
      himself in Bangladesh. This will cause some disruption but it  is  not
      considered that it would come close to very  significant  difficulties
      of very significant hardship. Leaving their friends and family  behind
      in  the  United  Kingdom,  does  not  amount   to   very   significant
      difficulties of very  significant  hardship  and  they  can  make  new
      friends in Bangladesh.



   7. About the fertility issues of the sponsor, on the  information,  would
      not amount  to  very  significant  difficulties  or  very  significant
      hardship. The information does not give details of the  treatment  the
      sponsor is receiving in  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  timescales  of
      prospects of success of the  availability  or  cost  of  treatment  in
      Bangladesh. It is therefore concluded that  relocating  to  Bangladesh
      would not amount to insurmountable obstacles, for  this  reason.  They
      would also not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
      integration into Bangladesh. Whilst the  appellant  has  been  in  the
      United Kingdom for more than six years, he grew up in  Bangladesh  and
      would be able to integrate into that country on return.



   8. The circumstances of the appellant are not  so  compelling  that  they
      amount to a breach of his  or  his  sponsors  Article  8  rights.  The
      appellant  fails  under  paragraph  276  ADE  or  Appendix   FM.   The
      interference with the appellant's and the sponsor's private and family
      life which is potentially  engaged,  is  a  lawful  decision  and  the
      interference is a necessary consequence of the respondent's acting  to
      control immigration for the public well-being and economic welfare  of
      the country and this is a legitimate aim.



   9.  The  interference  is  also  proportionate  and  on  the   issue   of
      proportionality, the entirety of the circumstances  of  the  appellant
      and the sponsor balanced against the provisions of section  117A-D  of
      the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has  been  considered.
      There is a strong public interest in maintaining effective immigration
      control. The appellant's private life was established at the  time  he
      was in the United Kingdom precariously so little weight  is  given  to
      it. The appellant's family life with the sponsor  was  established  at
      the time when he only had limited leave and at a time when he knew his
      leave was liable to be curtailed.



  10. The appellant and sponsor chose to marry, incredibly quickly,  knowing
      that they may not be able to live together in the United  Kingdom  and
      they must bear some  responsibility  for  the  consequences  of  their
      actions.  The  appellant  will  not  have  significant  difficulty  in
      integrating into Bangladesh. The  sponsor  can  choose  to  return  to
      Bangladesh with the appellant and if she did so the parties would  not
      face very significant difficulties or very  significant  hardship.  If
      she were to return to Bangladesh with the appellant, she would be free
      to return to the United Kingdom to visit her family  and  friends.  If
      the sponsor chose to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  privatising  her
      United Kingdom family and friends, she could stay in  touch  with  the
      appellant by telephone and other modern  means  of  communication  and
      could visit him in Bangladesh. The appellant can speak English and has
      been largely financially independent  since  arriving  in  the  United
      Kingdom, albeit slightly precariously as he is reliant  on  others  to
      assist him, but these factors do not tip the balance.


  11. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant states the following  which  I
      summarise.  The  appeal  before  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
      pursuant to EX1 and  Article  8.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  spouse
      who has a right of abode. The respondent refused  the  application  on
      the basis that there would be no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
      life continuing outside the United Kingdom.



  12. The Judge at paragraph 29 and 37 of  the  decision  said  that  he  is
      prepared to accept that the sponsor's family home has been sold and he
      accepts that the appellant has family life in the United Kingdom  with
      the sponsor and a private life, encompassing his friendships, built up
      during his time in the United Kingdom. He accepts the decision of  the
      respondent does interfere with the private and family  life  and  that
      the interference  is  arguably  sufficiently  serious  to  potentially
      engage Article 8.



  13. The Judge having accepted the appellant's relationship is genuine  and
      subsisting failed in  her  assessment  of  the  second  limb  test  of
      insurmountable obstacles. The  appellant  and  sponsor  were  credible
      witlessness is no adverse credibility findings were made by the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge subsequent to her questioning the appellant in the
      absence of the respondent.



  14. The Judge erred by  speculating  on  the  support  available  for  the
      sponsor's and the appellant's return to Bangladesh.  At  the  hearing,
      the Judge cross-examined the sponsor in relation to  this  issue.  The
      sponsor in his evidence said that his family would not assist  him  as
      they are busy with their own lives. The sponsor's father  was  retired
      and her sisters have their own family to take care of. The Judge erred
      by failing to take into account the sponsors oral evidence. The  Judge
      speculated that they can rely on family support  on  their  return  to
      Bangladesh.



  15. The Judge erred in proportionality assessment under paragraph as 117A-
      D. The appellant clearly illustrated a strong command of English as he
      did not require an interpreter and that  he  had  initially  supported
      himself and was supported by his partner.



  16. The Judge erred in her assessment at paragraph 41 and the  application
      of section 117 (4) is flawed. The appellant was residing in the United
      Kingdom lawfully when he started his family  life.  He  had  not  been
      served with a notice of curtailment by the respondent,  therefore  his
      leave to remain was still intact at the time when he  established  his
      family and private life in the United Kingdom. The Judge  stated  that
      the appellant only had limited leave. The appellant's  type  of  leave
      does not form part of the assessment under section 117  (4)  a  rather
      his lawfulness to be resident in the United Kingdom  was  significant.
      Therefore, the Judge failed to give  due  weight  to  the  appellant's
      family life in considering proportionality  under  Article  8.  It  is
      submitted that the correct approach may have  tipped  the  balance  in
      favour of the appellant. In addition, the Judge listed  other  factors
      in his proportionality assessment which was irrelevant at this was  in
      relation to insurmountable or very significant difficulties test.



7.    At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in her decision.

Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the decision

12. It is clear from reading the entirety of the  decision  that  the  Judge
   was aware of the issues in the appeal. In respect  of  EX  1,  the  Judge
   considered whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's
   family life with the sponsor continuing outside the United  Kingdom.  The
   Judge considered the definition of insurmountable obstacles in EX 2. That
   was the correct test to be applied. The Judge  give  cogent  reasons  for
   finding that there would not be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant
   returning to Bangladesh with his sponsor, if that was her wish.


13. He correctly identified that both the sponsor and the appellant grew  up
   in Bangladesh, speak the language and have familiarity with the  culture.
   He also considered that the sponsor had  lived  in  Bangladesh  just  two
   years ago and found it inconceivable that in just two years she has  lost
   friends in Bangladesh albeit, he was prepared to accept that contact  may
   have become less frequent. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   sponsor who has only been in the United Kingdom for two  years  would  be
   able to integrate into Bangladesh rapidly. This was further  strengthened
   by the sponsor's inability to give her evidence in the  English  language
   and she had to use an interpreter.



14. The complaint made against the Judge is  that  he  speculated  that  the
   appellant's family in Bangladesh, who were unimpressed with him  marrying
   without  their  consent,  would  watch  them  fall  into  destitution  in
   Bangladesh. On the evidence, the Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellant who is very close to his family in the United Kingdom  and  who
   has been financially assisted by them in  this  country  would  see  them
   destitute in Bangladesh. The judge was  entitled  to  view  that  if  the
   appellant's family assisted him in the  United  Kingdom,  they  would  if
   necessary, assist him in Bangladesh.  There  is  no  perversity  in  this
   assumption.


15. However, the more and definitive and  important  consideration  for  the
   Judge was that the appellant and her sponsor will not  be  needed  to  be
   supported by anyone on their return  to  Bangladesh  as  there  were  two
   independent adults. The Judge found that if the appellant could  relocate
   to the United  Kingdom  on  his  own  and  find  accommodation  and  when
   permitted to do so found employment and he could use the same  skills  to
   settle back in Bangladesh. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellant has been educated in the United Kingdom which will help him  to
   establish himself in Bangladesh.


16. There is no perversity to this conclusion that  the  appellant  and  the
   sponsor who are adults and self-reliant in this country, can become self-
   reliant in Bangladesh. The appellant did work in the United  Kingdom  and
   can work in Bangladesh. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant
   and the sponsor are adults and will make their own way in  life  as  they
   have done in the United Kingdom.  The  only  reason  that  the  appellant
   required support from his family in the United Kingdom was because he was
   not allowed to work. The appellant will be able to work in Bangladesh and
   will be able to find employment with the education that he has  received.
   I find that there is no material error of law in the  Judge's  conclusion
   that  the  appellant  should  not  require  support  on  his  return   to
   Bangladesh.


17. The Judge noted that the appellant's first study course in this  country
   was in hospitality and tourism after which he extended his  student  visa
   to study business management.  He  noted  however  that  the  appellant's
   course was revoked in around October 2014, the appellant did  not  attend
   any other college and said that he was spending time with  his  wife  and
   was studying at home using the books he bought, the library  and  on  the
   Internet. This illustrated to the Judge that the appellant  continued  to
   live in this country even when he was not studying at an institution.


18. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant and  the  sponsor  may
   find it difficult to relocate to Bangladesh but that does not  mean  that
   these  difficulties   constitute   insurmountable   obstacles   or   very
   significant  difficulties.  Both  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor   are
   Bangladeshi nationals and they will be  returning  to  their  country  of
   origin even though they wish to remain in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge
   rightly pointed out that the appellant and the sponsor's desire  to  live
   in the United Kingdom and continue their family life in this  country  is
   not reason enough under the immigration rules.


19. In respect of Article 8, the complaint made against the  Judge  is  that
   he took into account irrelevant factors and  misunderstood  the  evidence
   that the appellant always had leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
   student and there was no curtailment notice issued against him.  He  said
   that he had established his family and private life at a time when he had
   leave. The point to be made here is that, although the respondent did not
   curtail his leave, for  whatever  reason,  the  appellant  had  not  been
   studying in this country since 2014 but claims he was studying at home. I
   do not understand student visas are granted to those who want to study at
   home with their own books and on the Internet.


20. The appellant's leave has always been precarious even if  he  had  leave
   to remain in this country as a student by the respondent.  The  appellant
   has always been subject to immigration control which means that his leave
   remains precarious. Therefore, the appellant did establish a relationship
   with the sponsor when his immigration  status  was  precarious.  He  also
   married his spouse five days after he met her. He met the  sponsor  on  7
   November and they married on 12 November just after five days. Both  must
   have known that the appellant, who was subject  to  immigration  control,
   might not get further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  Judge
   rightly  pointed  out  that  they  must  bear  responsibility   for   the
   consequences of their actions. There is no material error of law for  the
   Judge to consider this as going against the appellant.


21. The other complaint made against the Judge is that there  was  a  notice
   of curtailment issued to the appellant, when there was no such notice. It
   is alleged that the Judge erroneously took  this  account  in  evaluating
   proportionality. The Judge was aware that the appellant has  not  studied
   in this country since 2014 and wrongly assumed there  must  have  been  a
   curtailment notice.  Even if there was no curtailment notice, it is not a
   material error of law such as to change his final  decision  on  all  the
   evidence in the appeal.


22. The Judge took into account all the evidence  in  this  appeal  and  was
   entitled to find that the appellant is not captured by EX 1. He was  also
   entitled to find that the  respondent's  decision  does  not  breach  the
   appellant's or his sponsors right to a family and  private  life  in  the
   United Kingdom and that there are no  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
   appellant's appeal where he should  be  granted  leave  to  remain  under
   Article 8, when he cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules.
   He then took into account the public interest as he was bound to  do  and
   found that the public interest trumps the interests of the appellant.



23. The appellant's grounds of appeal are no more than a  quarrel  with  the
   Judges findings on the evidence and the conclusions that he reached.  The
   First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision must be upheld  as  it  is  free  of
   material error.

Notice of Decision

The appellants appeal is dismissed under the immigration rules  and  Article
8 and the First-tier Tribunal's decision is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed  by                                    Dated   this   13th   day   of
    September 2017

A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal so the can be no fee order made.
