
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25866/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2018                           |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                             malik waqas arshad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Makol of OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born in June 1989, appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent, taken on 26
    March 2015, to refuse the appellant a residence  card  as  an  extended
    family member of his maternal uncle, a citizen of  Spain,  resident  in
    the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent's reasons for refusal stated that, in order  to  qualify
    for a residence card as an extended family member,  the  appellant  was
    required to produce evidence that he was related as claimed to the  EEA
    national sponsor.  The respondent considered that the appellant had not
    provided evidence in the form either of a valid national passport or ID
    card in respect of the sponsor.  The  letter  of  refusal  stated  that
    information held by the UK Border Agency indicated that an ID card  for
    Mr Mohammad Naeem Bibi had been reported  as  lost  or  stolen  to  the
    relevant authorities in Spain. The respondent also considered that  the
    appellant  had  not  provided  evidence  of  dependency  on  Mr   Bibi,
    immediately prior to entering the United Kingdom  as  required  by  the
    2006 Regulations.

 3. The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross  on  25
    July 2016.  Both the appellant and  the  sponsor  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge and gave evidence,  based  on  their  witness
    statements.  The appellant's witness statement,  dated  25  July  2016,
    stated that prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom, he was  reliant
    upon his sponsor uncle.  The appellant's dependency had begun when  the
    appellant had lived in  his  uncle's  household  in  Pakistan  but  had
    continued after the uncle had left for Europe.  Since the  uncle  moved
    to the United Kingdom in 2013, the appellant had  lived  with  him  and
    received  his  financial  help.   The  appellant  produced  documentary
    evidence to confirm that the appellant and the uncle were living in the
    same house, as well as evidence of financial support.

 4. So far as the identity card issue was  concerned,  the  appellant  said
    that his uncle had lost his wallet in Barcelona and had panicked.   The
    uncle had made a police report and, due to his state  of  mind  at  the
    time, he informed the police that everything  which  had  been  in  his
    wallet, including his identification card, had been lost.  In fact, the
    identification card had been sent to the respondent, in connection with
    the appellant's application.

 5. The witness statement of Mr Bibi dated 25 July 2016, confirmed what the
    appellant had said.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  contain  any  finding
    that the judge was concerned about any aspect of this evidence. Indeed,
    the decision contains no findings of fact.  This is because, after  the
    date of the hearing but before promulgation of the decision, the  Upper
    Tribunal gave its decision in the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), which held that there was no right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent not to grant a residence card to
    a person claiming to be an extended family member.

 7. For that reason, the First-tier Tribunal's decision was that there  was
    no statutory right of appeal.

 8. On 9 November 2017, the  Court  of  Appeal  gave  judgment  in  Kahn  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] [EWCA Civ 1755].  The
    Court of Appeal held that Sala had been  wrongly  decided  and  that  a
    right of appeal did, in fact, exist under the 2006 Regulations.

 9. Five days after the handing down of the judgment in Kahn, the appellant
    filed an application with the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds relied upon Kahn.

10. On 4 January  2018,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal noted that the  grounds  were  over  a
    year out of time.  The First-tier Tribunal judge who refused permission
    considered that an application could have been  made  earlier,  on  the
    basis that Sala was wrongly decided.  Although  the  judge  noted  that
    there was "some merit in the grounds" (as indeed there  was,  following
    Kahn) "given the lengthy delay in applying for  permission  to  appeal,
    the appropriate course of action is to make a fresh application...  for
    leave to remain (sic)."

11. Permission to appeal, was, however, granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the 28  February  2018.   The  basis  upon  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considered it appropriate to grant  permission  need  not  concern  us.
    What matters is that permission was granted.  Accordingly, pursuant  to
    section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2017, the  task
    of the Upper Tribunal is to decide whether there was an error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, such that its decision  should
    be set aside.

12. In the light of Kahn,  it  is  plain  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, based on Sala, was wrong in law.  A right of appeal existed.

13. Accordingly, at the hearing on 19 December  2018,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stated that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.  The
    Upper Tribunal then proceeded to re-make the decision  in  the  appeal.
    It heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement.  The appellant said  that  he  was  still  residing  in  his
    uncle's  house  and  was  dependent  upon  him.   There  was  no  cross
    examination of the appellant.

14. The Upper Tribunal, finds, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  the
    factual position is as stated by the appellant and as supported by  the
    evidence of the sponsor uncle.  We accept  the  appellant's  dependency
    began when he lived in his uncle's household in Pakistan and  continued
    when his uncle moved to Europe.  This has continued in the  UK  as  the
    appellant has lived with and been supported by his uncle here.  We also
    accept that there is an innocent  explanation  for  claiming  that  the
    identification card was lost when it was with  the  respondent.   As  a
    result, the reasons why the respondent  refused  the  application  were
    wrong.  The respondent must now decide, on the basis of  our  decision,
    whether to grant a residence card to the appellant, compatibly with the
    2006 Regulations and the Citizens Directive, upon which they are based.

15. In the course of his submissions, Mr  Deller  raised  the  question  of
    whether, in fact, the 2006 Regulations can be  said  to  apply  to  the
    present appeal.  Paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2016  provides  that,  notwithstanding  the
    revocation of the 2006 Regulations, those Regulations continue to apply
    in respect of an appeal under the 2006 Regulations  "which  is  pending
    (within the meaning of regulation 25(2) of  the  2006  Regulations)  on
    31st January 2017" (paragraph 3 (1)(a)).

16. Regulation 25(2) of the 2006 Regulations provided that "an appeal is to
    be treated as pending during the period when notice of appeal is  given
    and  ending  when  the  appeal  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
    abandoned".

17. Regulation 25(3) of the 2006 Regulations provided that  an  appeal  "is
    not to be treated as finally determined while a further appeal  may  be
    brought; and if such a further appeal is brought, the  original  appeal
    is not to be treated as finally determined until the further appeal  is
    determined, withdrawn or abandoned".

18. Having raised this issue, Mr Deller did not pursue it with any  vigour.
    He was, in our view, correct not to do so.  The  effect  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  means   that,   in   the
    circumstances of  the  present  case,  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not  fall  to  be  treated  as  finally  determined  but,
    instead, is pending.  As a result, the  2006  Regulations  continue  to
    govern the position and a right of appeal under them therefore lies.

19. We do not consider  that  the  circumstances  of  the  present  appeal,
    including the grant of permission  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  make  the
    present case  a  suitable  one  for  making  any  observations  on  the
    circumstances in which, following a binding decision of the kind  found
    in Kahn, cases decided by reference to the law as it was thought to  be
    at the time may  be  the  subject  of  out  of  time  applications  for
    permission to appeal.

    Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law.  The Upper Tribunal sets aside the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    and re-makes the decision by allowing the appeal.




Signed[pic]


The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

21 January 2019
