
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25996/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated  |
|on the papers                              |on 11 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR OBED MINKAH
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation: Neither party was represented.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Ghana who was born on 18 March 1986. I will refer to him as
      the claimant. The Secretary of State  has  been  given  permission  to
      appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes  ("the
      FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision of 29 October 2012 to refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
      residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  the  spouse
      of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  under  the
      provisions of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   2. On 15 May 2012 the claimant applied on the basis of his claimed  proxy
      marriage in Ghana on 28 November 2011  to  his  wife  and  sponsor,  a
      Portuguese citizen. The Secretary of State  refused  his  application.
      The main reason was;
         "It is noted that after close examination of  this  first  schedule
         certificate the purple "wet ink" stamps are found to be  underneath
         the black background demarcation lines of the certificate. In light
         of this the following is stated in this regard; the  purported  wet
         ink stamp has been printed prior  to  the  background  print  being
         generated  on  the  certificate.  The  document  is  not  a  colour
         photocopy as the signatures are input in wet ink. The document  may
         therefore not be an original document. In view of this  we  do  not
         accept  that  the  marriage  was  registered   with   the   correct
         authorities."


   3. The application was  also  refused  because  the  Secretary  of  State
      considered that under Ghanaian law the marriage was invalid because it
      had not been registered within three months. Furthermore, the claimant
      and his partner had not provided information as  to  where  they  were
      living at the time of the marriage. The marriage certificate  was  not
      lawfully issued and the claimed relationship had not been established.


   4. The claimant appealed and asked that the appeal be determined  on  the
      papers which is what the FTTJ did in a determination promulgated on 24
      January 2013. He concluded that the Secretary of  State  had  asserted
      that the marriage certificate was a forgery and the  burden  of  proof
      was on her to prove this. She had not done so.  Furthermore,  she  had
      misdirected herself on the law  relating  to  customary  marriages  in
      Ghana.  He  allowed  the  appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  an
      application for permission to appeal which was refused by a  judge  in
      the First-Tier Tribunal. However, on renewal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      permission to appeal was granted on 6 March 2013.


   5. In response to the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  the  claimant's
      representatives filed a Rule 24 response dated 4 April 2013. This  was
      accompanied by a copy of a formal "Return of Document Request" made by
      the claimant's representatives to the Secretary of  State  asking  for
      the original marriage certificate be returned  so  that  it  could  be
      submitted  to  the  Ghanaian  High  Commission  in  the  UK  for   its
      authenticity to be confirmed.  I  can  find  no  indication  that  the
      Secretary of State has ever responded to this request.


   6. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was referred  to
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss ("the DUTJ") who, in a  determination
      allocated and considered on 28 March 2013 found that the FTTJ made  an
      error of law. He set aside the  FTTJ's  decision  and  re-made  it  by
      dismissing the claimant's appeal. Although his determination is  dated
      4 May 2013 he does not appear to have  seen  the  claimant's  Rule  24
      response dated 4 April 2013.


   7. The claimant's representatives applied to the Upper Tribunal  for  the
      decision of the DUTJ to be set aside under Rule  43  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. The main reason  was  that  the
      Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission  to  appeal  had  directed
      that the claimant's representatives file and serve a written  response
      no later than 6 April 2013. He also directed that the case  should  be
      placed in a paper list for hearing after 20 April 2013.


   8. On 30 May 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer Issued  a  Notice  of  the
      Proposal to Set Aside the Decision of the Upper Tribunal under Rule 43
      which was sent to the parties the following day. The main  reason  was
      that the DUTJ had determined the appeal prematurely and without seeing
      the claimant's Rule 24 response dated 4 April 2013.


   9. The claimant's representatives responded agreeing that the decision of
      the DUTJ should be set aside. The Secretary of State did not  respond.
      On 2 September  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Spencer  set  aside  the
      determination of the DUTJ. He  directed  that  the  appeal  should  be
      determined without  a  hearing  and  that  any  submissions  from  the
      Secretary of State should be received by the Upper Tribunal  no  later
      than 23 September 2013. I can find no such submissions.


  10. In the circumstances my task is to determine on the papers whether the
      FTTJ erred in law and if so whether I should set aside and remake  his
      decision.


  11. Whilst the Secretary of State avoided a  direct  allegation  that  the
      marriage certificate was a forgery I find that the wording used  which
      I have set out in paragraph 2 was in substance an allegation that  the
      claimant had submitted and relied on a document which  was  forged  or
      not genuine. This was the conclusion reached by the FTTJ in  paragraph
      26. It was a conclusion open to him on the evidence. That being so the
      FTTJ correctly stated that it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      establish this to the standard of the balance  of  probabilities.  The
      FTTJ relied on and referred to RP (proof of  forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]
      UKAIT 00086 quoting the head  note  prepared  by  the  author  of  the
      determination which states; "An allegation  of  forgery  needs  to  be
      proved by evidence and by the person making it.  The  procedure  under
      s108 of  the  2002  Act  remains  available  to  respondents.  A  bare
      allegation of forgery or an assertion by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      that he believed the document to be forged can in these  circumstances
      carry no weight. The Tribunal treats a document as forged only on  the
      basis of clear evidence before  it.  KS  (Allegations  by  respondent:
      proof required?) Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00171 should  not  be  read  as
      implying the contrary." I note that  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State
      avoided the use of the word forgery in the reasons for refusal  letter
      there was no such reluctance on her part when  seeking  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


  12. The FTTJ was entitled to rely on the fact that the Secretary of  State
      had not submitted any form of verification report. These  are  usually
      referred to as Document Verification Reports.  Whilst  the  FTTJ  said
      that the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  produce  the  original
      marriage certificate it is clear  that  he  did  not  claim  that  the
      Tribunal would have any "Forensic expertise in identifying  forgeries"
      (paragraph 26) and concluded that it was not necessary to adjourn  and
      order that the  Secretary  of  State  produce  the  original  marriage
      certificate in order to justly and fairly determine the appeal.


  13. In paragraph 29 of the determination the FTTJ  also  referred  to  the
      Secretary of State's Instructions in particular paragraph 15.5.2 which
      states; "Since it is possible for Ghanaians living  outside  Ghana  to
      obtain the proper certificates, certificates of marriage  or  divorce,
      authenticated by the Ghanaian High Commission, should be requested  in
      all cases where the marital status of an applicant is important."  The
      Secretary of State could  have  sought  this  authentication  and  her
      failure to do so was a matter on which the FTTJ was entitled to  rely.
      Although it is not relevant to the question of whether the  FTTJ  made
      an error of law I note that the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed  to
      respond to the claimant's post  decision  request  that  the  original
      marriage certificate be returned so that an application can be made to
      the Ghanaian High Commission for it to be authenticated. I  find  that
      the judge did not err in law in coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      Secretary of State had not established that the  marriage  certificate
      was either forged or not genuine.


  14. I find that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  consider  in  the
      alternative whether the appellant and his partner were  in  a  durable
      relationship. This was raised in paragraph 8 of the grounds of  appeal
      to the First-Tier Tribunal but not addressed by the  FTTJ.  Whilst  it
      was not raised by the Secretary of State in her grounds of  appeal  it
      was an obvious error of which notice was given to the  representatives
      in the notice of the proposal to set aside the decision  of  the  DUTJ
      dated 13 May 2030.


  15. Because of this error of law I set aside  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ
      which I now remake.


  16. I adopt the reasons given by the FTTJ for  coming  to  the  conclusion
      that the Secretary of State has  not  established  that  the  marriage
      certificate was either  forged  or  not  genuine.  I  reach  the  same
      conclusion. This conclusion was not flawed by any error of law  and  I
      adopt it.


  17. However, I reach a different conclusion from the FTTJ in  relation  to
      whether the marriage was valid according to Ghanaian law and should be
      treated as  a  valid  marriage  for  the  purpose  of  the  claimant's
      application. NA (Customary marriage  and  divorce  -  evidence)  Ghana
      [2009] UKAIT 00009 is an authority which,  in  the  absence  of  later
      persuasive evidence I should follow. The expert  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal was that;
         "The most common  form  of  marriage  in  Ghana  is  the  customary
         marriage. It is a type of marriage contracted under the  particular
         tradition and customary practices of  a  group  of  people.  Indeed
         until the introduction of civil marriages by the British in  Ghana,
         then Gold Coast, the  only  form  of  marriage  was  the  customary
         marriage. These days, civil or ordinance  marriages  and  customary
         marriages co-exist and both are legally recognised. It is up to the
         parties to choose which form  of  marriage  they  desire.  A  valid
         customary marriage can  only  be  validly  contracted  between  two
         Ghanaian citizens and both parties must  have  capacity  to  marry.
         This means that there should be no violation of any rule of  tribal
         relationship. These rules differ from tribe to tribe. Thus,  whilst
         in some traditions, a man cannot marry his cousin, other traditions
         accommodate cross-cousin marriages.


  18. I find that the Tribunal in NA accepted this  expert  evidence  before
      summarising their conclusions in paragraph 24 where they said that: "A
      customary marriage is a lawful form of marriage in Ghana which must be
      carried out under the  relevant  particular  tradition  and  customary
      practices."


  19. Whilst the claimant is a Ghanaian citizen his partner is not.  She  is
      Portuguese. In these circumstances the  claimant  fails  to  establish
      that he has entered into a valid marriage or, as  a  result,  that  he
      should be recognised as the family member of an EEA national.


  20. The claimant also submitted that he was an extended family  member  of
      his partner, an EEA national, in accordance  with  the  provisions  of
      Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations. In order to succeed he needs  to
      establish to the standard of the balance of  probabilities  that  they
      are in a durable relationship. The claimant might have  been  able  to
      show this had he and his partner supplied clear and detailed  evidence
      about their relationship  and  asked  for  an  oral  hearing  to  give
      evidence and be cross-examined. I find that there is an  almost  total
      lack of relevant evidence. Neither the claimant's application nor  his
      witness statement provide any help or relevant information There is no
      material which even begins to establish that they  are  in  a  durable
      relationship.


  21. The original grounds of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal do  no  more
      than mention Article 8 human rights  grounds  in  one  sentence;  "The
      decision not to grant a residence card to A interferes with his  human
      rights contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR." The FTTJ  did  not  address
      any Article 8 grounds. Having failed to  establish  that  he  and  his
      partner entered into  a  valid  marriage  or  to  provide  any  useful
      information about their relationship I find that the appellant and his
      partner have failed to show that even to the  low  threshold  required
      interference  with  their  private  or   family   lives   would   have
      consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of
      Article 8.


  22. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and see  no  good
      reason to do so. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake it
      and dismiss the claimant's appeal both under the 2006 Regulations  and
      on Article 8 human rights grounds.






      Signed                                 Date 6 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
