
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25812/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 March 2014                              |On 9April 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               MRS SANA FAYYAZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Asghar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant was born on 19 March 1983 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    She made an application for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The decision was made on 29 October 2012.

2.   The appellant had sought to remain as  a  student  but  the  respondent
    considered that the CAS submitted was not valid and accordingly she did
    not meet the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appeal came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese.



4.    In  addition  to  the  immigration  decision  there  was  raised   for
    consideration by the Tribunal the contention that it  would  be  unsafe
    for the appellant to return to Pakistan given the risk that  she  might
    be subject to an honour killing because of her relationship with a  man
    and falling pregnant as a result.

5.   It was noted  by  the  Judge  that  further  evidence  which  had  been
    directed by the Tribunal had not been served, hence the  appellant  was
    found to be not credible as to the substance of her claim.  Her  appeal
    was dismissed in all respects.

6.   Grounds of appeal were  submitted  against  that  decision  essentially
    taking issue with the  standard  of  proof  that  was  applied  in  the
    circumstances of the case and the unreasoned findings  as  to  internal
    relocation, particularly for  a  single  woman  with  a  child  out  of
    wedlock.

7.   It was also contended that the approach taken to Article 8 of the  ECHR
    was superficial and little regard to be had to the  personal  situation
    and circumstances of the appellant and of her child.

8.   Leave to appeal was granted on such grounds.   Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me in pursuance of that grant.

9.   It is perhaps unnecessary to dwell at length on such grounds as it  was
    most fairly conceded by Mr Wilding, the Senior Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, that he agreed with the grounds  and  that  the  determination
    when read as a whole was defective in many respects.

10.  In the circumstances it was the unanimous view of  the  representatives
    that the matter should be set aside and sent  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a proper and fair hearing of the issues to be carried out.



11.  In the circumstances therefore I set aside the decision that it may  be
    remade.  I have regard to the Senior President's  Practice  Directions,
    particularly to paragraph 7.  It is right and proper that there  should
    be a full hearing on the matter.

12.  However I emphasise that which was emphasised by the  Tribunal  in  the
    past, that it is for  the  appellant  to  adduce  evidence  as  to  her
    situation and circumstances in the  United  Kingdom  and  any  relevant
    evidence relating to the situation which she may face  upon  return  to
    Pakistan.

13.  As I understand the matter she has  not  sought  to  claim  asylum  and
    therefore there is  no interview in connection with her  situation  and
    circumstances.  Thus all parties will be relying upon  her  information
    and statements in order to fairly determine the matter.

14.  Such information or evidence should be served no  later  than  10  days
    before the rehearing.  Any further directions  will  be  given  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  if  required.  I  note  that  no  interpreter  is
    requested.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
