
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25025/2012
     IA/25022/2012
     IA/25024/2012
     IA/25023/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th May 2013                                |On 7th June 2013           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                    BERNARD KODOWU AGBO (first Appellant)
                 JULIANA BOAKYEWA APPIAH (second Appellant)
                 LINUS GAMELI KODOWU AGBO (third Appellant)
                 ELLIOT EDEM KODOWU AGBO (fourth Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss J Onalo of R Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Pleass, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Landes promulgated on 27th February 2013.

 2. The Appellants born 24th May 1972, 10th September 1979,  19th  February
    2009, and 11th October 2010 are  citizens  of  Ghana.   The  first  and
    second Appellants are partners, and are the parents of  the  third  and
    fourth Appellants.

 3. In October 2005 the first Appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  long  residence.   That
    application was refused on 15th January 2008, and the  decision  served
    on the first Appellant's former representatives.

 4. The first Appellant contended that he did  not  receive  that  decision
    until 25th June 2012.  All the Appellants applied for leave to  remain,
    relying upon Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).  The applications were refused on  2nd  November
    2012 and Immigration Decisions made, indicating that decisions had been
    taken to remove the Appellants from the United Kingdom.

 5. The Appellants appealed, and their appeals were heard together by Judge
    Landes on 14th February 2013.  The judge found that the first Appellant
    had not proved that  he  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of fourteen years, and therefore did not qualify  for
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.  The judge also found that
    the Appellants could not benefit under the Immigration Rules introduced
    as from 9th July 2012 by HC 194, and which  were  designed  to  address
    Article 8 claims.   Finally,  the  judge  found  that  the  Appellants'
    appeals could not succeed under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had erred  in  finding  that
    the first Appellant's passport was not genuine, and that the judge  had
    erred  in  not  taking  into  account  that  documents  such  as  a  GP
    registration document and P60s belonging to the first Appellant had not
    been produced at the hearing by the Respondent and therefore could  not
    be relied upon by the first Appellant.

 7. It was also contended that the judge had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    refusal decision made in 2008 had been properly served upon  the  first
    Appellant's previous solicitors, and by concluding  that  such  service
    effectively "stopped the clock" for  the  purposes  of  long  residence
    under the Immigration Rules.  It was also contended that the judge  was
    wrong to attach very little weight to the delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Respondent in dealing with the first Appellant's application, which was
    made in 2005, and the judge had failed to assess the best interests  of
    the minor Appellants.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker in the following terms;


         1.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  dismissed  the  Appellants'
             appeal, brought on human rights grounds, against the  decision
             of the Respondent to remove them from the United Kingdom.
         2.   The Appellants'  claim  had  in  part  been  based  upon  long
             residence.  Central to the issues before the judge was whether
             a passport relied upon was genuine.  The grounds  submit  that
             the evidence was insufficient.  I do not agree.   The  grounds
             make no reference  to  the  proceedings  brought  pursuant  to
             section 108 of the 2002 Act.  I have seen the judge's notes in
             relation to those proceedings.  I am satisfied that there  was
             sufficient evidence for the judge to  make  the  findings  she
             did.
         3.   The remaining grounds  in  general  submit  that  the  judge's
             approach to the issue of proportionality was flawed.  This was
             a very full and carefully considered determination.   Contrary
             to what  is  submitted  in  the  grounds  the  judge  properly
             directed herself with regards to the children;  see  paragraph
             55.
         4.   The judge looked to the totality of the evidence  and  clearly
             found as she was entitled to do that it  was  punctuated  with
             dishonesty and deceit.
         5.   The grounds taken as a whole are no more than  a  disagreement
             with findings of fact all of which were open to the  judge  to
             make.

Submissions

 9. Miss Onalo confirmed that when the grant of permission was received,  a
    telephone call was made to the Tribunal,  as  although  permission  was
    granted, the reasons given indicated that the  judge  had  intended  to
    refuse permission.  Miss Onalo explained that  it  was  confirmed  that
    permission had been granted.

10. When asked why we should not adopt the reasons given by  Judge  Zucker,
    Miss Onalo submitted that the reasons did not deal with all the  issues
    that had been raised in the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

11. When asked to specify what had not been considered Miss Onalo  referred
    to paragraph 5 of the grounds and argued that the judge had been  wrong
    to speculate that it was in the year 2000 that Mamaa  Badu  had  stated
    that she was told that the Appellant had not been in the UK long enough
    to qualify for the long residence concession at  that  time.   We  were
    asked to accept that the judge had speculated in stating  that  it  was
    2000 as the Appellant had started living with Mamaa Badu prior to  that
    date.

12. Miss Onalo also referred to paragraph 6 of the grounds, submitting that
    the document from the Appellant's  doctor  had  been  served  upon  the
    Respondent and the Appellant had not kept a copy.  This document proved
    that the Appellant had registered with his doctor in 1990  but  because
    the Respondent had not produced the document, the Appellant was  unable
    to rely upon it to show continuous residence since  1990.   Miss  Onalo
    accepted, when asked, that  the  Appellant's  representatives  had  not
    sought disclosure of this document from the  Respondent  prior  to  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. It was also submitted by Miss Onalo that the first Appellant  made  his
    application for leave to remain, based on long residence, in 2005,  and
    that he did not receive the Respondent's decision until June 2012,  and
    the judge had erred by finding that there had been good service of that
    decision upon the Appellant's previous representatives in January 2008.

14. We then heard from Miss Pleass, who contended  that  Judge  Zucker  had
    clearly intended to refuse permission to appeal, and that it  had  been
    an error to grant permission.  We were asked to  adopt  Judge  Zucker's
    reasons.

15. In relation to the letter from  the  Appellant's  doctor,  Miss  Pleass
    confirmed that so far as she was aware, it was not in the  Respondent's
    file when the appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal.  She had
    not seen that letter.  In any event she argued that the letter  itself,
    would not prove continuous residence from 1990.  We were asked to  note
    the judge's findings on other documentary evidence, such as  the  first
    Appellant's passport,  and  payslips  which  the  first  Appellant  had
    produced, and referred to in paragraph 29 of the  determination,  which
    did not have standard tax codes, and there was insufficient evidence to
    indicate that the company which claimed to have issued  the  tax  codes
    actually existed.

16. Miss Pleass submitted that Judge Zucker had dealt with all  the  issues
    raised in the grounds, and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    disclosed no error of law.

17. In responding Miss Onalo argued that Judge Zucker had  not  dealt  with
    everything raised in the grounds.  She referred to paragraph 48 of  the
    determination contending that the judge had accepted that the Appellant
    had by the date of hearing lived in the United  Kingdom  "for  at  most
    fourteen years".  That should have been taken into account in assessing
    proportionality.  Miss Onalo also argued that the judge  had  accepted,
    in paragraph 34 of the determination, that Mamaa Badu  was  a  credible
    witness.

Our Conclusions and Reasons

18. Nothing we heard at the hearing persuaded us that we should depart from
    the reasons given by Judge Zucker, when in our view he clearly meant to
    refuse permission to appeal, but in fact granted permission.  We  agree
    with Judge Zucker, that the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not disclose an error of law.

19. Dealing with the issues raised in the grounds, we do not find that  the
    judge erred in her consideration of the first Appellant's passport.  We
    have seen the forgery report that was the  subject  of  an  application
    made pursuant to section 108 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.  The judge made sound evidence based findings  in  concluding
    that the passport was not genuine.  The findings were open  to  her  on
    the evidence, and sustainable.  It is contended in the grounds that the
    judge erred in paragraph 27 of her determination by finding that it was
    in 2000 that Mamaa Badu had stated that she was told that the Appellant
    had not been in the United Kingdom long enough to qualify for the  long
    residence concession.  It is contended that this was unfair speculation
    by the judge, as both the Appellant and Mamaa Badu had stated that they
    lived together between 1998 and 2003.

20. We  believe  that  this  was  a  misunderstanding  by  the  Appellants'
    representatives.  What the judge actually set out in paragraph  27  was
    that if the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 1986  as  he
    claimed, then he would have qualified for long residence by having  had
    fourteen years' residence in 2000, and at that time both he  and  Mamaa
    Badu were living together.  The judge's point was  that  the  Appellant
    could if he had been in the United Kingdom since 1986, have applied for
    leave in 2000 but did not do so.  The judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    making this finding.

21. In paragraph 28 the judge considered the Appellant's contention that  a
    doctor's letter confirmed that he had been registered with that  doctor
    since 1990, but this letter had been given to the  Respondent  and  was
    not produced.  The judge did not  err  in  her  consideration  of  this
    evidence.  The judge was entitled to note that even if the  letter  was
    produced, it did not prove continuous residence since 1990.  The  judge
    noted that the Appellant had been aware since at least June  2012  that
    this evidence was not accepted,  and  that  he  had  not  obtained  his
    medical records to show the  dates  when  he  visited  his  doctor,  or
    produced any further details of his visits to the doctor's surgery.

22. We find no error in paragraph 29 of the  determination,  in  which  the
    judge considered P60  documents  from  Servo  Cleaning  Limited,  which
    related to the first Appellant and were said  to  date  back  to  1991,
    although again these documents had been submitted to the Respondent and
    were not produced.  The judge was entitled to make the point  that  the
    first Appellant had been aware that these documents were  not  accepted
    since at least June 2012, and no further evidence had been produced  to
    indicate that the company existed during the period  in  question,  nor
    was there any evidence from HMRC, to indicate that the first  Appellant
    was recorded as working for Servo Cleaning Limited during that  period.
    The judge was entitled to find that this evidence could not  be  relied
    upon to prove the first Appellant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 1991 and 1998.

23. Paragraph 7 of the grounds refers to the judge being satisfied that the
    Appellant had been residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  1999,  but
    contends that the judge did not dispute that the  Appellant  and  Mamaa
    Badu had known each other before then, and  their  testimony  was  that
    they had known each other from 1997.  The judge made a specific finding
    in paragraph 38 that the first Appellant had been in the United Kingdom
    since 1999.  She did not record that the first Appellant and Mamaa Badu
    had known each other before then, but  recorded  that  they  must  have
    known each other for some time before  the  first  Appellant  moved  to
    Telford, which the judge found to be in the summer of 2003.  There  was
    no error made by the judge in consideration of this issue.

24. Paragraph 8 of the grounds complains about the finding in paragraph  41
    of the determination, in which the judge finds  that  the  Respondent's
    decision  was   properly   served   upon   the   Appellants'   previous
    representatives in January 2008, which meant that after service of that
    notice, no further time in the United Kingdom would count towards  long
    residence.  We are satisfied that the judge did not err in so  finding,
    but note that the judge also considered an alternative  scenario.   The
    judge  went  on  to  consider  what  the  position  would  be,  if  the
    Respondent's decision was only in fact served in June 2012 and  as  the
    judge correctly pointed out, given her finding that the  Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom since  1999,  he  would  not  have  acquired
    fourteen years' residence even by June 2012.

25. The determination was challenged on the basis that  little  weight  had
    been given to the Respondent's delay in dealing  with  the  application
    for leave to remain.  We cannot agree with that submission  as  in  our
    view the judge considered delay, and  the  principles  in  EB  (Kosovo)
    [2008] UKHL 41 in paragraphs 62-64.  She explained that the decision in
    EB (Kosovo) indicated that delay  could  be  relevant  in  three  ways,
    firstly that during any period of delay an Appellant's Article 8  claim
    was likely in fact to strengthen, secondly that although parties  might
    enter into relationships in the knowledge that their status in  the  UK
    was precarious, the expectation would  grow  that  if  the  authorities
    intended to remove a party they would have done so,  and  thirdly  that
    delay might be relevant if shown to be the result  of  a  dysfunctional
    system yielding unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair  outcomes.   The
    judge found in paragraph 64 that delay in  the  second  sense  must  be
    given significant weight in this case, and took this  into  account  in
    conducting the proportionality balancing exercise.

26. We conclude that the judge considered, with care,  the  principles  set
    out in EB (Kosovo), and applied them appropriately.

27. It is also contended on behalf of the Appellants that the judge  failed
    to assess the best interests of the third and fourth Appellants who are
    minor children.  We find this contention to be without foundation.  The
    judge considered the best interests of the children at  paragraphs  55-
    59, and considered them as a  primary  consideration  when  making  the
    proportionality  assessment  required  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.  The  judge  took  into  account  the  young  ages  of  the
    children, and concluded that it is in the best interests of children to
    live with and be brought up by their parents, and correctly applied the
    principles set out in E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315.  We can discern no error in the way that  the  judge
    considered the best interests of the children, and  concluded  that  it
    would be in their best interests to return to Ghana  if  their  parents
    returned.

28. This was a determination prepared with care, and the  judge  took  into
    account all material matters, and did not give weight to any immaterial
    matters, and gave adequate reasons for her findings, and  committed  no
    error of law.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
law.  That decision therefore stands and the appeals are dismissed.







Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date  20th May 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20th May 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

