
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25433/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 RUTA ASEFAW
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Knafler QC and Mr T Hussain, instructed by
                    Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ruta Asefaw, was born on 28 June 1974 and  is  a  female
    citizen of Eritrea.  Following an initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal
    on 25 March 2013, I set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 14 June 2012 and  adjourned  the  appeal  to  a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal at or  following  which  I  would
    remake the decision.   My  reasons  for  finding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law such that its decision  fell  to  be  set
    aside were as follows:

         REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT
         ITS DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

          1. The appellant, Ruta Asefaw, was born on 28 June 1974 and is  a
             citizen of Eritrea.  On 15 January  2008,  the  appellant  was
             arrested having, in September 2007, presented a false  Italian
             passport as evidence of entitlement to work.   On  6  February
             2008, she was convicted at Sheffield Crown Court of an offence
             relating to the false passport and sentenced to twelve months'
             imprisonment.  On 11 June 2008, a decision was made to  deport
             the appellant.  The appellant appealed against  that  decision
             to the First-tier Tribunal (Designated Judge Dearden and Mr  M
             E Fraenkel) which, in a determination promulgated on  14  June
             2012, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
             permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

          2. The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum
             appeal  and  that  part  of  the  determination  is  not   now
             challenged in the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             Those grounds concern the  appellant's  HIV  positive  medical
             condition only.  I shall deal  with  the  grounds  in  reverse
             order.

          3. Ground 2 submits that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  deal
             properly with the appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  appeal.   The
             Tribunal, relying on N (Application  number  26565/05),  found
             that the "majority" of the anti-retroviral drugs  required  by
             the appellant (and as detailed in a report from a Dr Gregg  of
             the Sheffield Teaching Hospital's NHS Trust dated  19  January
             2012) would be available to the appellant in Eritrea.  At [35]
             the Tribunal noted that:

                  "The report from Dr Gregg observes that the appellant  now
                  takes abacavir,  tenofovir,  emtrictabine  and  darunavir,
                  boosted with ritonavir.  When  one  looks  at  A2  of  the
                  respondent's bundle one can immediately see that tenofovir
                  and emtrictabine are available in Eritrea.   One  can  see
                  from B2  of  the  respondent's  bundle  that  abacavir  is
                  available but darunavir and  ritonavir  are  not.   It  is
                  observed that a sub-optimal regime for the appellant would
                  be combivir and lopinavir.  According to  the  information
                  from the respondents both are available in Eritrea."

          4. The Tribunal  went  on  to  record  that  Dr  Gregg  had  been
             concerned that the appellant would not have  access  to  viral
             load  monitoring  and  "therefore...failure  to   respond   to
             treatment would not be detectable".  The Tribunal  noted  that
             the background  material  indicated  that  HIV/AIDS  treatment
             facilities  are  available  to  patients  both  as   out   and
             inpatients and that  viral  load  test  facilities  were  also
             available.  Later at [35], the Tribunal concluded:

                  "In this case we conclude that medical treatment  for  HIV
                  is available for the  appellant  in  Eritrea.   The  exact
                  combination of drugs may not be available to her  but  the
                  majority of the drugs of  which  the  appellant  currently
                  takes  are  available  to  her.   This  appellant  is  not
                  critically ill or close to death and whilst we  are  sorry
                  that she suffers from the HIV condition we decline to find
                  that  her  case  comes   within   the   very   exceptional
                  circumstances as described in N.  Whilst noting  that  the
                  appellant says that she has no  relatives  in  Eritrea  we
                  observe that she has previously, by several  courts,  been
                  found to be an incredible witness.  We do not accept  that
                  she is without relatives to turn to in Eritrea.   On  this
                  basis, we decline to find that returning the appellant  to
                  Eritrea would put the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
                  obligations  under  Articles  3  and  8  because  of   the
                  appellant's ill health."

          5. Mr Hussein, in his oral submissions and the grounds of  appeal
             relied on the Court of Appeal judgement in  DM  Zambia  [2009]
             EWCA Civ 474, in particular [20]:

             While, as I reiterate, we have  not  heard  argument  on  this
             question,  my  tentative  view  is  that  this   manifests   a
             misunderstanding of what  the  Convention  envisages  when  it
             speaks of private life and also of what  it  takes  to  engage
             Article 8. It is sufficient for the  present  to  recall  the
             holding of the European Court of Human Rights in S and Marper
             v UK (application nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04), to the  effect
             that the House of Lords, Baroness Hale excepted, had erred in
             regarding the taking of DNA samples as not engaging Article 8
             at  all.  One  has  to  have   clearly   in   mind   that   in
             Pretty v the United Kingdom (application no. 2346/02)  the
             court found that private  life  included  "the  protection  of
             physical and psychological integrity" and that in YF v Turkey
             (application no. 24209/94) they spoke again  of  private  life
             including "the  physical  and  psychological  integrity  of  a
             person" and that "a person's body concerns the  most  intimate
             aspect of private life". Simply counting the number of friends
             that a person has  in  the  United Kingdom  is  not  how  one
             establishes whether they have a private  life.  To  remove  an
             AIDS sufferer from free care and treatment in one of the  best
             health services in the world, which had rescued her from  what
             would otherwise have been a  terminal  condition,  would  have
             seemed to me, at least unless argument persuaded me otherwise,
             to have been  a  clear  interference  with  her  physical  and
             psychological integrity and thus an invasion  of  her  private
             life requiring justification.

          6. Mr Hussein submitted that it had been wrong for  the  Tribunal
             to conflate  the  grounds  of  the  appellant's  appeal  under
             Articles 3 and 8 ECHR  since  different  considerations  arose
             under each Article.  The approach of the Tribunal appeared  to
             be that, if the appellant could not succeed under  Article  3,
             she must inevitably fail also under Article  8.   However,  Mr
             Hussein submitted,  that  approach  ignored  the  comments  of
             Sedley LJ in DM quoted above; the Tribunal had made no attempt
             to consider the effect upon the appellant's moral and physical
             integrity which would be caused by her removal to Eritrea.

          7. Mrs Pettersen,  for  the  respondent,  acknowledged  that  the
             Tribunal may have erred by conflating Articles 3 and 8 in  its
             analysis.  She submitted that, had the  Tribunal  gone  on  to
             deal separately with  Article  8,  it  would  inevitably  have
             found, in  the  light  of  its  findings  of  fact,  that  the
             appellant's removal would be proportionate.

          8. This appeal raises the difficult question of "medical" appeals
             that potentially engage the operation of both Article 3 and  8
             ECHR.  The Tribunal did deal with the appellant's private life
             in respect of Article 8 at [35] in the following terms.

                  "In this case we have given the appellant the  benefit  of
                  the doubt by finding that she does  have  a  private  life
                  with her friends at the church, although we  observe  that
                  she could have the same private life with  church  friends
                  in Eritrea.  In respect of private life therefore we  find
                  that the first  three  questions  [of  Razgar]  should  be
                  answered  'yes'.   However  in  conducting  the  necessary
                  balancing exercise between the desire of the appellant  to
                  remain in the United Kingdom and the desire of the  United
                  Kingdom  government  to  have   an   orderly   system   of
                  immigration control  in  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
                  country and for the prevention of disorder  and  crime  we
                  find that the balance comes down in favour of  the  United
                  Kingdom government rather than the appellant.  Any private
                  life that has been built up  by  the  appellant  has  been
                  built up when she knew that she had  no  expectation  that
                  she would be allowed  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  indefinitely.  We therefore find the Secretary of  State's
                  decision was proportionate."

          9. Insofar as that analysis deals with aspects of the appellant's
             Article 8 private life other than her medical  condition,  the
             Tribunal has reached a conclusion which was clearly open to it
             on the evidence.  Indeed, it is  a  conclusion  which  is  not
             challenged by Mr Hussein whose focus has  been  entirely  upon
             the appellant's HIV/AIDS condition.   It  is  clear  from  the
             jurisprudence that, in particular circumstances, an  appellant
             may succeed in a medical appeal under Article 8  where  he  or
             she fails under  the  more  rigorous  conditions  required  by
             Article 3.  Mr Hussein submits that this is one of those  rare
             cases and I consider that he may be correct.  What is clear is
             that  the  Tribunal  should  have  addressed  the  appellant's
             medical condition in the context of Article 8 but it failed to
             do so.  For that reason, I find that its determination  should
             be set aside.  I  have  declined  to  proceed  to  remake  the
             decision immediately; I consider that the Upper Tribunal would
             benefit from a further hearing at which new  medical  evidence
             may be adduced dealing inter alia with the observations  which
             the First-tier Tribunal made regarding  the  sub-optimal  drug
             regimes which may be available to  the  appellant  in  Eritrea
             (see above).  I find that there is less merit in the appeal in
             respect of Article 3 ECHR  in  the  light  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal's findings regarding alternative drug  regimes  which
             may be available (albeit sub-optimal and at  a  cost)  to  the
             appellant.  However, given that I am adjourning the appeal for
             a resumed hearing, the Upper Tribunal will be prepared to hear
             argument and  consider  further  evidence  in  respect  of  Mr
             Hussein's Article 3 ECHR submissions also.  For the  avoidance
             of doubt, the resumed hearing will be concerned only with  the
             appellant's  HIV/AIDS  condition;  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             findings regarding her  asylum  appeal  (and  Article  3  ECHR
             insofar as that  part  of  the  appeal  relates  to  the  same
             particulars of the appellant's account as her  asylum  appeal)
             will not be revisited.

         DECISION

             The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14
             June 2012 is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal  will  remake  the
             decision at or following a resumed hearing

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 6 May 2015, Mr S Knafler  QC  and
    Mr T Hussain of Counsel appeared for the Appellant.  Mr  M  Diwnycz,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the  respondent.  I
    was grateful for the attendance of Dr  Julia  Greig.   Dr  Greig  is  a
    consultant physician/honorary senior  clinical  lecturer  at  Sheffield
    Teaching Hospitals.  She has prepared a number  of  reports  concerning
    the Appellant whom she has treated since 2008.  Her  many  reports  are
    contained in the appellant's bundle of documents at [18] et  seq.   The
    most recent report is dated 30 April 2015 but Dr Grieg's oral  evidence
    primarily concerned her report of 12 September 2013 in  which  she  has
    set out in detail the nature  of  the  treatment  which  the  appellant
    requires and the likelihood of the appellant being able to access  such
    treatment in Eritrea.  The appellant has developed two mutations of the
    HIV virus, K65R and also G19E.  The  effect  of  the  mutations  is  to
    render certain drug therapies ineffective in  controlling  her  disease
    and minimising HIV viral load.  At present the appellant  takes,  inter
    alia, Truvada, Avacivr and Darunavir and Ritonavir.  Dr Greig explained
    that this combination of medication has controlled the appellant's  HIV
    condition since the mutations in the virus were identified but, so  far
    as she has been able to ascertain from discussions with drugs companies
    and other investigations, Truvada, Avacivr and Darunavir and  Ritonavir
    are not marketed or available in  Eritrea.   Dr  Greig  said  that  the
    appellant would be likely, notwithstanding the mutations in the  virus,
    to continue to live in the United Kingdom  on  her  current  regime  of
    treatment for months and possibly  years  without  serious  difficulty.
    However, such HIV treatments which are available in Eritrea would  not,
    on account of the mutations in the virus, prove  effective.   She  said
    that one of the available drugs (Kaletra) appeared to be  available  in
    Eritrea only  intermittently;  in  her  report,  Dr  Greig  noted  that
    "patients who take HIV therapy intermittently do worse than  those  who
    take treatment continuously."  She also explained  that  three  of  the
    drugs currently taken by the appellant form the "backbone" of her  drug
    therapy; a "backbone" consisting of fewer than three drugs would simply
    be insufficient to suppress the appellant's viral load in the medium or
    longer term.

 3. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, produced  at  court  a  response  to  a
    Country of Origin Information Request dated 27 June 2014.  The  request
    was brief: "I would like to  know  what  treatments  are  available  in
    Eritrea  for  HIV."   The  response,  apparently  based  entirely  upon
    information available on the MedCo database (a  European  Refugee  Fund
    financed project to  obtain  medical  country  of  origin  information)
    indicted that medical professionals in Eritrea were available to  treat
    those with HIV/AIDS both as outpatients and inpatients.   In  addition,
    laboratory CD4 counts are available together with  viral  load  testing
    facilities.  The report went on to say "in addition, the following  ARV
    drugs are available  in  Eritrea:  Atripla;  Tenofovir;  Entricitabile;
    Efavirenz."  Dr Greig was shown the document  and  made  two  comments.
    First, the mutations in the appellant's HIV virus would mean  that  the
    drugs listed would be wholly ineffective.  Secondly, she said that  she
    was very surprised if count facilities and, indeed,  regular  treatment
    by doctors would be available outside private hospitals.

 4. I shall deal at this point with the document produced  by  Mr  Diwnycz.
    Mr Knafler submitted that the response document listed fewer drugs than
    evidence  submitted  previously  (including  the  Country   of   Origin
    Information Report for Eritrea) had indicated would be  available.   He
    submitted that the situation  of  treatment  of  HIV  in  Eritrea  had,
    therefore, markedly deteriorated.  Whilst I  note  that  submission,  I
    consider  that  the  response  document  needs  to  be   treated   with
    considerable caution.  First, it is  brief  being  based  only  on  one
    source.  Secondly, there was nothing in the document to  indicate  that
    its contents supersede details available in the  existing  COI  Report.
    Thirdly, there is nothing in the response to suggest that the  list  of
    four drugs  is  exclusive  and  that  no  other  drugs  are  available.
    Consequently, I do not accept that, for the purposes of my analysis,  I
    should assume that the only drugs available for HIV in Eritrea are  the
    four drugs listed in the response document.

 5. It would appear from Dr Greig's oral and written evidence the following
    conclusions may  be  drawn.   First,  the  appellant  is  currently  in
    relatively good health on a  stable  drug  regime  notwithstanding  the
    mutations in her virus  which  have  rendered  certain  drug  therapies
    ineffective.  Secondly, drugs are available in  Eritrea  to  treat  HIV
    albeit that treatment on a  regular  basis  may  only  be  obtained  in
    private hospitals.  Mutations in the appellant's virus appear  to  have
    made it much less likely that a sufficient number  of  effective  drugs
    would be available to form the "backbone" of the appellant's  treatment
    and to stabilise her viral load in the longer term.  Whilst  it  cannot
    be said that there is a total absence of treatment available in Eritrea
    there is very likely to be a lack of  regular  treatment  available  to
    treat the appellant's mutated  HIV  virus.   Finally,  in  response  to
    questions  regarding  the  four  drugs  referred  to  in  the  response
    document, Dr Greig said that the  appellant  would  be  likely  to  die
    within two years of return to Eritrea if those drugs and no others were
    available to her.  Death would be likely to occur as a  result  of  the
    appellant being  unable  to  fight  off  opportunistic  and  aggressive
    infections and viruses.

 6. It was against  this  medical  background  that  Mr  Knafler  made  his
    submissions.  I was also assisted by the very helpful skeleton argument
    prepared by Mr Knafler together with Mr Hussian and Mr Cole of  Parker,
    Rhodes Hickmotts.  Mr  Knafler's  submissions  were  divided  into  two
    categories which I shall also adopt, namely Article 3 ECHR and  Article
    8 ECHR.

Article 3 ECHR

 7. The appellant argues that she would face inhuman or degrading treatment
    upon return to Eritrea on account of the fact that she would be  viewed
    as a failed asylum seeker and, as a consequence,  be  detained  without
    medical care.  The COI Report of 18 September 2013 at 28.15 states:

         'Testimonies of returned asylum seekers indicate that  the  act  of
         claiming asylum is perceived by  the  authorities  as  involving  a
         criticism of the government and  -  as  with  all  other  forms  of
         dissent - is therefore  not  tolerated.   Forcibly-returned  asylum
         seekers interviewed by Amnesty International were tortured both  as
         a form of punishment for perceived criticism of the government  and
         for the purposes of interrogation.  According to accounts given  by
         escaped detainees, Eritrean  security  officials  are  particularly
         interested in how asylum seekers fled  the  country,  who  assisted
         them and what they said  against  the  Eritrean  government  during
         their asylum application process.   Returnees  have  reported  that
         under torture or threat of torture, they were forced to state  that
         they have committed treason  by  falsely  claiming  persecution  in
         asylum applications.'

 8. Significantly in the case of the present appellant, the  parties  agree
    that she left Eritrea legally and on her own valid passport.  Given the
    length of time that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom, it is
    possible that passport has now expired but I had no  evidence  to  show
    that that was the case or, if it has expired, that  the  appellant  had
    taken any steps to renew the passport.  How  the  appellant  "fled  the
    country" is therefore not a factor in her case.  In  addition,  country
    guidance on this matter has not altered since  November  2006  when  AH
    (Failed asylum seekers - involuntary returns) Eritrea CG  [2006]  UKAIT
    00078 was promulgated by the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.   That
    Tribunal concluded  that  "neither  involuntary  returnees  nor  failed
    asylum seekers are as such at real risk  on  return  to  Eritrea."   AH
    appears on the list of extant country guidance cases which was  updated
    on 18 February 2015.  I acknowledge that the evidence  upon  which  the
    appellant  relies  postdates  AH.   I  note  that  the  UNHCR   Special
    Rapporteur  writing  in  May  2013  considered  that  "the  forced  and
    supposedly voluntary return of Eritrean citizens to their  country  ...
    despite warning from UNCHR and other international organisations is  of
    grave concern."  However, in my opinion there  is  simply  insufficient
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal for it to  conclude  that  a  failed
    asylum seeker who was forcibly returned to Eritrea but who has not left
    that country unlawfully may be able to return in possession of a  valid
    passport faces a real risk of being detained and tortured  on  arrival.
    Insofar  as  the  appellant  relies  on  Article  3  ECHR  for  reasons
    unconnected with her medical condition, I reject  her  claim  that  she
    faces a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment.  In reaching  that
    finding I  am  reminded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the
    appellant's claim for asylum and that a previous Tribunal as  long  ago
    as December 2003 found  that,  because  the  appellant  had  previously
    possessed a national passport, she would be able  to  obtain  a  travel
    document from the Eritrean embassy.  It is also  significant  that  not
    only did the appellant travel to the United Kingdom on her own passport
    but was granted leave to enter initially as a domestic worker, the same
    status which she had enjoyed upon entry to Saudi Arabia, the country to
    which she had travelled directly from Eritrea in February 2002.

 9. Mr Knafler's next submission brought the appellant's medical  condition
    into the analysis.  He submitted that the appellant  was  likely,  upon
    entering Eritrea, to be detained for a period of time during which  she
    would not have access  to  her  HIV  medication.   In  that  period  of
    detention, the appellant might become prey  to  opportunist  infections
    which might make her ill or even kill her whilst in the extremely  poor
    prison conditions for which Eritrea is notorious.

10. I am not  persuaded  by  that  submission.   First,  the  evidence  (in
    particular, the COI Report of September 2013) gives no clear indication
    of the likely length of any possible detention.  The report notes  that
    "in each case reported to Amnesty International the arrest  took  place
    immediately upon arrival of the  individual  in  Eritrea.   Periods  of
    detention reported to Amnesty International range from a number of days
    to a number of years."  More significantly, as I have found  above  the
    appellant will be able to show that she left Eritrea to work abroad  as
    a domestic worker and did so on a  valid  passport.   Although  she  is
    being deported to Eritrea, it is likely that she will be able to obtain
    a valid travel document if her own passport  has  expired.   I  am  not
    persuaded that she would be treated as  a  rejected  asylum  seeker  or
    potential traitor by the  receiving  Eritrean  authorities.   Secondly,
    even if she were to be detained it is not, in my opinion,  likely  that
    she  would  be  regarded  as  a  significant  threat  by  the  Eritrean
    authorities and that, insofar as any estimate  can  be  given  on  such
    paltry evidence, it is likely that her detention would  last  for  days
    rather than weeks or months.  Although the  matter  was  not  discussed
    with Dr Greig nor is it referred to in the written evidence, I can  see
    no reason why the appellant's doctors, knowing that the appellant would
    imminently return to Eritrea, would not provide her with  a  course  of
    her current drug regime for as long a  period  as  possible  given  the
    likelihood that drugs may be difficult to find in Eritrea.   I  do  not
    find, on the evidence, that, even if she were detained,  the  appellant
    would be prevented from taking any drugs which she had brought with her
    from the United Kingdom.  I do find that she would be likely to  emerge
    from detention (if it occurred at all) having been able to maintain her
    current drug regime throughout the period of detention.  She would not,
    as a result, be susceptible to the opportunist infections  which  might
    harm her.

11. Mr Knafler also relied on the COI Report and other evidence to which  I
    have already referred (the  UNHCR  Report)  which  indicates  that  the
    authorities significantly restrain internal travel  in  Eritrea.   That
    evidence is supported by letter from  the  British  embassy  in  Asmara
    dated 10 August 2010 which indicates that "travel permits are  required
    to  travel  anywhere  in  Eritrea,  travel  to  border  areas  is   not
    permitted."  Only those who have completed their national  service  are
    likely to be able  to  travel  within  the  country.   The  appellant's
    skeleton argument asserts that it would be "highly  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would be able to travel to access medical treatment  even  if
    available for her specific strain of HIV."

12. The problem with the appellant's argument is that there is  no  obvious
    causal link between possible restrictions  on  her  ability  to  travel
    within Eritrea and  her  ability  to  access  drugs  required  for  HIV
    treatment.  The appellant is likely to return to  Asmara  where  it  is
    likely most private and other medical facilities are situated.  If  she
    remains there, she is likely to have the best chance of  accessing  the
    drugs and treatment she requires.  There is no evidence to suggest that
    drugs or treatment may be obtained elsewhere in Eritrea or  that  those
    drugs and treatments might potentially  assist  her  if,  but  for  the
    restrictions on travel, she were able to access them.

13. It is also important to bear in mind that health cases have  particular
    considerations in the context of Article 3 ECHR.  All such cases should
    be considered in the light of N [2005] 2AC 296 and D v  United  Kingdom
    24 EHRR 423.  The Court of Appeal in ZT [2005] EWCA Civ 1421 reiterated
    this fact at [16]:

         "The argument, as a point of law,  is  misconceived.  Soering  came
         nowhere near to laying down any special rule about the behaviour of
         the receiving state, within the ambit of the single rule of article
         3 in terms of inhuman and degrading treatment. What the  Strasbourg
         court did hold, in its paragraphs 104-111, was that if there was  a
         prospect of the "death row phenomenon" being unduly extended  in  a
         particular case, then it would be a breach of  the  basic  rule  of
         article  3  to  return  the  prisoner  to  suffer  that  fate.  The
         prisoner's suffering would, indeed,  be  caused  by  the  laws  and
         procedures of the receiving state, but that was simply a matter  of
         the factual history creating the condition that the  sending  state
         must avoid, and not the reason why article 3 was held to have  been
         breached. Article 3 was breached in that case because, applying the
         general regime of article 3,  a  defined  and  plainly  unjustified
         state of suffering  awaited  the  returned  prisoner.  But  in  the
         particular factual category of health cases, N lays down the  rules
         as to how article 3  should  be  applied.  Those  rules  include  a
         specific requirement of  exceptional  circumstances.  They  do  not
         include a special sub-category, turning on  the  behaviour  of  the
         receiving state, that takes the case outside the normal  article  3
         regime."

14. The court in ZT went on at [18] to observe;

         "That said, I can envisage a case in which the particular treatment
         afforded to an AIDS sufferer on  return,  in  terms  of  ostracism,
         humiliation, or deprivation of basic rights that was added  to  her
         existing medical difficulties, could create an exceptional case  in
         terms of the guidance given by Baroness Hale of Richmond, cited  in
         paragraph 12 above. That would, in the first instance, be a  matter
         for the Secretary of State. In the present case the evidence before
         the IAT came nowhere near to supporting such a contention;  indeed,
         the IAT adopted evidence from the then current CIPU  report  which,
         although making very grim reading,  did  not  paint  a  picture  as
         alarming as that contended for by the appellants in  late  2005.  I
         revert to this aspect of the case at the end of this judgment."

    I am not  satisfied  that  "the  specific  requirement  of  exceptional
    circumstances" has been made out in the present case.  I am aware  that
    the existing country guidance is rather old, it has, significantly, not
    been replaced whilst the evidence which has been adduced does  not,  in
    my opinion, render it reasonably likely that an individual  having  the
    particular characteristics or travel history of  this  appellant  would
    face Article 3 ECHR conditions either directly  at  the  hands  of  the
    Eritrean authorities or as a combination  of  her  treatment  by  those
    authorities and her medical condition.

Article 8 ECHR

15. The law concerning "medical" Article 8 ECHR  cases  has  recently  been
    clarified by the Court of Appeal in GS  (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40.
    Giving the leading judgment, Laws LJ stated at [85 - 87]:

         "85. It is common ground that in cases where the  claimant  resists
             removal to another State  on  health  grounds,  failure  under
             Article 3 does not necessarily entail failure under Article 8.
             In her skeleton argument at paragraph 55 Ms Giovanetti for the
             Secretary of State cites JA (Ivory Coast) &  ES  (Tanzania)  v
             SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353, in which the  appellants  had  been
             given a "de facto commitment" that they would  be  allowed  to
             remain in the UK for treatment. Sedley LJ, with whom  Longmore
             and Aikens LJJ agreed said this at paragraph 17:

                  "There is no fixed relationship between Art. 3 and Art. 8.
                  Typically a finding of a violation of the former may  make
                  a decision on the latter unnecessary; but  the  latter  is
                  not simply a more easily accessed version of  the  former.
                  Each has to be approached and applied on  its  own  terms,
                  and Ms Giovannetti is accordingly  right  not  to  suggest
                  that a claim of the present kind must come within  Art.  3
                  or fail. In this respect, as in others, these  claims  are
                  in Mr Knafler's submission distinct from cases such  as  D
                  and N, in both  of  which  the  appellant's  presence  and
                  treatment in the UK were owed entirely to  their  unlawful
                  entry ..."

          1. If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it  does  here),
             Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate  or  additional
             factual element which brings the case  within  the  Article  8
             paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
             state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm.  That
             approach was, as it seems to me, applied  by  Moses  LJ  (with
             whom McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls  agreed)  in  MM
             (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:

                  "The only  cases  I  can  foresee  where  the  absence  of
                  adequate medical treatment  in  the  country  to  which  a
                  person is to be deported will be relevant to Article 8, is
                  where it is an additional factor  to  be  weighed  in  the
                  balance, with other factors  which  by  themselves  engage
                  Article 8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
                  established firm family ties in  this  country,  then  the
                  availability of continuing medical treatment here, coupled
                  with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for  support,
                  together establish 'private life' under  Article  8.  That
                  conclusion would not involve a comparison between  medical
                  facilities here and those  in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a  finding
                  would not offend the principle expressed  above  that  the
                  United  Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention  obligation  to
                  provide medical treatment here when it is not available in
                  the country to which the appellant is to be deported."

          1. With great respect this seems to me to be entirely  right.  It
             means that a specific case has to be made under Article 8.  It
             is to be noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that  the  rigour
             of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such  cases
             as these applies with no less force  when  the  claim  is  put
             under Article 8:

                  "17. The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not
                      impose any obligation on the  contracting  states  to
                      provide those  liable  to  deportation  with  medical
                      treatment lacking in  their  'home  countries'.  This
                      principle applies even where the consequence will  be
                      that  the  deportee's  life  will  be   significantly
                      shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N  v  Home  Secretary
                      [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008]  47  EHRR
                      885 (paragraph 44)).

                  18.  Although that principle was expressed in those  cases
                      in relation to Article 3, it  is  a  principle  which
                      must apply to Article 8. It makes no sense to  refuse
                      to recognise a 'medical care' obligation in  relation
                      to Article 3, but to acknowledge it  in  relation  to
                      Article 8." "

16. Agreeing with Laws LJ, Underhill LJ consideredthat the  starting  point
    should remain Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 where the House of Lords considered
    that "a decision to remove a person from the United Kingdom where  that
    would prejudice his or her access to medical treatment may in principle
    engage Article 8" {108].  However, Underhill LJ went on to  observe  at
    [110]:

         "However, that raises the question of how, if article 8  is  indeed
         potentially engaged in cases of this  kind,  that  is  reconcilable
         with the principle established in relation  to  article  3  that  a
         member state is under no obligation to permit a  person  to  remain
         for the purpose of obtaining medical treatment not available in the
         country of return. In enunciating that principle in N  neither  the
         House of Lords nor the Strasbourg Court reviewed  its  relationship
         with the potential  engagement  of  article  8  as  established  in
         Bensaid or Razgar: that is indeed one of the criticisms made in the
         judgment of the minority in Strasbourg in N - see para. O-I26  (pp.
         911-2)."

17. He then considered the "no obligation to treat" principle enunciated in
    MM (Zimbabwe) [2014] EWCA Civ 985:

         "It is that question which this Court addressed in  MM  (Zimbabwe).
         Moses LJ, with whom the other members of  the  Court  agreed,  held
         that the "no obligation to treat" principle must apply  equally  in
         the context of article 8: see paras. 17-18 of his  judgment,  which
         Laws LJ sets out at para. 89 above. He then sought to identify what
         role that left for article 8. He acknowledged  that  "despite  that
         clear-cut principle, the courts in the United Kingdom have declined
         to  say  that  Article  8  can  never  be  engaged  by  the  health
         consequences of removal from  the  United  Kingdom",  referring  to
         Razgar and also to AJ (Liberia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 (another mental health  case);  but
         he drew attention to  statements  in  both  cases  emphasising  how
         exceptional the circumstances would have to be before a breach were
         established. In particular, he set out, at para. 20, a  passage  to
         that effect from the opinion of Lady Hale in  Razgar  which  starts
         with the observation that "it is not easy to  think  of  a  foreign
         health care case which would fail under Article 3 but succeed under
         Article 8". He concluded, at para. 23 with a passage which Laws  LJ
         has already quoted but which for ease of reference I will  set  out
         again:

             "The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose, in this
             case, the appellant had established firm family ties  in  this
             country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
             here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
             support, together establish 'private life'  under  Article  8.
             That conclusion would not involve a comparison between medical
             facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such  a  finding  would
             not offend the  principle  expressed  above  that  the  United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the appellant is to be deported."

         There are possibly some ambiguities in the details of the reasoning
         in that passage, but I think it is clear that two essential  points
         are being  made.  First,  the  absence  or  inadequacy  of  medical
         treatment,  even  life-preserving  treatment,  in  the  country  of
         return, cannot be relied on at all as a factor engaging article  8:
         if that is all there is,  the  claim  must  fail.  Secondly,  where
         article 8 is engaged by other factors, the fact that  the  claimant
         is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may  not  be
         available in  the  country  of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
         proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
         itself giving rise to a breach since that would contravene the  "no
         obligation to treat" principle."

18. In the present case, there appears to be no doubt  that  the  treatment
    which the appellant requires is "life preserving"; the evidence  of  Dr
    Greig makes that plain.  As regards the basis upon which the  appellant
    may bring a claim under Article 8, she has  no  family  living  in  the
    United Kingdom but has plainly developed a private  life  here  (as  is
    evidenced by the support she has received from members  of  her  church
    and  community).   The  difficulty  in  accessing  consistent   medical
    treatment in Eritrea may, therefore, be a factor in the proportionality
    exercise but it may not dominate that exercise in  such  a  way  as  to
    contravene the "no obligation to treat"  principle.   It  is  trite  to
    observe the judgements of the  senior  courts  are  important  for  the
    principles of law which they contain rather than because their  factual
    matrices may resemble those in other  cases.   Having  said  that,  the
    circumstances of the current appellant are not dissimilar from those of
    the appellant PL in GS (India) whose appeal Underhill LJ considered  at
    [114]:

         "As for PL, if one leaves aside the issue of  the  unlikelihood  of
         his receiving access to proper  treatment  in  Jamaica,  his  claim
         under article 8 is hopeless. It is true that he  has  been  in  the
         United  Kingdom  since  2001  and  has  formed  friendships   here,
         principally through his church. It was  apparently  on  that  basis
         that the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal, addressing the first two
         of the conventional "Razgar questions", held that his removal would
         interfere with his right to respect for his private life, and to  a
         degree which potentially engaged article 8. But for almost  all  of
         that period he has been here illegally: he was given leave to enter
         only as a  visitor  and  has  been  unlawfully  over-staying  since
         November 2002. He made an asylum claim for the first time  in  2012
         which the Judge found to have no merit. He has no  family  ties  in
         this country. The Judge rightly  held  that  his  friendships  were
         formed in the knowledge that he had no right  to  remain  and  that
         they could not have significant weight in the balance  against  the
         legitimate   interests   of   immigration   control.    In    those
         circumstances, to strike the article 8 balance in his  favour  only
         because of the consequences for his  health  if  he  were  removed,
         however grave, would be in substance to  impose  an  obligation  to
         treat."

19. I have no doubt that the appellant has a strong  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom with friends at church and in her wider community.   The
    appellant had become appeal  rights  exhausted  in  January  2004  and,
    although she made an application for discretionary leave in 2007 (which
    was refused) she remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully and, indeed,
    committed a criminal offence here for which she was sentenced to twelve
    months' imprisonment.  If one were to leave aside the "unlikelihood  of
    her receiving access to proper treatment" in Eritrea her  private  life
    Article 8 claim, like that of  the  appellant  PL,  would  have  to  be
    considered as "hopeless."  She has formed her friendships and  ties  in
    the United Kingdom in the full knowledge  that  she  had  no  right  to
    remain here.  Following the authority of the Court of Appeal in  GS,  I
    am unable to conclude that it is correct in law to tip  the  Article  8
    balance in the appellant's favour simply on account of the consequences
    for her health if she were to be removed to  Eritrea,  "however  grave"
    those consequences may be.  I find that, if I were to allow the  appeal
    on that basis, I would, in the light of the appellant's offending,  the
    public interest concerned with her removal and the fact  that  she  has
    developed a private life in this country knowing that she had no  right
    to be here, would, in effect,  contravene  the  "obligation  to  treat"
    principle.  I must find, on the basis of the  authorities  but  without
    any enthusiasm, that the appellant cannot  succeed  in  her  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  dated  19  August
2011 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


