
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25512/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 September 2013                           |On 9 September 2013          |
|No hearing                                    |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER



                                   Between

                               NADIA NIBIGERA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 28 May 2013.

2.   On 6 August 2013 I granted permission to appeal and gave directions  as
    follows:

         "1.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Burundi  who  applies  for
             permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal dismissing her appeal on immigration and human rights
             grounds.  She is a national of Burundi who entered the UK with
             leave to remain as a student on  17  September  2009  and  her
             leave was subsequently extended until 29  October  2012.   She
             applied for leave to remain as a spouse,  but  she  failed  to
             attend an interview and her application was refused under  the
             provisions of para 322(10) and  para  286  with  reference  to
             284(vi).   The  respondent  not  only  refused  the  variation
             application but made a decision to remove her under s47,  both
             decisions being made in the same document.


         2.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  believe  that  the
             appellant and her husband were credible witnesses and did  not
             believe that their marriage was subsisting.  Her  reasons  are
             set out in [34]  -  [55].   The  judge  also  found  that  the
             application had properly been refused on the basis that  there
             was a failure without providing a  reasonable  explanation  to
             comply with a request made to attend for an interview: [29]  -
             [33].


         3.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge  erred  in  law  by
             failing to find that the removal decision  was  unlawful  and,
             when considering whether the marriage was subsisting, to  take
             into account the guidance set out  in  Goudey  (Sudan)  [2012]
             UKUT 0041.


         4.   However, the position in Goudey was different and dealt with a
             couple who, although living apart, both wanted to be  together
             and live together as husband and wife, whereas in the  present
             appeal the judge was not satisfied for reasons  properly  open
             to her that the marriage was subsisting.  I am satisfied  that
             her findings and conclusions on that issue were properly  open
             to her for the reasons she gave.  In the light of her findings
             on the issue of the marriage, there can be no criticism of her
             findings under article 8.


         5.   However, the judge did not deal with the  appeal  against  the
             removal decision and to this extent  arguably  erred  in  law.
             Permission to appeal is granted on this issue only.


                                  Direction


         My preliminary view is that the appeal relating to  the  lawfulness
         of the decision to make a removal direction should be dealt with on
         the papers and that in the light of the judgment of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in Secretary of State v  Ahmadi  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  512  the
         appeal should be allowed to the extent that the decision to  remove
         is  set  aside  as  not  in   accordance   with   the   law.    Any
         representations to the contrary are to be filed with  the  Tribunal
         within 14 days of receipt of this decision, a copy being served  on
         the other party."


3.   No response has been received from the  appellant  but  the  respondent
    has written to say that the s.47 decision is formally withdrawn.

4.   In these circumstances I am satisfied that the proper  course  in  this
    appeal is for it to be determined without  a  hearing.   Permission  to
    appeal was only granted on the issue of the lawfulness of  the  removal
    decision. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  by
    failing to find that that decision was not in accordance with the  law,
    a conclusion confirmed by the Court of Appeal in the Secretary of State
    v Ahmadi.  I set the decision aside to the extent that it dismissed the
    appeal against the removal decision.

5.   I would have substituted a decision allowing the appeal  on  the  basis
    that the decision to remove was not in accordance with the law but  the
    respondent has now withdrawn the s.47 decision.

Decision

6.   The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  The  decision  dismissing  the
    appeal is set aside in relation to the removal decision only.  I record
    that the removal decision has been withdrawn by the  respondent.   Save
    as aforesaid the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.





Signed                                  Date: 6 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

