
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25623/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2014                            |On 29 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                                   (Given orally at hearing)

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                           MELINDA CALLANTA MARCO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Islam, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of the Philippines, born on  18  April
    1964 has been granted permission to appeal against the determination of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull, promulgated on  19  November  2013  by
    which the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the  respondent  made  on  11  June  2013  to  refuse  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave to remain by way of the grant of further leave.

 2. The issue to be addressed is whether, in proceeding with the hearing on
    6 November 2013 in the absence of the appellant or any  representative,
    the judge made an error of law such as to require that her decision  be
    set aside and the appeal either remitted to  be  heard  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, or decision re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appellant's case is that the  judge  was  wrong  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing because on the basis of the information that was  available  to
    her, the only proper response was to grant an adjournment to enable the
    appellant to attend on another day.   The respondent submits  that  the
    judge made no error of law in proceeding with the hearing  because,  on
    the basis of the facts and the situation as it was  before  the  judge,
    she was entitled to proceed as she did.

 3. In order to resolve this question, I look  at  the  process  of  events
    leading to the hearing on 6 November.  After notice of that hearing had
    been sent to the parties, the appellant's representatives sent a letter
    dated 14 October 2013 to the Tribunal  saying  that  their  client  was
    unable to attend the hearing at Birmingham on 6  November  because  she
    was living closer to London and it would be more convenient for her  to
    attend  a  hearing  in  London.   That,  therefore,  amounted   to   an
    application for an adjournment of the hearing and  for  it  to  be  re-
    listed at a London venue.  By a letter dated 4 November 2013 the First-
    tier Tribunal refused that application so that all  concerned  were  on
    notice that the hearing would proceed on 6  November.   On  5  November
    2013, the appellant's representatives sent  a  fax  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal asking for an adjournment on the basis that the appellant  was
    unwell.  That came before the judge who said at paragraph  [4]  of  her
    determination:

          "The  Tribunal  received  a  fax  dated  5  November   2013   from
          Immigration and Work Permit asking  that  the  appellant's  appeal
          hearing be adjourned because the appellant had been "laid  up  and
          she is not able to  travel  from  London  to  Birmingham  to  give
          evidence in the hearing...we request the  honourable  Tribunal  to
          adjourn the above mentioned hearing.   Medical  evidence  in  this
          regards will be sent to the Tribunal at the earliest.""

 4. The judge looked at that request and caused a telephone call to be made
    by a clerk of the Tribunal to the representatives to ascertain  whether
    the appellant would be attending the hearing, and also to discover  why
    no representative was present.    The  response  from  the  appellant's
    representatives was that no one would be attending  and  the  appellant
    was sick.  The judge noted that no  evidence  of  the  appellant's  ill
    health had been provided and that no satisfactory explanation had  been
    offered by the representative as to why they had not attended  and,  in
    the context that  the  earlier  application  for  the  adjournment  had
    already been refused, she decided to exercise her discretion to proceed
    with the appeal in the absence of the appellant and representative.

 5. We now have, as was recognised by the judge who granted  permission  to
    appeal, a letter from the appellant's doctor, Dr Debs Lawton,  dated  6
    November 2013, confirming a diagnosis of  gastroenteritis  following  a
    visit by the appellant to  the  surgery  on  5  November;  that  letter
    stating also that the appellant would not be able to  travel  by  train
    because of diarrhoea.  Curiously, that  letter  was  not  sent  to  the
    Tribunal until 19 November, which was the day after  the  determination
    had been written.  I am told today that the reason  that  letter  could
    not be sent to the Tribunal on the day of the hearing, 6  November,  or
    indeed 5 November  (the  date  of  the  consultation)  is  because  the
    document was not created until subsequently so that it was backdated to
    6 November.  I have to  say  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  credible
    explanation as to why a reputable organisation such as  the  office  of
    the appellants doctor would choose to back-date such  a  letter,  I  am
    simply unable to accept that to be an accurate description  of  events,
    and I am not prepared to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  Fairbrook
    Medical Centre backdated the letter, that being the reason why  it  was
    not available until the date it was provided.

 6. I asked for an explanation as to why, even if the appellant was  unable
    to attend, the  representatives  did  not  attend  the  hearing  on  16
    November  at  Birmingham,  as  they  were  on   the   record   as   the
    representatives.   I  am  told  that  this  is  because  the  appellant
    instructed  her  representatives  not  to  attend.   Thus  either   the
    adjournment would be granted on the day by the judge,  or  the  hearing
    would not be able  to  proceed  because  there  was  no  representative
    present.    That,   of   course,   is   wholly   unacceptable.      The
    representatives have a duty to attend whilst they remain on the record,
    whether or not the appellant herself does.

 7. The decision of the judge was informed, of course by  rule  19  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, which  provides
    as follows:

          19 Hearing appeal in absence of a party

          (1) The Tribunal may hear an appeal in the absence of a party  or
          his representative, if satisfied that-

             (a) the party or his representative has been  given  notice  of
             the date, time and place of the hearing, and

             (b) there is no good reason for such absence.

            (2) Where paragraph (1) does not apply, the Tribunal  may  hear
          an appeal in the absence of a party    if satisfied that-

             (a) a representative of the party is present at the hearing;

             (b) the party is outside the United Kingdom;

             (c) the party is suffering from a communicable disease or there
             is a risk of him behaving in a violent or disorderly manner;

             (d) the party is  unable  to  attend  the  hearing  because  of
             illness, accident or some other good reason;

             (e) the party is unrepresented and it is impracticable to  give
             him notice of the hearing; or



                        (f) the party has notified the Tribunal that he does
       not wish to attend the hearing.

 8. Drawing all this together, I am in no doubt at all that on the basis of
    the information available to the judge, she  was  entitled  to  proceed
    with the hearing and she made no error of law in doing  so.    No  good
    reason was provided for the absence of the  appellant's  representative
    and no evidence was offered of the asserted illness, which was bound to
    be assessed in the light of the earlier refusal to adjourn for  reasons
    concerning the appellant's  convenience  rather  than  her  ability  to
    attend the hearing. I maintain that assessment  as  being  the  correct
    one, even in the light of the letter that subsequently  came  from  the
    doctor confirming a diagnosis  of  gastroenteritis  and  expressing  an
    opinion that the appellant should not travel.  In any event, I  invited
    Mr Islam today to set out the factors, if taken at their  very  highest
    and if taken as unchallenged, which he said  would  have  entitled  the
    appellant to succeed on human rights grounds.   Those  factors  can  be
    summarised as follows:

 9. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009 as a student.  That
    leave was extended but subsequently in August 2012 she was given notice
    of curtailment of leave because the college sponsor  licence  had  been
    withdrawn although she was given until 27 October 2012 in order to make
    arrangements for an alternative college.  A few days before that  leave
    expired she submitted the application,  not  for  further  leave  as  a
    student, but outside the rules  on  human  rights  grounds.   Mr  Islam
    points out that while she has been here, the appellant has not drawn on
    public funds; she has studied; she has paid fees for a course which she
    was unable to complete because of the withdrawal of the sponsor licence
    and it was no fault of hers that her studies came to  an  end  in  that
    way.   She  has  insufficient  funds  to  start  another  course;   she
    subsequently  sought  to  regularise  her   status   by   making   this
    application; she has no savings left with which to re-establish herself
    in the Philippines and has no job to return to; and in any event wishes
    to stay to make a life for herself in  the  United  Kingdom  where  she
    hopes to find work and enjoy the private life, which of course, she has
    built up since 2009.  There is no element of  family  life  arising  in
    this case.

10. It is plain beyond doubt that this is a claim which could not  possibly
    succeed on human rights grounds.  The assertion  that  the  refusal  to
    vary leave by the grant of further leave  in  these  circumstances  was
    such as to disclose an impermissible infringement of  rights  protected
    by Article 8 of the ECHR is wholly  unarguable.   This  reinforces  the
    conclusion I have already reached that the judge made no error  of  law
    that was material to the outcome  of  this  appeal  and  therefore  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal will be dismissed.





                                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                       Date: 21 January 2014
