

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: IA/25611/2014
      IA/25615/2014





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgations|
|On 11th April  2016             |On 13th April 2016              |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 [STELLA D]
                                    [L D]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Mr Olawanle (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The appellants  are  related
       in that the first-named and second-named appellants are  mother  and
       daughter. The first-named appellant  claimed  to  have  entered  the
       United Kingdom in 1999 and  having  married  [Stephane  D],  an  EEA
       national, she was granted a  residence  card  as  his  dependant  on
       September 3, 2002 which allowed her to remain in the United  Kingdom
       until November 20, 2007.

    2. The first appellant and her husband have two  children  namely  [ND]
       who was born on [ ] 2004 and the second-named  appellant  born  [  ]
       2007.

    3. After the first-named appellant's leave expired she remained in  the
       United Kingdom as an overstayer. She lodged an application for leave
       to remain on human rights grounds on behalf of herself and  her  two
       children on July 5, 2012.  This was  refused,  without  a  right  of
       appeal, on July 22, 2013.

    4. Following submission of a pre-action protocol letter on  October  4,
       2013 the respondent agreed to reconsider the application and on June
       3, 2014 the  respondent  refused  the  application  and  issued  the
       appellants with removal directions on June 3, 2014.

    5. On October 28, 2014 [ND] was granted British citizenship  under  the
       British Nationality Act 1981 based on the fact she had lived in  the
       United Kingdom for ten years.

    6. The appellants appealed the decisions to remove  them  on  June  17,
       2014 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002.

    7. The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Goodrich
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on July 21,  2015  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on August 27,  2015  she  refused  the  appeals
       under both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

    8. The appellants lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  September  14,  2015
       submitting the First-tier Judge had erred in  her  approach  to  the
       issue of article 8 ECHR. Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler
       refused permission to appeal finding the conclusions  were  open  to
       the Judge.

    9. The appellants renewed their grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
       and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  gave  permission  to  appeal  on
       February 15, 2016 on the basis it was arguable the Judge  had  erred
       by failing to apply the principles in  Sanade  and  others  (British
       children-Zambrano-Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).

   10. In a Rule 24 letter dated March 16, 2016 the respondent opposed  the
       appeal arguing the findings made were open to the Judge and  it  was
       wrong for Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer to raise a new matter. .

   11. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives after which I reserved my decision.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make no order.

SUBMISSIONS

   13. Mr Olawanle submitted the first-named  appellant  had  been  in  the
       United Kingdom since  1999  and  had  been  here  legally  when  she
       conceived her two children. She was now  a  single  parent  and  the
       Judge found that the children's father, her husband, had no  contact
       with the children and by implication the  first-named  appellant  as
       well. He pointed  out  that  the  first-named  appellant  had  never
       claimed in her application or statement to have  any  dealings  with
       her husband and  that  information  about  her  husband  only  arose
       following questions put to her  by  the  Judge  but  the  Judge  had
       rejected her evidence on this point.  Although  not  raised  at  the
       hearing Mr Olawanle submitted that the Judge had erred in failing to
       have regard to the principles in Sanade because she  had  failed  to
       give sufficient weight to the fact the first-named appellant's other
       child was British citizen and it would be  unreasonable  to  require
       that child to leave the United Kingdom. Mr Olawanle also referred to
       the recent decision of PD and  others  (Article  8-conjoined  family
       claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 and submitted the  Judge  failed
       to have regard to the principles set out in that decision.

   14. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted
       that this was never a Zambrano appeal. The fact there was no contact
       between the children's father and the father did not mean  he  would
       be unable to care for them in the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  was
       aware of all of the facts of  the  case  including  [ND]'s  acquired
       nationality. The decision had been open to the Judge.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   15.  The  appellants'  original  applications  were  brought  under  the
       Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR. The grounds seeking permission
       to  appeal  did  not  challenge  the  Judge's   rejection   of   the
       applications under the Rules but instead challenged her decision  on
       general human rights grounds.

   16. In giving permission Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  raised  a  matter
       that apparently had not been argued  before  the  Judge  namely  the
       principles of Sanade.

   17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted, contrary to the content of  the  Rule
       24 letter, that permission to appeal could be given on any  relevant
       point of law.  The  issue  was  whether  the  Judge's  decision  was
       reasoned enough in relation to the fact [ND], a child/sibling, was a
       British citizen.

   18. The appellants were represented by the same representative  in  both
       the First-tier and at the hearing today. It is clear the  Judge  was
       alive  to  possible  EEA  issues  because  in  paragraph  [27]   she
       considered the position of the first-named appellant's husband.  The
       Judge was clearly considering whether the first-named appellant  had
       retained rights of residence. The question of  whether  her  husband
       had permanent residence was not something considered as there was no
       evidence he had exercised treaty rights. Having considered the first-
       named appellant's oral evidence and her written evidence  the  Judge
       concluded in both paragraphs [27] and [34] of her decision that  the
       appellants' husband/father was not in contact with the appellants.

   19. The Judge therefore had to approach the appeals  from  the  starting
       point that the children were living with their mother who was  their
       sole parent  and  with  sole  responsibility.  As  stated  above  Mr
       Olawanle did not appeal the decision on  the  grounds  the  decision
       under the Rules was incorrect but instead argued that following  the
       decision of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  the  Judge  had  erred  by
       punishing the second-named appellant for the first-named appellant's
       poor  immigration  history  and  should  have   concluded   it   was
       unreasonable to expect the second-named  appellant  and  her  sister
       (now a British citizen) to leave the United Kingdom  for  a  country
       they had never been to in their lives.

   20. In Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]
       UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Tribunal held that Ruiz Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-
       34/09 "now makes it  clear  that  where  the  child  or  indeed  the
       remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a citizen of the
       European Union, as a matter of EU law it is not possible to  require
       the family as a unit to relocate outside of the  European  Union  or
       for the Secretary of State to submit that it would be reasonable for
       them to do so". The respondent's most recent IDI's dated August 2015
       also state that it is never reasonable to expect a  British  citizen
       child to accompany a parent outside of the EU.

   21. Mr Olawanle agreed that being a British citizen  was  not  a  "trump
       card" and this must be correct in light of the  Tribunal's  decision
       in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT  45  (IAC)  where  it
       found that UKBA continues to accept that EU law prevents  the  state
       requiring an  EU  law  citizen  from  leaving  the  United  Kingdom,
       although contends with good reason, that this is to be distinguished
       from a case where an independent adult can choose between  continued
       residence in the United Kingdom or continued cohabitation abroad.

   22. The Judge had in mind the family matrix and in considering the issue
       of immigration control reminded herself about part 5A  of  the  2002
       Act (as inserted by the Immigration  Act  2014)  and  in  particular
       section 117B. She was also clearly  aware  that  [ND]  had  acquired
       British citizenship as she considered the  implication  of  this  in
       paragraph [52] of her decision and the effect of Section 117B(6)  of
       the 2002 Act.

   23. Section 117B(6) states ."... the public interest  does  not  require
       the person's  removal  where  (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and (b) it would not
       be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom."

   24. Ms Brocklesby-Weller effectively invited me to find that the Judge's
       consideration in paragraph [52] had regard  to  the  point  made  in
       Sanade. In paragraphs [48] and [49] the Judge had noted:

      a. The children's best interests were a primary but  not  a  paramount
         consideration.
      b. Their best interests were best served being with their mother.
      c. Both children were born here and [ND] was now a British citizen.
      d. The children wish to continue living in the United Kingdom.
      e. A key issue was whether [ND]'s interest in being able  to  exercise
         the rights that attach to her status as a British citizen mean that
         the removal of her sister and mother is disproportionate.

   25. The Judge's key findings in paragraph [52] were:

      a. The person liable to be removed was the first-named appellant.
      b. [ND] was a British citizen and whilst this was  a  highly  relevant
         consideration it was not a trump card.
      c. The fact [ND] was a qualifying child  did  not  mean  other  public
         interest considerations are defeated.
      d. Section  117B(6)  does  not  overrule  other  considerations  under
         section 117B.

   26. Mr Olawanle's original argument to the First-tier  Tribunal  rightly
       centred  on  the  children  because  the   first-named   appellant's
       atrocious immigration history would clearly have counted against her
       if she was the only appellant.

   27. The Judge had regard to the  fact  the  children's  lives  had  been
       shaped  by  United  Kingdom  culture,   values,   pastimes,   living
       standards, language and the prevailing education  system  with  both
       the second-named appellant and her sister having participated in the
       education systems their whole lives. The  Judge  was  aware  of  the
       stages both children were in at their  schools  and  that  both  had
       established a private life. The Judge also accepted that having been
       born here neither child had any connection with Nigeria and for  all
       intent and purposes the United Kingdom was  their  home  albeit  she
       recorded at paragraph [29] that the first-named appellant's  parents
       and possibly extended family continued to live  in  Nigeria  despite
       her claim not to have kept in contact.

   28. It is against this background that I have considered the  permission
       to appeal and the arguments advanced by both representatives.

   29. I am satisfied that the Judge considered the issue of reasonableness
       for the purposes of article 8. However, the issue I have  to  decide
       is whether the Judge's assessment had regard to  the  principles  of
       Sanade and in particular to the fact that [ND] lived with her mother
       and her father was not in contact with them.

   30.  I conclude that whilst the Judge carried out a detailed  assessment
       of the appellants' circumstances she did not attach  any  weight  to
       the principle that "where the child or indeed the  remaining  spouse
       is a British citizen and therefore a citizen of the European  Union,
       as a matter of EU law it is not possible to require the family as  a
       unit to relocate outside of the European Union or for the  Secretary
       of State to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so."

   31. Whilst the Judge reminded herself  British  citizenship  was  not  a
       trump card I am satisfied that as the Judge found that the  children
       had no contact with their father the fact [ND] was a British citizen
       should have been given greater weight than merely a consideration of
       it being a trump card. For the reason identified by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Plimmer I do find an error in law and I set aside the decision
       under article 8 ECHR. In doing so I make it clear that save for this
       issue I would not have found an error in law.

   32. I considered whether further evidence would assist  me  in  remaking
       the decision but as the Judge's finding about  the  father  has  not
       been challenged it remains a finding  of  fact  that  I  must  carry
       forward and no  further  evidence  is  needed  because  nothing  has
       changed since this decision was issued.

   33. I therefore remake this decision and in doing so I  have  regard  to
       the same matters that the Judge  did  but  I  also  must  take  into
       account the principle of Sanade and in light of  [ND]'s  citizenship
       and the guidance both in Sanade and the  respondent's  own  IDI's  I
       find  that  removal  of  either   appellant   would   make   removal
       disproportionate and a breach of their article 8 rights.

DECISION

   34. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law in respect of the article 8
       ECHR decision only. I set aside that decision and allow both appeals
       under article 8 ECHR.

   35. I uphold the decisions under the Immigration Rules. .


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

A fee was paid I make no order as the appeals were granted on matters not
raised by the appellants.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
