
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25032/2013
     IA/25747/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 March 2014                              |                             |
|Delivered orally                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                  paul samson santoshkumar samuel jayakumar
                             shikainah champion
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Ms Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond promulgated on  3  February  2014  in  which  he
    allowed the appeals of Mr Paul Samson Santoshkumar Samuel Jayakumar and
    Mrs Shikainah Champion ("the claimants") against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 4 June 2013 to refuse them further leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. I should say at the outset that the claimants have two children who  it
    appears should  have  lodged  appeals  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State made at the same time as those in respect  of  their
    parents but for reasons which are not clear to me  at  this  stage,  no
    separate appeals were created for them and they do not appear  to  have
    been treated by the First-tier Tribunal as appellants.

 3. In summary Judge Raymond found that the  claimants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules but decided that for the  reasons
    set out in his decision, in paragraphs 24  onwards  that  removing  the
    claimants from the United Kingdom would be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:

          i)  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  confirmed  that   the
             Immigration Rules are a  complete  code,  and  any  Article  8
             assessment should only be made after consideration  under  the
             Rules which was not done here,  the  Tribunal  erring  by  not
             having had  regard  to  the  Rules  and  that  the  subsequent
             proportionality assessment is unsustainable  because  of  that
             omission.

         ii) As was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 0064 (IAC) an Article
             8  assessment  shall  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are
             compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules and  that
             the Tribunal had not identified these.

        iii) Gulshan also makes clear at this stage an appeal  should  only
             be allowed where there are  exceptional  circumstances  -  see
             Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and that the  Tribunal  had  not
             followed this approach.

         iv) The Tribunal had failed to provide adequate  reasons  why  the
             claimants' circumstances are  compelling  or  exceptional  and
             that the claimants do not have the  right  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom purely because of  their  employment  prospects
             being better in this country.

 5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M  Holmes  on  24
    February 2014 who stated that it was arguable that the  decision  fails
    to engage with the guidance of the Supreme Court in Patel  [2013]  UKSC
    72 and to the Upper Tribunal in Nasim [2014] UKUT 25 as to the scope of
    a  private  life  appeal  when  the  individual's  moral  and  physical
    integrity are not affected by the decision under appeal.  There  is  no
    general right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of
    pursuing a career or education whether or not the  United  Kingdom  has
    funded part  of  the  training  for  them.   There  was  no  legitimate
    expectation of settlement despite the inability to meet the Immigration
    Rules.   As  the  grounds  argue  all  of   the   relevant   applicable
    jurisprudence (including both Gulshan and Nagre) requires the judge  to
    start from an identification of why the applications fell  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and then the compelling and exceptional circumstances
    relied upon as the basis for the argument that they should  nonetheless
    succeed.  Arguably the judge fell into error  in  failing  to  identify
    what was sufficiently compelling and exceptional  about  this  family's
    circumstances as to require the respondent to  grant  them  DLR  rather
    than to require them to return to India and seek to secure admission by
    the work permit route on the basis of the second appellant's employment
    prospects.

 6. When the matter came before me there was some  discussion  between  the
    representatives in relation to the rule 24 response  submitted  by  the
    claimants.  Ms Holmes accepted that she had received that.

 7. It is accepted that in this case the claimant's applications were  made
    on 19 May 2012 and thus prior to the coming into force of the new Rules
    including Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.   As  is  accepted,  the
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules (HC 194) which introduced
    those changes makes clear that Appendix FM  does  not  have  effect  to
    applications which were pending as at 8  July  2012.   Accordingly,  Ms
    Holmes accepted that it appears that the decision letters sent  to  the
    claimants (and their children) had proceeded  on  the  erroneous  basis
    that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE were applicable in this case.  It
    was accepted also that erroneous  assumption  underpins  the  basis  on
    which the grounds of appeal were drafted and   Judge  Holmes'  decision
    granting permission.

 8. Ms Holmes accepted that in the circumstances it  could  not  be  argued
    that this was a case in which the Rules set  out  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 and that it could not properly be said in this case  that  MF
    (Nigeria) was applicable given that this is not a deportation case  and
    it is not suggested that the Immigration Rules introduced by HC 194 had
    the effect in respect of  Article  8  cases  which  were  arising  from
    applications made for further leave to remain  under  the  Rules  could
    apply unlike  the  situation  in  respect  of  deportation  application
    decisions.  Ms Holmes said that in the circumstances there  was  little
    sensible that she could say out in the grounds.  Understandably, in the
    circumstances, Counsel for the claimants had little  to  add  over  and
    above what is said in the response from the respondents.

 9. In the circumstances, given that it is now accepted that this is not  a
    case to which Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE applies then  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not err materially in  its  approach  to  Article  8.
    While it did consider the "new" rules first (which  it  need  not  have
    done), it reached conclusions with regard to  the  particular,  unusual
    factual matrix in this appeal, which were open to it, and for which  it
    gave adequate reasons.  In the light of the concession  by  Ms  Holmes,
    and that absence of any alternative challenge from her to the  findings
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal, I am not satisfied that it did  err
    in law. In the circumstances I find that there was no error of law  set
    out in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly I uphold
    it.

10. My decision and that of the First-tier Tribunal relates only to the two
    adult appellants in this case as neither of the children are parties to
    this appeal.  Clearly however it is a  matter  that  will  need  to  be
    resolved by the respondent in due course bearing in mind  the  findings
    which have been made in respect of their parents.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
       making of an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed:                                 Date: 28 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

