
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25278/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination promulgated            |
|On 30 September 2014                 |On 1 October 2014                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOHAMED KAMARA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Hoey, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The parties are as described above,  but  are  referred  to  in  this
       determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Farrelly, allowing the appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
       ECHR, outwith the Immigration Rules.

    3. Mr Matthews submitted as follows on error of law.  While a judge does
       not have to set out all the case law, this  determination  showed  no
       application of the principles to be derived from the  leading  cases,
       in particular MS v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
       CSIH 52 and Gulshan v  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC).   The  judge
       appeared to think that once  the  case  was  seen  not  to  meet  the
       requirements of the  Rules,  that  led  to  a  "free  ranging  Razgar
       assessment".  He did not apply the concepts of arguably good  grounds
       for looking outside the Rules, or  of  compelling  circumstances  not
       sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.    His   assessment   of
       proportionality  was  in  any  event  faulty,  because  he  took  the
       criterion of the best interests of the children to be  determinative,
       but those interests have ultimately to  be  weighed  in  the  overall
       balance, and the significant factors  on  the  other  side  were  not
       mentioned at all.

    4. Ms Hoey argued that a judge does not have to recite all the case law,
       and that paragraph 22 of the determination, although brief,  was  all
       that was required to explain why a proportionality assessment outside
       the Rules was embarked upon.

    5.  I  indicated  that   the   determination   would   be   set   aside.
       Determinations do not need to recite case law  at  length,  but  this
       decision fails to explain why the relevant Article  8  considerations
       were not all contained in  the  Rules,  and  why  it  goes  on  to  a
       proportionality assessment outside the Rules.  I was  also  persuaded
       by the submission that the proportionality assessment  is  one-sided,
       and seems to take the best interests of the children as  a  paramount
       rather than a primary consideration.

    6. I heard submissions about remaking the decision.  The facts are in no
       significant  dispute.   The  determination  includes  an   undisputed
       finding that relocation of the family members to Sierra  Leone  could
       not  reasonably  be  expected.   I  do  not  think  any  judge  could
       realistically find otherwise, given the UK  citizenship  of  all  the
       children, the ages of the older children, and  their  ongoing  family
       life with their respective fathers.  The appellant  and  his  partner
       have a daughter born on 6  February  2014.   The  appellant  and  his
       partner married on 30 May 2014 (the certificate was exhibited).   The
       appellant's wife is again pregnant.  Mr Matthews  accepted  that  the
       case under appendix FM of the Rules  came  to  turn  on  whether  the
       exception in section EX.1 applies.  I am satisfied that the appellant
       has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  child  who
       is a UK citizen; it would not be reasonable in all the  circumstances
       to expect the child to leave the UK; he has a genuine and  subsisting
       relationship with his UK citizen wife; and there  are  insurmountable
       obstacles to family life with her continuing outside the UK.

    7. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
       appeal, as brought by the appellant to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
       allowed under the Immigration Rules.
                               [pic]
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               30 September 2014
