
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25050/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2015                       |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                         Praefa Uennatornwaranggoon
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford of Counsel instructed by VC Legal (UK)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a subject of the Kingdom of Thailand born  on  11  May
    1990.  She has been educated in the United Kingdom since the age of  12
    and holds a master's degree and now wishes  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom and pursue her chosen profession of graphic designer.  She also
    is in a relationship with Thomas Cook, a British national.

 2. On 15 January 2014 she applied for indefinite leave on the  basis  that
    she had accumulated ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. On 27 May 2014 the Respondent refused her application  and  decided  to
    remove her by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  Respondent  considered  the
    Appellant had not shown she had been continuously resident for at least
    ten years as defined by paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules for the
    purposes of paragraphs 276B-276D.  The gaps in her lawful residence had
    not come about for exceptional reasons.   The  Respondent  went  on  to
    consider whether the Appellant had a  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention within paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and concluded that although the Appellant was under the age of 25 years
    she had not spent at least half her life residing continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom and had been  absent  from  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    substantial aggregate  period  of  time  and  refused  her  application
    because she did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(iii)-
    (vi).  The decision was taken in the knowledge that the  Appellant  had
    two sisters who were  naturalised  British  citizens  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. On 12 June 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds asserted she had been educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom, had a network of friends and a boyfriend  of  over  two  years
    standing and referred  to  her  British  citizen  sisters.   They  also
    asserted that by the time of any hearing the Appellant would have  been
    living in the United Kingdom for some twelve years which would be  more
    than half of her life.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 25 February 2014, Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal James dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   She
    had not completed  ten  years'  continuous  residence  because  of  the
    various periods during which  she  had  been  absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  She noted her  education  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that
    neither the Appellant nor Mr Cook had identified when their  friendship
    developed into a relationship.

 6. The Judge referred to the Appellant's family in Thailand.  She rejected
    her claim that she had no non-Thai friends and that she was  unable  to
    speak or write Thai properly.

 7. She noted it had been conceded for the Appellant  that  she  could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Having dismissed her long residence claim, she went on to  dismiss  her
    claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  which,  on  28  April  2015,
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer  granted  because  it  was
    arguable:-

       . The Judge had failed to determine  the  number  of  days  over  the
         permitted  absences  for  continuous  residence  during  which  the
         Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom.

       . The Judge had given little weight to both the private life and  the
         family life she had established in the United Kingdom.

       . The Judge had failed to examine the issue of whether  and  to  what
         extent  the  Appellant's  previous  leave  could  be  described  as
         precarious.

       . The  Judge  had  failed  fully  to  address  the  question  of  the
         reasonableness  of  the  Appellant's  partner  leaving  the  United
         Kingdom to join her in Thailand.

       . The Judge had failed to address  the  principles  relevant  to  the
         expulsion of a person who had spent her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom by way of reference to the jurisprudence in JO (Uganda) and
         Another v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10.

       . The Judge had erred in estimating the length of the relationship of
         the Appellant and her partner and in finding that her  partner  had
         visited Thailand where he had met the Appellant's family.

 9. The grounds upon which  permission  was  granted  broadly  reflect  the
    grounds given in the application for permission.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions for the Appellant

10. The Appellant and her partner attended the hearing although neither  of
    them took any active part.

11. For the Appellant, Ms Radford submitted the actual number of  days  the
    Appellant had been out of the United Kingdom was important  because  if
    the lower figure for which the Appellant contended was the correct  one
    it might cause the Respondent to consider exercising her discretion  in
    favour of the Appellant and also it would affect the assessment of  the
    proportionality of the decision to refuse leave.  The issue was whether
    the Appellant's absences totalled 69 days (13%) or 161 days (30%)  over
    the total permitted  absences  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    Respondent's own guidance.  The  Judge  had  mentioned  this  issue  at
    para.26 of her decision but she had not adequately dealt with it.

12. The Judge had referred to Section 117B of the 2002 Act  at  para.46  of
    her decision and had given little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private
    life but  she  had  failed  to  distinguish  that  while  a  precarious
    immigration status might reduce the weight to be given to  any  private
    life, the weight to be given to any family life established in  the  UK
    was only to be reduced if it had been developed during  a  period  when
    the Appellant  had  been  unlawfully  resident.   She  had  never  been
    unlawfully resident.

13. Further, the Appellant's status in the United  Kingdom  should  not  be
    considered as precarious. If there was a  spectrum  of  precariousness,
    she was at what might be described as the "stable  end".   Her  sisters
    had been educated in the United  Kingdom  and  had  become  naturalised
    British subjects.  The lengthy leave to remain which the Appellant  had
    enjoyed would not suggest to her that her right to reside in the United
    Kingdom was in any way precarious.  The Judge had  not  considered  the
    issue of  precariousness,  which  in  the  Appellant's  case  could  be
    described as "slight", because she had always had lawful leave.

14. In her assessment of the Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention, the Judge had not  considered  the  insurmountable
    obstacles there were to her partner joining her in Thailand and  indeed
    had failed to address whether he could move to Thailand and whether  it
    would be proportionate to separate them as a couple.  She had noted the
    relationship had until recently  been  conducted  while  the  Appellant
    lived in London and her boyfriend in Leeds.  She had not taken  account
    of the fact that her boyfriend's family lived in the United Kingdom and
    the difficulties of relocation to Thailand.  There was nothing  in  the
    Judge's decision which found that the public  interest  was  so  strong
    that the Appellant and her boyfriend should be separated.

15. The Judge had failed to consider the jurisprudence in JO  (Uganda)  and
    Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 (App  No.  1638/03).   Strong  reasons
    were required to remove a person who had spent the major  part  of  her
    life, childhood and youth in the United Kingdom.

16. The Judge had made material errors to which reference had been made  in
    the grounds for appeal.  Looked at in the round, these matters  pointed
    to material errors of law in the decision which should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

17. Mr Avery opened by submitting  that  whatever  the  period  of  absence
    during which the Judge considered the Appellant had  been  absent  from
    the United Kingdom was a significant period and consequently there  was
    no material error of law in her treatment of the time the Appellant had
    been absent. In addition, the context in which the Appellant  had  been
    absent from the United Kingdom was important, namely,  school  holidays
    and family celebrations.

18. It was accepted the Judge may be said to have approached her assessment
    of the Article 8 claim in a condensed  manner.   She  had  referred  at
    para.46 to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  At paras.48 and  49  she  had
    made relevant findings of fact. It was of note the Judge had  concluded
    she was unable to make a finding that  the  Appellant  was  financially
    independent for the reasons given at para.49.

19. The Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom had been throughout as a
    student and her private life would have been limited to a  presence  in
    the United Kingdom for the purpose of  studies.   The  Judge  had  made
    findings of fact about the nature of her private life.   There  was  no
    reason why the Appellant could not leave the United  Kingdom  and  seek
    entry clearance to return in the normal way.

20. The circumstances of the applicant in Maslov were very  different  from
    those of the Appellant who had family and ties to Thailand.  Again, the
    context of the Appellant's relationship  with  her  country  of  origin
    needed to be taken into account.

21. The errors of fact which the Judge may have  made  were  not  material.
    The Appellant had mentioned the period of over two years at para.17  of
    her statement.  The relationship currently had been  conducted  over  a
    long distance between London and Leeds.  She had found at para.42  that
    it was a relatively recent relationship.  The  Appellant  and  Mr  Cook
    were neither engaged nor married and had no children: see para.43.

22. Even if Mr Cook had not visited Thailand since meeting  the  Appellant,
    the fact was on the evidence of both himself and the Appellant  he  had
    travelled to Thailand on holiday before they met and  he  had  met  her
    parents and extended family members,  albeit  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This last point had in fact been noted by the Judge at para.19  of  her
    decision.

23. The Judge was properly  entitled  to  reach  her  conclusions  and  the
    grounds disclosed no  material  error,  simply  disagreement  with  the
    Judge.

Further Submissions for the Appellant

24. Ms  Radford  submitted  there  was  no  event  which  had  stopped  the
    Appellant's accruing ten years' continuous lawful residence and if that
    period was completed during the currency of an appeal she was  entitled
    to rely on long residence as a ground.

25. It remained unclear from the decision whether the  Judge  had  properly
    considered the relevant factors identified in Sections 117A-117D of the
    2002 Act.  The possibility of the Appellant leaving the United  Kingdom
    and seeking entry clearance did not resolve the problem that the  Judge
    had failed adequately to address her family life claim.

26. The Appellant's circumstances were comparable to those of the applicant
    in Maslov because the essential issue was the amount of  time  she  had
    spent away from her birth family in the United Kingdom and immersed  in
    British culture.

27. The consideration of her private  life  needed  to  have  included  her
    social and cultural ties to the community in which she lived, not  just
    her  life  as  a  student.   The  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    circumstances of her partner in the United  Kingdom  and  the  decision
    contained material errors of law and should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

28. I shall first address the  errors  of  fact  in  the  Judge's  decision
    referred to by the Appellant.  As already noted, the Judge was aware at
    para.19 that the Appellant's boyfriend had met the  Appellant's  family
    in the United Kingdom.  Whether he had travelled to Thailand before  or
    after meeting her, I do not find  an  important  issue.   The  material
    facts are that he had travelled to Thailand, albeit as a  tourist,  and
    he had met the Appellant's parents and extended family, albeit  in  the
    United Kingdom.

29. The Appellant had described her  relationship  with  her  boyfriend  as
    being "of over two years" in para.17 of her statement of 28 July  2014.
    The evidence before the Judge as recorded at para.42 of her decision is
    that they had met in early 2012  and  the  hearing  took  place  on  18
    February 2015.  The Appellant did  not  and  her  boyfriend  could  not
    inform the Judge when their friendship developed into  a  relationship.
    Crucially, the Appellant at the hearing had told the Judge that she had
    moved to Leeds to live with her boyfriend as  recently  as  23  January
    2015.  In the circumstances,  I  do  not  find  the  reference  to  the
    friendship or relationship having  been  in  existence  for  two  years
    rather three to be material, even if the error is something  more  than
    typographical.

30. There was no argument that the  Appellant  had  been  absent  from  the
    United Kingdom during her claimed ten years' continuous  residence  for
    more than the permitted period under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    Respondent's own guidance.  There was  no  analysis  of  any  different
    periods of ten years' claimed continuous residence or  suggestion  that
    any of the gaps in lawful residence had been for  exceptional  reasons.
    The aggregate period of absence might be relevant in the assessment  of
    the  proportionality  of  any  claim  under  Article  8   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, but its relevance or materiality will depend in each
    case on the individual circumstances of an applicant. I refer later  to
    the Judge's assessment of the Article 8 claim.

31. There was little, if any, evidence before the Judge of the  Appellant's
    private life beyond that of a student and an intern and the evidence of
    her relationship with her boyfriend was limited. The Judge acknowledged
    the low threshold for the establishment of family life at  para.45  but
    again, in view of her findings at paras.42- 45, it cannot reasonably be
    said that in relation to the Appellant's family life anything turned on
    the point that her immigration status was not  unlawful.  Having  noted
    the evidence, the Judge  was  entitled  to  draw  the  conclusions  she
    reached.  Her findings set out the limited private life  the  Appellant
    had developed and the limited family life with her boyfriend.

32. Given the Judge found that the Appellant's private and family life were
    so limited, whether or not she failed to distinguish between the two in
    respect of the weight to be given to each aspect whether by  reason  of
    precarious immigration status or unlawful residence,  was  in  all  the
    circumstances not a material error.

33. The Judge did refer to the comments in the Respondent's decision  about
    precariousness at para.13 of her decision. She expressly  took  account
    of the public interest at paras.8, 9 and 54 and dealt with the relevant
    factors referred to in section 117B of the 2002 Act at paras.36-38,  42
    and 49.

34. Given the Judge's findings about the Appellant's relationship with  her
    boyfriend and the family life it constituted, it  was  not  a  material
    error that the Judge failed specifically and in depth  to  address  the
    circumstances  of  her  boyfriend  and  whether  he  could  migrate  to
    Thailand. The Judge did address the continuance of the relationship  if
    the Appellant were removed  to  Thailand  at  para.51.   There  was  no
    evidence before the Judge that Mr Cook would  be  unable  to  join  the
    Appellant in Thailand.  Indeed, at para.7 of his statement of  21  July
    2014 he says:-

         "The way in which we have maintained our technically  long-distance
         relationship gives me confidence that we would  somehow  manage  to
         overcome the eventuality that Praefa had to leave the UK as far  as
         our relationship goes ...."

35. The applicant in Maslov had come to Austria aged 6 and when he was aged
    about  16  had  been  granted  an  unlimited  settlement   permit.   He
    subsequently acquired a substantial criminal record. What distinguishes
    Maslov from  the  Appellant's  circumstances  is  that  Maslov  had  an
    unlimited settlement permit.  The  Appellant  has  only  had  temporary
    leave to enter or remain as a student.  In the circumstances  it  would
    appear that  there  was  little,  if  any,  point  in  considering  the
    jurisprudence in Maslov.  JO (Uganda) concerned two appellants who  had
    come to the United Kingdom aged about 4 or 5.  The first  of  them  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain when aged about 13 or 14.   The
    other appellant was suspected of having illegally  entered  the  United
    Kingdom shortly after his 18th birthday.  Each of them had subsequently
    acquired criminal records.  Again, there would appear to be  little  of
    relevance in this judgment for the Judge to consider.

36. The Judge's treatment at paras.52-54  of  the  claim  under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules may have been brief but given the factual
    findings she had already made, I find her treatment  of  the  claim  by
    reference to R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 to have been adequate.

37. My conclusion is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did  not
    contain any material error of law such that it should be set  aside  in
    whole or  in  part  and  it  shall  stand.   The  effect  is  that  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    error of law and shall stand with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity order is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 31. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
