
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25837/2013
     IA/25838/2013
     IA/25839/2013
     IA/25840/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st May 2014                                 |On 2nd May 2014            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                            Mr Min Prasad kharel
                             miss yogita kharel
                              mrs bijula kharel
                             master yash kharel
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Jusmount & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This matter came before me on 12th March 2014 when I decided:-

      i) "This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Secretary of State. However, for the sake of continuity and clarity
         I shall continue  to  refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
         Respondent and to the Kharel family as the Appellants.

     ii) The Appellants are citizens of Nepal  and  are  husband,  wife  and
         their two children. The eldest child born in 2003 was born in Nepal
         and came to the UK aged three in 2006.  The other was born  in  the
         UK in 2007. The husband first came to the UK  in  2004  as  a  work
         permit holder. His wife and eldest child joined him in 2006.

    iii) Apart from a period of some eight months the family  have  been  in
         the UK lawfully.

     iv) They made an application to the Secretary of State  for  indefinite
         leave to remain prior to the introduction of  the  new  Immigration
         Rules. The Secretary of State refused the application on  6th  June
         2013.

      v) The Appellants appealed and their appeals came  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge Creswell) sitting at Newport  on  8th  January
         2014. Having heard the appeals Judge Creswell allowed  the  appeals
         on Article 8 grounds.

     vi) The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal. The Secretary of State's  grounds  are  that
         the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its approach to the Article
         8 assessment. It failed to take into account  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1192 which, she argues,  indicates  that  the  Immigration
         Rules are a complete code, Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct
         approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) which, she argues, indicates that
         an Article 8 assessment should only be carried out under  the  ECHR
         where there  are compelling circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
         Rules and also Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), which indicates  that
         an appeal should  only  be  allowed  where  there  are  exceptional
         circumstances.

    vii) The Secretary of State also asserts that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         misdirected itself in finding that the best interests of one of the
         children made removal of the  Appellants  disproportionate  as  the
         child had spent less than seven  years  in  the  UK  and  would  be
         returning to Nepal with her parents.

   viii) The Secretary of State also argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to give adequate reasons why it was in the best interests of
         the children to remain in the UK and why they  could  not  continue
         their private and family life together in Nepal on the  basis  they
         are young enough to adapt with the support  of  their  parents  and
         that many children throughout  the  world  move  countries  in  the
         middle of their education.

     ix) Before me Ms Holmes relied  on  the  grounds.  On  the  Appellants'
         behalf Mr Hussein argued that the determination was not  flawed  or
         tainted by error of law. The Judge quite  properly  took  the  view
         that the length of time in the UK  (10  years)  was  a  substantial
         period of time; that the eldest child now aged 10 was only three on
         arrival and the Judge was entitled to find that if  an  application
         was made by that child under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
         Rules it was likely to succeed. He argued the circumstances in this
         case were compelling such that the Judge was entitled  to  consider
         Article 8 outwith the Immigration Rules.

      x) I find that the First-tier Tribunal's treatment of  Article  8  was
         flawed and must be set aside for the following reasons.

     xi) The First-tier Tribunal has found both that the new  Rules  do  not
         apply because the application preceded  them  but  then  considered
         them, in particular paragraph 276 ADE which the judge felt assisted
         the eldest child. It seems to me that this application  being  made
         prior to the new rules coming into force  and  in  the  absence  of
         transitional provisions rendering them retrospective,  they  cannot
         have application to this case. However, where they  have  relevance
         is that they give a clear indication of Parliament's view  of  what
         is and is not proportionate in immigration cases. The Judge in this
         case has, I find, in considering where the best  interests  of  the
         children lie and the weight to be attached to them wholly failed to
         consider that these children are Nepalese  as  are  their  parents.
         They do not meet the Immigration Rules to permit them to remain and
         unlike British children they could have  no  expectation  of  being
         permitted to enjoy the benefits of life in the UK. The  distinction
         to be drawn between British children and  non-British  children  is
         made clear in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC  74.  This  was  not  taken  into
         consideration by the First-tier Tribunal.

    xii) In suggesting  that  the  eldest  child  met  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276 ADE on the basis that she was aged ten at the date of
         hearing and had been  in  the  UK  seven  years  the  Judge  erred.
         Paragraph 276ADE applies only when a child has been in the  UK  for
         seven years at the date  of  application.  Additionally  the  Judge
         failed to  give  reasons  why  the  child  would  meet  the  second
         requirement of the Rule, namely that it would  be  unreasonable  to
         expect her to return to Nepal. She  would  be  returning  with  her
         parents and sibling to the country of her nationality and heritage.
         In failing to take into account the Supreme Court case  of  Zoumbas
         in particular and failing to give adequate reasons as  to  why  the
         family should not return to the country of  their  nationality  and
         culture I find the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of  law.  As
         this case was about Article 8 only, that error was fundamental  and
         material to the outcome which means that the determination must  be
         set aside in its entirety to be redecided.

   xiii) Both representatives before me indicated that the appropriate venue
         for it to be redecided was the Upper Tribunal".

 2. I therefore adjourned the case to be relisted before me for  a  resumed
    hearing and it was duly listed for 1st May.

 3. On  24th  April  the  Appellants'  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    indicating that they had been instructed by the Appellants to  withdraw
    the appeals.  However the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary
    of State's appeal and thus not the Appellants' to withdraw.

 4. I indicated to the Appellants' representative that if they were  saying
    that they no longer challenged the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse them leave to remain then I would allow the appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it is unchallenged by  the  Appellants.  The
    representatives agreed to that course of action.  Accordingly  I  allow
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it  is  unchallenged
    by the Appellants, which has the effect that the  Appellants'  original
    appeals against the Secretary of State's decision are dismissed.

 5. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is accordingly allowed.









Signed                              Date 1st May 2014





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
