
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25701/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 14 July 2015                               | On 27 July 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           ms Edith Adesola Sanni
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant  Ms R Chapman, (Counsel instructed by Daniel Cohen,
                    Immigration Law Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  For ease of reference I  shall  refer
    to the parties as the Secretary of State, who is the appellant  and  to
    Ms Sanni as the Claimant in these proceedings.

2.   The Claimant born on 17 April 1953 is a citizen of Nigeria.  She  first
    entered the UK in June 1975 and resided lawfully here until  late  1984
    when she and her family returned to Nigeria.  The  Claimant  re-entered
    the UK on 4 September 2008 as a visitor and remained in the  UK  since.
    She now has three adult children, two of whom (Tolulope and  Folushade)
    are British nationals and Olufonso has leave to remain in the UK  as  a
    partner under Appendix FM and is on the 10-year  route  to  settlement.
    There are also two grandchildren. In October 2008 she applied  for  ILR
    as a dependent relative.  That application was refused and  her  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge Aujla and promulgated on 10 May 2010.  A further
    application was refused under paragraph 317  (dependent  relative)  and
    under private and family  life  Immigration  Rules.   That  appeal  was
    dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy  on  3  March  2014.
    Permission to appeal was granted. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  found
    an error of law by the  second  Tribunal  (FJT  Herlihy)  in  assessing
    credibility by failing to have regard to further evidence  and  failing
    to give reasons  why  that  evidence  was  rejected.   The  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de  novo  with  no
    findings of fact preserved except as agreed by the parties.

3.   The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Finch)(FTT).  In
    a determination  promulgated  on  15  January  2015  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 317 was dismissed and the Article 8 ECHR appeal  was  allowed
    on the basis of family and private life with three  daughters  and  two
    grandchildren in the UK.

FTT Decision and Reasons

4.   At [10] the FTT referred to that fact that the  Tribunal  in  2010  had
    not believed the Claimant's account that she could not  return  to  the
    family home and live  there  with  her  stepson.   The  FTT  found  the
    evidence from the  Claimant  and  her  three  daughters  together  with
    additional witness statements  to  be  credible.   It  found  that  the
    Claimant faced a risk of assault and intimidation from her  stepson  in
    the event of a return to her former home in Nigeria.  At [15]  the  FTT
    considered Devaseelan with reference to the findings of  fact  made  by
    Judge  Aujla  in  May  2010.   Further  reference  was  made   to   the
    determination of UTJ Kopieczek and the  additional  evidence  that  was
    before the second Tribunal.

5.   Clear reference at [16] was made to Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and the need to take  into
    account public interest factors.  Reference was made to the periods  of
    time when the Claimant lived in the  UK  without  leave  and  to  those
    periods of time with leave.  The FTT  found  that  the  Claimant  could
    speak English and would not be an economic burden [18].

6.   At [22] the FTT considered private and  family  life  and  specifically
    referred to Section 117B as to the  weight  that  should  be  given  to
    private life established when in the UK in precarious circumstances.

7.   At [23] the FTT found family life  as  between  the  Claimant  and  her
    three adult daughters.  Reference was made to relevant case law and  it
    was concluded that there was strong family life as between the Claimant
    and her daughters [24 to 26].

8.   In considering the best interests of the children the  FTT  found  that
    the  Claimant  played  a  significant  part  in  the   lives   of   her
    grandchildren and that her absence was  likely  to  have  an  emotional
    impact on them despite their young age.  It was  also  noted  that  the
    fact that the Claimant provided childcare for her children enabled them
    to accommodate and provide for the Claimant in the UK.

Grounds of Application

9.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the decision on  the
    grounds that the FTT materially misdirected itself in law by failing to
    engage with the findings of the previous Tribunal in 2010  and  failing
    to provide cogent reasons for departing from those findings contrary to
    the guidelines in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702.

10.  A further ground was that the Tribunal erred in respect of  Article  8;
    the fact that her daughters prefer to have the Claimant as a  caregiver
    for their children is not protected by Article 8 ECHR  and  her  rights
    were not disproportionately breached.

Permission

11.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Grimmett) on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred by failing to follow Devaseelan.  It was not clear  from
    the decision what the findings of the earlier Tribunal  were  and  what
    the starting point for the appeal was.  It was also considered arguable
    that the Tribunal erred in its assessment of Article 8  in  respect  of
    the precariousness of her time in the UK.

Rule 24 Response

12.  In a response prepared under Rule 24 the Claimant  submitted  that  the
    first ground of appeal was misconceived.  It was accepted that the  FTT
    did not specifically set out the findings made by Judge  Aujla  in  the
    2010 determination.  However, reference was made to  the  determination
    dated 16 July 2014 by UTJ Kopieczek, which referred  to  Judge  Aujla's
    findings that he did not find the Claimant's account of  problems  with
    her stepson, including physical and verbal abuse, to be credible.   UTJ
    Kopieczek 's determination also referred to a bundle of documents  that
    were before the FT Judge Herlihy and which included evidence  that  was
    not before the Tribunal in 2010 including  written  witness  statements
    which gave an account of the abuse suffered by the  Claimant  from  her
    stepson. An error of law was found in the determination of FTJ  Herlihy
    for failure to consider the further new evidence, and   whose  findings
    of credibility were found not to be sustainable.

13.  It was argued that the FTT was clearly aware of  the  determination  of
    UTJ Kopieczek  which  was  specifically  referred  to  at  [3]  of  her
    decision.  Reference was made to Devaseelan at [15]  and  to  the  fact
    that it was necessary to consider the findings of fact  made  in  2010.
    The FTT further stated that whilst findings of fact made at a  previous
    hearing were authoritative, consideration must be given  to  additional
    evidence which can displace those findings.  It was therefore  open  to
    the FTT to accept the Claimant's evidence on this issue, which had  not
    been before the First-tier Tribunal in 2010 and which was  corroborated
    by the oral evidence of her daughters and witness statements from three
    independent witnesses [10].

14.  As to the second ground of appeal under Article 8 it  was  argued  that
    the FTT made careful findings based on the evidence with  reference  to
    Section 55 and the interests  of  the  Claimant's  grandchildren.   The
    findings of fact were not challenged by the Secretary of State, the FTT
    had regard to Section 117B as to public interest factors, giving little
    weight to private life established  when  status  is  precarious.   The
    FTT's findings at [26] were based on a careful  analysis  of  evidence,
    jurisprudence and the finding of family life was not challenged by  the
    Secretary  of  State.   There  was  no  error  in  the  assessment   of
    proportionality.

Error of Law Hearing

15.  At the hearing submissions were made by Ms Holmes  who  relied  on  the
    grounds of application and particularly emphasised the FTT's failure to
    set out the findings made by the Tribunal in 2010.

16.  As to the second ground she submitted that the FTT failed to take  into
    account the fact that the Claimant did not have to live with her family
    in Nigeria and need not return to the former home.

17.  Ms Chapman relied on the detailed Rule  24  response  and  acknowledged
    that whilst the FTT had not specifically set out the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in 2010, the FTT considered the findings  and  Devaseelan  was
    properly applied.  As to  the  concerns  raised  about  the  Article  8
    assessment,  Ms  Chapman  argued   that   this   was   effectively   an
    unsubstantiated assertion.  Family life cannot be treated as precarious
    under Section 117, this issue related only to private  life.   The  FTT
    found clear and sustainable findings of fact with regard to family life
    as between the Claimant, her children and grandchildren.

Discussion and Decision

18.  I am entirely satisfied that the FTT was fully aware  of  the  findings
    of fact made by the previous Tribunal in 2010.  These findings of  fact
    were not specifically set out in that determination but that  does  not
    amount to an error of law.  The FTT fully  engaged  with  the  relevant
    evidence and issues under appeal and in particular was cognisant of the
    Upper Tribunal decision that the second Tribunal had erred  in  law  in
    making a  credibility  assessment  by  failing  to  take  into  account
    additional evidence that was not before the 2010 Tribunal.  Further,  I
    find no justifiable criticism can be raised of the FTT's  consideration
    and application of the guidance and approach in Devaseelan.   I  accept
    that the FTT did not specifically identify the findings as its starting
    point but this was inferred and that process followed.  I find no error
    of law  there.   The  FTT  found  and  concluded  that  the  additional
    evidence, not before the  Tribunal in 2010, was capable of resulting in
    different conclusions and findings of fact.   It  found  that  the  new
    evidence fell within the category of  evidence  that  could  have  been
    given as at the date of the previous Tribunal 2010 but  was  not.   The
    guidance in Devaseelan was clearly applied. Accepting that the FTT  did
    not engage in any detail with the reasons why that evidence was not put
    before the Tribunal in 2010, I am satisfied that this does  not  amount
    to a material error of law.  The FTT found the additional evidence  was
    strong and consisted of not only the Claimant's evidence but also  that
    of her three adult daughters and three independent witnesses.

19.   I find no error of law in the second ground.  The FTT clearly  had  in
    mind the public interest and those factors  in  statutory  form,  which
    were specifically referred to in the decision.

20.  The main substance of the  decision  was  the  strong  family  life  as
    between the Claimant and her adult daughters and her  grandchildren  as
    shown in findings [24 to 26], none of which are  challenged.   The  FTT
    concluded that there existed family life above and  beyond  the  normal
    family ties and also  having  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    grandchildren.  This ground amounts to a disagreement with the decision
    made by the FTT. I find that no material error of law is disclosed.

Notice of Decision

21.  I find no material error of law  in  the  decision  and  reasons.   The
    decision and reasons is upheld.  The Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

22.  No anonymity order is made.



Signed                                  Date 23.7.2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make an order for repayment of the cost in full.



Signed                                  Date 23.7.2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
