
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25804/2014
                                                             & IA/25805/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 April 2015                                 |On 13 April 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Devraj Oli
                              Gyanu Prasai Oli
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the claimants:     Mr M Puar, instructed by NC Brothers & Co Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pacey  promulgated  29.10.14,  allowing  the
    claimants' appeals against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 10.6.14, to refuse their applications for leave to remain in  the
    UK outside the Rules.  The Judge heard the appeal on 24.10.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    9.12.14.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 8.4.15 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I find that there was such error of  law
    in the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    determination of Judge Pacey should be set aside.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge McDade found  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained an arguable error of law.

 6. In her short decision comprising just 6 paragraphs, Judge Pacey acceded
    to the  submission  of  the  claimants'  representative  to  remit  the
    decision to the Secretary of State on the basis that they  had  resided
    in the UK for a period of over 10 years, which had not been  considered
    by the Secretary of State. The decision of  the  judge  was  that  "the
    appeals are allowed to extent that they are remitted to  the  Secretary
    of State."

 7. The grounds of appeal correctly submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge acted beyond the jurisdiction of the First-tier  Tribunal;  there
    is no power in the First-tier Tribunal to remit a case to the Secretary
    of State, especially on the basis of  an  application  that  was  never
    made. Pursuant to section 86 of the 2002 Act, the judge either  had  to
    dismiss the appeals, allow them outright, or allow them to the  limited
    extend that the decisions were not in accordance with the law. None  of
    these alternative decisions were made.

 8. The claimants applied on 28.3.14 for leave to remain outside the Rules.
    The refusal decision of 10.6.14 did not  have  to  anticipate  that  by
    September of 2014 the claimants might by then have resided  in  the  UK
    for  a  period  of  10  years,  particularly  since  there  are   other
    requirements to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, such  as  Life
    in the UK and English language requirements. In fact, since the  second
    claimant has only been in the UK since 2008,  she  could  not  possible
    have met the 10 year requirement, even in  September  2014.  There  was
    thus no failure on the part of the  Secretary  of  State,  who  has  to
    decide the application on the basis of the  circumstances  appertaining
    at the date of decision. The decisions of the Secretary of  State  were
    entirely in accordance with the law.

 9. Further, if the claimants wished a  particular  application  under  the
    Rules to  be  considered,  it  was  incumbent  on  them  to  make  that
    application to the Secretary of State. The  application  made  was  for
    leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules. It is  arguable  that
    an application for leave to remain under  276B  must  be  made  on  the
    proper specified form  and  the  appropriate  fee  paid  and  thus  the
    question arises whether there was a valid application under 276B  which
    could have been considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  a
    section 120 notice was served and thus the claimants were entitled  and
    indeed obliged to raise all grounds on  which  they  relied,  which  Mr
    Wilding accepts that they did. In the circumstances there is no mileage
    in that issue at this stage.

10. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  should  have  considered
    whether either claimant met the requirements of 276B  at  the  date  of
    hearing. For the reasons stated above, the second claimant  could  not.
    In default,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have  considered
    private and family life under the Immigration Rules,  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE, before considering whether there were such compelling
    circumstances insufficiently recognised in the Rules so  as  to  render
    the decision unjustifiably harsh or  otherwise,  following  the  Razgar
    steps, disproportionate. None of that was done and thus the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

11. In passing I note Mr Wilding's  argument  that  276B(ii)  requires  the
    exercise of discretion by the Secretary of State and that  it  was  not
    for the Tribunal to exercise such a discretion when there had  been  no
    consideration of that discretion by the Secretary of State. That  is  a
    matter that will have to wait for further discussion on the remaking of
    the decision in the appeal.

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact  finding  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  has  been   no   valid
    determination of the issues in the appeals.

13. In all the circumstances, I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within the Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2.  The  effect  of  the
    error has been to deprive the parties of a decision on  the  issues  in
    the appeal. Having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal
    with cases fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay,  I
    find that it is appropriate to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the decision in the appeal to be remade afresh.
                  [pic]
                  Signed
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated         8 April 2015


Consequential Directions

15. The decision in the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Birmingham;

16. The estimated length of hearing is 2.5 hours;

17. No findings of fact were made and the appeal should be reheard  in  its
    entirety;

18. Either party has leave to adduce further evidence, such evidence to  be
    lodged with the Tribunal and served on the other party no later than  7
    days before the First-tier Tribunal hearing;

19. Skeleton arguments are to be served by both parties as to the issues in
    the appeal as highlighted above, such to be lodged  with  the  Tribunal
    and served on the other party no later than 7 days  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.


                  [pic]
                  Signed
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated         8 April 2015
