
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25947/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 7 July 2015                       |On 10 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  MANOJ PAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Brown, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 19 August  1987.   In  his
    determination promulgated on 5 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Morrison came to the following conclusions:

          a) The appellant cheated in his English test.  The respondent was
             entitled to curtail his leave and to  refuse  his  application
             for  leave  as  a  spouse  under  paragraph  SLTR.1.6  of  the
             Immigration Rules on the basis that his presence in the UK was
             not conducive to the public good.

          b) Removal of the appellant would be disproportionate in terms of
             Article 8 of the ECHR.  The most persuasive factor was that it
             would effectively end the marital relationship.  The effect on
             his wife would be serious.  She was a UK citizen who had spent
             her life in the UK with no suggestion that she  was  complicit
             in her husband's deception.   If  the  appellant  were  to  be
             removed then through no fault on her part her  life  would  be
             irrevocably changed, causing considerable stress.  "In  coming
             to this  conclusion  I  acknowledge  that  the  appellant  has
             behaved badly and that in most circumstances his removal would
             have been appropriate but in this case he is  benefiting  from
             the effects which his removal would have on  his  relationship
             with his wife and on his wife's future well-being."

 2. The appellant was granted leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the outcome under the Immigration Rules, and the respondent was granted
    permission to appeal against the outcome under Article 8.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are:

      1) failing to give adequate weight to  material  matters,  namely  the
         findings on cheating and under paragraph SLTR.1.6,  when  assessing
         the proportionality balance;

      2) failing to give adequate weight to  material  matters,  namely  the
         public interest in ensuring that  persons  whose  presence  is  not
         conducive to the public good are restricted  from  benefiting  from
         the effects of their deception, and giving "no explicit  regard  to
         public  abhorrence  of  situations  in  which  deception   actually
         benefits the wrong-doer";

      3) failing to give adequate reasons for material findings, namely that
         the appellant's wife would find life in Nepal  unduly  harsh,  when
         there was only limited medical evidence about her  and  neither  he
         nor she said in evidence that she would not accompany him to Nepal;
         misapplying the burden of proof in respect of lack of  evidence  of
         initial income to obtain accommodation in Nepal; and

      4) failing to properly  apply  or  to  consider  primary  legislation,
         namely section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 4. Mr Matthews submitted thus.  Grounds 1 and 4 overlap.  Section  117B(4)
    requires little weight to be given to the appellant's private  life  or
    to his relationship with his wife established while he was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Although he was not  formally  here  unlawfully  when  the
    relationship was initially formed, and his  leave  had  been  curtailed
    only after deception came to light, that did not imply  that  he  could
    say he was here lawfully up to that time.  The provision should be read
    to the effect that his presence here was unlawful  from  when  he  used
    deception in October 2012, although the notice curtailing his leave was
    dated only 20 June 2014.  Mr Matthews could not say that the point  had
    been put in quite that way to the First-tier Tribunal, but this  was  a
    matter of fact, and there had been reliance on the sub-section.  As  to
    Ground 2 although matters of weight were generally for a judge, and the
    grounds did not allege perversity, this is codified in  statute  rather
    than left to broad discretion.  There was considerable public  interest
    in appellants not benefitting in a case like this where  the  appellant
    was one of the participants in a large  scale  fraud.   The  judge  had
    shown that he  was  aware  of  that,  but  the  weight  given  was  not
    sufficient under the provisions of the statutory scheme.  As to  Ground
    3, Mr Matthews accepted that the judge's decision is a careful one, but
    he pointed out that the onus was always on the appellant  to  show  the
    difficulties his wife might encounter in Nepal, and there had  been  no
    detailed medical evidence about her condition.   At  paragraph  59  the
    judge effectively reversed the  burden  of  proof  about  the  lack  of
    evidence of conditions to be encountered in Nepal.  That was more  than
    a semantic point.

 5. Mr Matthews accepted my observation that the crux of the  decision  was
    obviously the significantly adverse effect of removal on  the  wife  of
    the appellant.  He also accepted that the grounds do not go so  far  as
    to say that there could properly have been only one outcome.

 6. I indicated to Mr Brown that I did not need to hear  from  him  on  the
    Article 8 grounds.  In my opinion, the determination makes it plain why
    the judge thought that although she was  not  specifically  asked,  the
    evidence from the wife and her parents showed that  her  relocation  to
    Nepal was not a realistic possibility.  That view was open to  him  and
    is properly explained.  He by no means minimised  the  significance  of
    the appellant's use of deception.  He  found  the  case  to  be  finely
    balanced.  The respondent's point  in  terms  of  section  117B(4)  was
    perhaps made more sharply in the Upper Tribunal than it had been in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The point about the burden of proof amounts to  a
    criticism of phrasing rather than of substance.   On  the  issue  which
    tipped the balance, no error  is  shown.   It  is  not  said  that  the
    conclusion  reached  was  not  properly  open  to   the   judge.    The
    determination is particularly  thorough  and  careful.   It  is  always
    possible to find something to quibble.  I  do  not  think  the  grounds
    amount to more than that.  They do not  show  the  centrepiece  of  the
    decision to be flawed.

 7. Mr Brown withdrew the appellant's grounds of appeal.

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           8 July 2015


