
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25485/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 19th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Mohamed aly Ibrahim Khamis
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Suffield-Thompson promulgated on 26th January 2015
    in which the judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary
    of State's refusal of his application for a  residence  permit  on  the
    basis of his marriage to an EEA citizen in the context of Regulation  7
    and Regulation 17 of the EEA 2006 Regulations. I am going to  refer  to
    the parties as they were  known  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  my
    convenience.

 2. The Respondent had refused the application for a  residence  permit  on
    the basis that  the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.   The
    decision of the Respondent did not raise any other issues and  did  not
    reserve  any  other  requirements  of  the   Regulations   for   future
    consideration.

 3. The grounds of this appeal assert that the Judge was wrong to allow the
    appeal outright. There was no proper evidential basis to conclude  that
    the sponsor was a qualified person.

 4. I find no merit in the grounds.

 5. At the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  came  prepared
    to deal with the issue of the marriage of convenience, and  dealt  with
    such to the satisfaction of the judge who was hearing the case.

 6. At the hearing there was  no  application  to  amend  the  reasons  for
    refusal by the Secretary of State's representative.  If there had  been
    it is trite law that  such  an  application  would  have  been  granted
    subject to a fair  opportunity  being  provided  to  the  Appellant  to
    address the issue through evidence oral and/or documentary.

 7. It is only in the context of the closing submissions that  Respondent's
    representative sought to argue that even if the Appellant satisfied the
    judge that the marriage was not one of convenience there was inadequate
    evidence to show that the EEA national was still  a  qualified  person.
    The position is set out at paragraph 12(iv) of the judge's decision, at
    page 4, under the heading "The Respondent's Case" when the judge  notes
    the submission was made on the basis that "the wife is now working part-
    time". The representative argued that the judge should remit  the  case
    back to  the  Respondent  so  that  the  financial  position  could  be
    assessed.

 8. The judge rejected the Respondent's submissions that the case should be
    remitted.

 9. The grounds' assertion that without documentary evidence the part  time
    employment was "un-evidenced" is of course erroneous because it ignores
    the oral evidence.  There was no cross-examination of the oral evidence
    of the Sponsor's part-time employment. The Respondent's  representative
    did not dispute it, as the submission recorded  reveals.  The  grounds'
    assertion that the judge failed to reason,  or  inadequately  reasoned,
    the Sponsor's exercise  of  treaty  rights,  because  of  the  lack  of
    documentary evidence lacks coherence.

10. As I have set out above the sponsor's exercise of treaty rights was not
    in issue in the reasons for refusal and was not added as  a  ground  of
    refusal. There was no proper evidential basis for the judge to treat it
    as an issue which required reasoning.

11. Even if I were minded to set the decision aside and remake it today  so
    as to deal with the qualified status of the sponsor, on  the  basis  of
    the uncontested oral evidence of part time work, I could only find that
    the sponsor meets the requirements of being a qualified person  as  set
    out in Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

12. For all the reasons I have set out above I find that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is not  vitiated  by  material  error  and  the
    decision allowing the Appellant's appeal stands.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  first  tier
allowing the Appellant's appeal stands.


Signed   E Davidge     Date 16 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

