
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25716/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4th January 2016                  |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 AMIR ABBAS
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Shrestha of Counsel instructed by M R
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge V  A  Lowe  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 31st October 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 5th July 1986  who  on
    29th April 2014 applied for a residence card  as  the  extended  family
    member of an EEA national, Ali Niamat Sheikh.

 3. The application  was  refused  on  5th  June  2014  with  reference  to
    regulation 8 of The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006  (the  2006  regulations).   The  Respondent  contended  that  the
    Appellant had not provided any evidence of his dependency  on  his  EEA
    national Sponsor at any time in Pakistan.  There  was  no  satisfactory
    evidence that the Appellant had been residing  with  the  EEA  national
    prior to entering the United Kingdom nor any satisfactory evidence that
    since entering the United Kingdom the Appellant  had  continued  to  be
    dependent upon the EEA national.  The application was therefore refused
    with reference to regulation 8(2)(a) of the 2006 regulations.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the FtT heard the  appeal  on  15th  October
    2014, and heard evidence from the Appellant and  Mr  Sheikh.   The  FtT
    found the Appellant and Mr Sheikh to be "wholly  unreliable  witnesses"
    and dismissed the appeal pursuant to the  2006  regulations,  and  with
    reference to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal.   In  summary  it  was
    contended that the FtT had erred in considering Article  8,  by  making
    only a  brief  finding,  and  merely  repeating  the  position  of  the
    Secretary of State.

 6.  It  was  contended  that  the  Appellant  had  produced   satisfactory
    documentary evidence "which indicated there being a level of  financial
    dependency upon the Sponsor and that the support is ongoing".   It  was
    contended that if the FtT had considered the wealth of documents in the
    round, it would have come to the same conclusion.

 7. It was contended that the FtT had erred by failing to admit Mr Sheikh's
    witness statement as  his  evidence-in-chief  on  the  basis  that  the
    statement was made in English, and Mr Sheikh confirmed  that  he  could
    not speak or read any English.  It was submitted that Mr  Sheikh  could
    have been asked if the statement had been explained to him in  his  own
    language and whether he understood the contents of his  statement,  and
    in failing to do so, the FtT had unfairly and unjustly refused to admit
    Mr Sheikh's statement as his evidence-in-chief  which  had  a  negative
    impact on the case.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Scott-Baker of the FtT in the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge had failed to  consider  the
             evidence submitted as to dependency and further that the judge
             had failed to admit in evidence a witness statement written in
             English as the Sponsor could not speak  or  read  English  and
             cumulatively such omissions amounted to an error of law.

         3.    The  judge  had  considered  the  evidence  as  to  financial
             dependency but the findings were peppered by  speculation  and
             doubt which seemingly had not been put to  the  Appellant  and
             therefore not arguably open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence
             before  him.   At  [11]  the  judge  records  that  a  witness
             statement was not admitted as, although in English, the person
             who had made  the  same  could  neither  read  nor  speak  any
             English.  The judge does not appear to have considered whether
             such statement had been translated  for  the  witness  and  in
             these circumstances it is considered that the failure to admit
             this evidence amounts to an error of law.

         4.   Permission to appeal is granted".

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FtT directed  itself  appropriately,  and  the
    Grounds of Appeal identify no arguable error of law, but  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the findings made by the FtT, and are an  attempt  to
    re-argue the case.  It was submitted that the findings made by the  FtT
    were open to it on the facts before it.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

11. Mr Shrestha confirmed that he did not pursue the Article  8  aspect  of
    the  appeal  because  of  the  recent  Upper   Tribunal   decision   in
    Amirteymour.

12. Otherwise Mr Shrestha relied upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal, and the grant of permission.   Mr
    Shrestha suggested that the judge granting permission had in fact found
    an error of law.

13. Mr Shrestha explained that he had not  appeared  before  the  FtT,  but
    having had a conference with the Appellant, he understood that  it  was
    not in fact put to Mr Sheikh that there was an issue with  his  witness
    statement.  In any  event,  Mr  Shrestha  submitted  that  Mr  Sheikh's
    witness statement could have been signed in front of  the  FtT  and  he
    could have been asked by the FtT whether the statement had been read to
    him in a language that he understood.

14. Mr Shrestha submitted that  there  was  clear  evidence  of  dependency
    before the FtT and the FtT had erred by speculating and  acting  in  an
    inquisitorial role.  Mr Shrestha submitted that the FtT decision should
    be set aside and the appeal remitted to the FtT to be heard again.

15. At the conclusion of Mr Shrestha's submissions I pointed  out  that  Mr
    Sheikh had given oral evidence before the FtT, and asked what  evidence
    it was contended had been excluded.  Mr Shrestha replied the extent  of
    dependency, although he accepted that it had been open to Mr Sheikh  to
    give whatever evidence he wished before the FtT.

The Respondent's Submissions

16. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response  and  submitted  that  the
    grounds amounted to a disagreement with the findings of the FtT and did
    not disclose any error of law.

17. Mr Harrison submitted that the FtT had taken great  care  in  analysing
    the evidence and had reached conclusions open to it on the evidence and
    had not engaged in speculation.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. Mr Shrestha was correct to abandon the Article 8 aspect of  the  appeal
    in the light of the decision in Amirteymour and  Others  (EEA  appeals;
    human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) and for ease of reference  I  set
    out below the head note to that decision;

         "Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  Appellant
         cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA regulations.  Neither the factual matrix nor the  reasoning
         in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals
         of this nature".

20. There was in this appeal, no removal decision and no notice pursuant to
    section 120 of the  2002  Act.   Therefore  the  FtT  should  not  have
    considered Article 8.

21. I next deal with Mr Sheikh's witness statement which was  not  admitted
    in evidence.  This is referred to in paragraph 11 of the FtT  decision,
    the explanation for not admitting the statement was that the  statement
    was made in English and Mr Sheikh confirmed  at  the  hearing  that  he
    could not speak or read any English.

22. The witness statement should have been signed and dated  prior  to  the
    commencement of the hearing.  As Mr Sheikh  could  not  speak  or  read
    English, the statement should have contained confirmation that  it  had
    been read to him in a language that  he  understood.   The  Appellant's
    representatives should have ensured that this was done.

23. It may have been possible for the witness statement to be translated by
    the interpreter at the  FtT  hearing,  but  the  non-admission  of  the
    witness statement is not a material error of law.  This is  because  Mr
    Sheikh gave oral evidence, which is summarised at paragraph 15  of  the
    FtT decision.  Therefore Mr Sheikh had the opportunity to give evidence-
    in-chief, so that he could give any evidence that he thought  relevant,
    and the Appellant's representative  had  the  opportunity  to  ask  any
    questions of him, which were  thought  to  be  relevant.   Mr  Sheikh's
    evidence was therefore not excluded nor restricted.  There is no  merit
    in this ground of appeal, which discloses no material error of law.

24. I next turn to the consideration of the FtT of the evidence in relation
    to financial dependency.  I do not find a material  error  of  law.   I
    find that this ground of appeal does amount to a disagreement with  the
    findings made by the FtT, but there is no explanation in  the  grounds,
    as to how exactly the FtT erred in law in considering the  evidence  in
    relation to financial dependency.  With respect  I  disagree  with  the
    comments made by the judge who granted permission, in  paragraph  3  of
    the grant.  In my view the only  element  of  speculation  in  the  FtT
    decision is the last sentence in paragraph 21 which I set out below for
    ease of reference;

         "It may also be the case, although less plausibly, that the  2  men
         are involved in a business venture  which  involves  the  Appellant
         living in Buckinghamshire  and  then  moving  money  backwards  and
         forwards to fund commercial transactions".

25. That however is not material, taking into account my finding  that  the
    FtT carried out an extremely comprehensive and  careful  assessment  of
    all the evidence provided by both parties.  The FtT decision  makes  it
    clear what evidence was submitted and considered.  The findings made by
    the FtT are set out at paragraphs 18-24.  The  FtT  gave  adequate  and
    cogent reasons in paragraphs 19-22 for finding that the  Appellant  had
    not discharged the burden of proof in relation to financial dependency.
     Those findings are sustainable, and it was unnecessary for the FtT  to
    include the last sentence in paragraph 21.

26. Read as a whole, the FtT decision  is  comprehensive,  deals  with  all
    material issues, and does not attach weight to any  immaterial  issues.
    The findings made are supported by adequate and cogent reasons, and the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal are a
    disagreement with the findings made, but do not disclose  any  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and I see  no  need  to
make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 6th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 6th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
