
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25939/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th December 2017                  |On 8th December 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                         RALPH LINCOLN LAWN WILLIAMS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Osadebe of Zureil Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr Williams arrived in the UK on 9 April 2012 with entry  clearance
         as the spouse of Annette Mullinger, a British Citizen. He had leave
         to enter until 26 February 2015. That relationship broke  down  and
         they were divorced on 17 April 2014. On 15 January 2015, he  sought
         to vary his leave to remain, such application then being varied  to
         an application for leave to remain as the spouse of  Emma  Snow,  a
         British Citizen whom he had married  on  27th  October  2014.  That
         application was refused and his human rights application refused by
         the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 1 July 2015.
         His appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge M R Oliver in a  decision  promulgated  on  1  March
         2017. Mr Williams was granted permission to appeal that decision on
         the grounds that it was arguable there  had  been  inadequate  fact
         finding, that the considerations of s117B  had  not  been  factored
         into the decision and the judge had failed  to  consider  the  best
         interests of the children.




      2. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.




      3. The First-tier Tribunal judge found the marriage between the couple
         to be genuine and subsisting. Ms Snow has a child from  an  earlier
         relationship and it appears from the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         that there was evidence that the child had contact with  his  birth
         father although the extent of that contact is not revealed  in  the
         decision. The First-tier Tribunal judge  gives  sparse  and  wholly
         inadequate consideration to that child in the context of a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship between the appellant and  the  child's
         mother. It is insufficient to state that




             "...the appellant's relationship with his partner's  son,  are
             not circumstances so exceptional as to  warrant  consideration
             outside  the  rules,  because  they  are  common  currency  of
             relationships where children are involved who ae not  of  both
             parties to the relationship."




      4. Although there appears to be a lack of evidence  of  the  financial
         circumstances of the family, the failure to engage  with  the  best
         interests of the child, the Immigration Rules generally  and  s117B
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 renders  the  decision
         of the  First-tier  Tribunal  infected  with  significant  material
         errors of law.




      5. I set aside the decision to be remade.

      6. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires us to remit the case to the First
         tier with directions or remake it for ourselves.  Where  there  has
         been no hearing at all  before the First tier  and  the  facts  are
         disputed or  unclear  we  conclude  that  the  decision  should  be
         remitted to the First tier judge to determine the appeal.

      7. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:

             7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

      8. Given the paucity of reasoning and lack of adequate fact-finding  I
         am satisfied that this case is one that should be remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be re-heard.


     Date 8th December 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
