

                                             [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25202/2013


                                      THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On August 27, 2014              |On  August 29, 2014      |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                MR NIRMAL SINGH NOOR
                              (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Mallick, Counsel, instructed by Bhogal
      Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born September 24, 1977,  is  a  citizen  of  India.  On
    September 27, 2004 the appellant was granted leave to enter the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  He overstayed  and  on  September  30,  2009  he
    applied for further leave to remain but this was refused on December 8,
    2010. On February 8, 2013, following a religious ceremony  some  months
    earlier, he married his wife, Krisztina Boros. On February 12, 2013  he
    applied for a residence card based on his marriage to an EEA  national.
    The respondent refused the application on June 4, 2013.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Regulation  26
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006   on  June
    5, 2013 and on April 2, 2014 Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  Edwards
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his appeal and  dismissed
    it in determination promulgated on April 7, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 14, 2014 and on May 16,
    2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Levin  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ had erred. The matter  came  before
    me on July 7, 2014 and after hearing submissions I found there had been
    an error of law  not  least  because  the  respondent's  representative
    accepted:

     a. The FtTJ referred to there being numerous  discrepancies  in  their
        interviews but Ms Mallick pointed out that this was not  the  case.
        With regard to the matter referred to by the FtTJ at paragraph [11]
        Ms Mallick reminded me that the witness had addressed this  in  her
        witness statement and no weight had been given to this by the FtTJ.



     b. Ms Everett conceded the fact the couple did not have a  joint  bank
        account could hardly be classed as significant because many  people
        do not have joint accounts.

     c. The FtTJ classed the  child  as  a  child  of  convenience  without
        putting this to the witnesses.

     d. There had been no consideration of article 8 or Section 55  of  the
        Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 4. I adjourned the case until today's date and  I  preserved  findings  of
    facts and issued directions.

 5. The preserved findings were:

     a. The appellant came to the United Kingdom  in  2004  with  leave  to
        remain as a visitor until March 27, 2005.


     b.  The  appellant  admits  he  overstayed  and  did  not  attempt  to
        regularise his stay until he submitted an application for leave  to
        remain on September 30, 2009. This was refused on December 8, 2010.



     c.  Whilst  here  as  an  overstayer  he  worked  here  illegally   by
        undertaking various building jobs.

     d. In January 2010 he met his wife and they exchanged words and  texts
        in  English  although  mutual  friends  translated  more   detailed
        conversations for them.

     e. On December  10,  2012  they  underwent  a  religious  ceremony  in
        Southall and on February 8, 2013 they married under English law  in
        a civil service.

     f. The appellant submitted his application for  a  residence  card  on
        February 12, 2013.

     g. In August 2013 the appellant's wife discovered she was pregnant and
        the baby was born on March 17, 2014.

 6. In order  to  qualify  for  a  residence  card  the  appellant  has  to
    demonstrate the marriage is  not  a  marriage  of  convenience  because
    Regulation 2  of  the  2006  Regulations  excludes  spouses  where  the
    marriage is one of convenience. I made it clear in my  directions  that
    for the appellant to succeed in his application he will have to satisfy
    the Tribunal that his marriage is not one of convenience.

 7. I made clear I would have regard to the case law of  IS  (marriages  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 and  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
    marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038(IAC).

 8. I then issued directions as follows:

     a. The respondent was to  confirm  to  the  Tribunal  and  appellant's
        representatives within seven days  of  service  of  the  directions
        whether they were challenging the appellant's claim that he is  the
        father of the child born on March 17, 2014.


     b. The appellant's representative was to serve any additional evidence
        on the Tribunal and respondent no later than August 13, 2014.  Such
        evidence must be served in  accordance  with  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
        Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

     c. Both the appellant's and his wife's witness statements would  stand
        as evidence-in-chief.

     d. Hungarian and Punjabi  interpreters  were  to  be  booked  for  the
        hearing on August 27, 2014.

 9. On checking the Court file I note the administration  at  the  Tribunal
    has left a lot to be desired as my earlier decision  was  sent  out  on
    July 16, 2014 on the basis I was remitting the decision to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Clearly this was not the case.

10. The respondent did not respond to my direction but  the  appellant  did
    file a bundle of documents containing an  updated  statement  from  the
    appellant and other documents. This 97 page bundle was in  addition  to
    the 322 page bundle that had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

11. I asked, at the outset of  the  resumed  hearing,  Mr  Duffy  what  the
    respondent's position was regarding the child's  paternity  bearing  in
    mind the clear direction I had previously  given.  Mr  Duffy  indicated
    that the respondent had no evidence to contradict the appellant's claim
    that he was the father. I pointed out to him that the whole point of my
    earlier direction was to avoid this situation and he agreed he did  not
    intend to raise paternity.

12. Miss Mallock then outlined the issues for the appeal and simply put she
    stated that if I was satisfied this was not a marriage  of  convenience
    (as considered  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse-marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia
    [2008] UKAIT 31) then the appeal should be allowed. She referred me  to
    page 6 of the skeleton argument that she handed to me.

13. Mr Duffy indicated that having considered all of the papers he took the
    view that when the parties were interviewed the respondent was entitled
    to refuse the application. However, the respondent was unaware  of  the
    pending birth and now the appellant and his wife have a  child  and  he
    was no longer disputing  paternity.  Mr  Duffy's  conclusion  was  that
    little would be served by requiring either the appellant or his wife to
    give evidence in light of the material  now  before  the  Tribunal.  He
    further  confirmed  that  he  had  no  submissions  to  make   on   the
    application.

    FINDINGS

14. I did not require any submissions from  Miss  Mallock  because  of  the
    stance adopted by Mr Duffy. I also  had  in  front  of  me  a  detailed
    skeleton argument that addressed the issues.

15. When this application was made I am satisfied there were concerns  that
    the respondent properly raised but  I  have  to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence. There were discrepancies in their  interviews  and  there  is
    also the language issue. These issues have to be balanced  against  all
    of the evidence that has been submitted. There are statements from  the
    appellant, his wife  and  the  appellant's  wife's  mother.  There  are
    documents from the hospital  that  confirm  the  appellant's  level  of
    involvement in his wife's pregnancy, photographs  and  various  utility
    bills.

16. Applying the guidance in Papajorgji and IS and having regard to all  of
    the available evidence and preserved findings I am satisfied  that  the
    appellant has demonstrated on the balance of  probabilities  that  this
    was not a marriage of convenience.

    DECISION


17. There was a material error of law. I  set  aside  the  FtTJ's  original
    decision .

18. I allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and  I  direct  that  the
    appellant be issued with a residence card.

19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I am not aware a fee was paid. Even if a fee
had been paid I would not make an order because the appeal has been allowed
as a result of further evidence that was not before the interviewing
officer.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
