
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25973/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8th April 2015                             |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Mr Muhammad Salman Zaman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Mnamani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I. Howard, promulgated on 28th November 2014, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 7th October 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Muhammad  Salman  Zaman.    The   appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  4th
    April 1988.  He appeals against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    10th June 2014, refusing to issue him with an EEA residence card  under
    Regulations 2 and 17,  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, such an EEA  national  spouse  being  one,  Kornelija
    Mikalkeviciute.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  he  married  his  sponsoring  wife,  Ms
    Kornelija Mikalkeviciute, a Lithuanian national, on 22nd  May  2014  in
    Liverpool.  He had entered the UK for study, but confirmed that he last
    studied in October 2012, and then he met  his  wife  in  a  night  club
    called Tiger Tiger, where they first made contact, following  which  he
    took his wife to Starbucks for a salad sandwich and  a  Coke,  and  the
    relationship developed.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge applied the well-established Tribunal decision of  Papajorgji
    (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 to this
    case.  What that establishes that there is no burden at the  outset  of
    an application on a claimant to demonstrate that the marriage to an EEA
    national is  not  one  of  convenience.   However,  once  a  reasonable
    suspicion is raised on the basis of the evidence that the  marriage  is
    entered into for the predominant purpose of securing residence  in  the
    UK, then there is an evidential burden on the claimant to address  this
    very question.

 5. In this case, the judge referred to the fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    asked a total of 446 questions and his wife was asked a  total  of  422
    questions.  The Respondent was concerned with answers to about  fifteen
    questions only (see paragraph 17).

 6. However, at the hearing,  before  the  judge,  the  Presenting  Officer
    stated that there were 50 questions asked of each of  them  separately,
    which gave cause for concern, on  the  grounds  of  being  inconsistent
    (paragraph 17).

 7. The judge went on to say that he had looked at the questions and that,

         "The questions range across a  number  of  topics  including  their
         siblings, his  family  in  Pakistan,  their  first  meeting,  their
         contact following that first meeting, whether she is  a  vegetarian
         or vegan, their talk of marriage, the proposal,  the  time  of  the
         wedding, the witnesses to  the  wedding,  the  microwave  in  their
         kitchen, showering habits, where food is kept, cooking, cigarettes,
         attending the gymnasium and events on and around 19th May 2014 when
         immigration officials attended their shared home".

 8. The judge went on to say, following the recital above, that,  "each  of
    these topics about which they were questioned  contained  answers  that
    are inconsistent" and that, "I have looked carefully at the context  of
    the  answers  and  considered  the  explanations  for  the  differences
    advanced in the evidence" (paragraph 18).  Given this, the  judge  then
    went on to say that, "it is correct to say that neither  the  Appellant
    nor her husband was able to give cogent reasons for the differences  in
    their answers" (paragraph 19).

 9. What was most significant, according to the judge was that, at the time
    of the visit by the Immigration Officers, "there was no  suggestion  of
    the Appellant's living at the address at the time  of  the  visit  [and
    this] is telling.  The explanation is that they had fought and he  had,
    temporarily,  moved  out.   I  did  not  find  the  account   of   this
    'coincidence' at all compelling" (at paragraph 20).

10. Accordingly, the judge decided that there was  a  reasonable  suspicion
    and that the inconsistencies are such as  to  "satisfy  the  evidential
    burden on the Respondent.  Thus the evidential  burden  shifts  to  the
    Appellant and her witness" (paragraph 21).

11. In this regard, the judge observed that,

         "Their evidence was weak.  They are very different.  The  Appellant
         is a serious and relatively humourless individual.  His wife on the
         other hand is gregarious and a serious party-goer.  The description
         she gives of him on the night they met is of a man  ill-at-ease  in
         the environment of a public house or nightclub ..." (paragraph 22).

    The judge also then went on to say that he heard evidence from  two  of
    Ms Mikalkeviciute's friends and that,

         "They  are  both  similar  in  demeanour  to   Ms   Mikalkeviciute.
         Considering the presentation of each of the four  witnesses,  I  am
         satisfied that the Appellant is the acquaintance of her two friends
         and  it  is  in  those  circumstances  her  'marriage'   has   been
         contracted" (paragraph 23).

12. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that the  judge  imposed  too  high  a
    burden of proof upon the Appellants and that the decision  was  against
    the weight of the evidence.

14. On 10th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that there has been some unfairness in this  case,
    which could amount to an error of law.

15. On 16th February 2015 a Rule 24 response  was  entered,  where  it  was
    maintained that the judge did not  find  that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor shared a house, but not a room.

16. Rather, what the judge was doing was summarising the  position  adopted
    by the Sponsor and Appellant in respect of  their  living  arrangements
    and how these arrangements impacted on their interview.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on  8th  April  2015,  Ms  Mnamani,  began  by
    drawing my attention to the Appellant's bundle and  to  the  interviews
    which were there set out.  In particular, my  attention  was  drawn  to
    pages 94 to 162.  It was further submitted that the Respondent's bundle
    contains the discrepancies that are relied upon by the Respondent.  The
    findings by the  judge  were  made  from  paragraph  14  onwards.   She
    submitted that over 400 questions were asked to  both  of  the  parties
    separately, and there were bound to have been some inconsistencies, but
    the judge had to explain what  these  inconsistencies  were.   This  is
    particularly important because, if one looks at the discrepancies  that
    allegedly are said to have been made, in the Respondent's  own  bundle,
    they could easily be explained away.  The judge had  clearly  therefore
    applied a much higher standard of proof.  This was clear from what  the
    judge said at paragraph 20, when he had evidence before  him  that  the
    Appellant had moved out of the house  after  a  disagreement  with  the
    Sponsor, and that was the reason why he was not there.   At  one  point
    the judge had observed that the couple shared a house, but not a  room,
    but  subsequently,  the  judge  then  contradicted  himself.   It  was,
    therefore, important for the judge to set out exactly what it was  that
    was so discrepant as to damage the credibility of the Appellant and the
    Sponsor.

18. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted  that  the  challenge  here  was  to
    factual  findings  and  it  was  therefore  a  disagreement  with   the
    determination.  The Upper Tribunal should be slow to interfere  in  the
    findings of a fact-finding Tribunal below.  The  fact  was  that  there
    were discrepancies here and these were  set  out  at  annex  1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle.

19. In reply,  Ms  Mnamani  stated  that  there  was  "unfairness"  to  the
    Appellant, in the way envisaged by the  judge  granting  permission  to
    appeal.  The unfairness arose from the fact that there is an allegation
    of discrepancies without the discrepancies actually having been set out
    in the determination.  If one looks carefully, there  are  actually  no
    discrepancies as such.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  This is a case where the judge has applied  the  principle
    in Papajorgji carefully.  The central  complaint  made  by  Ms  Mnamani
    against the determination is that the judge did not set out in the body
    of the  determination  the  precise  contradictions  in  the  evidence.
    Whereas this is true, it cannot be said that the judge was oblivious to
    the discrepancies in question.  This is because he quite clearly stated
    that, "the questions range across a number of  topics  including  their
    siblings, his family in Pakistan, their  first  meeting  ..."  (and  so
    forth) (at paragraph 18).  He ends  the  analysis  of  these  areas  of
    questioning with the statement that, "each of these topics about  which
    there were questions contains answers that are inconsistent" (paragraph
    18).

21. Second, if one looks at the questions  themselves,  it  is  clear  from
    Appendix 1 of the Respondent's bundle, and the refusal  letter  itself,
    that some of these discrepancies are indeed such as to have formed  the
    basis of the judge's determination in exactly the way that it did.  For
    example the Appellant said that his wife proposed to him in the morning
    of June or July 2013.  His spouse, however, said that she  proposed  to
    him in the  bedroom  in  the  evening  of  May  2013.   Similarly,  the
    Appellant still had not informed his family in Pakistan about the  fact
    that he was now married to a Lithuanian and maintained  that  this  was
    because "their reaction would not be good".

22. Furthermore, the Appellant said that the house where he lived  was  red
    brick.  His spouse said that the house was  painted  white.   But  more
    importantly, when the Immigration Officers visited on 19th May 2014 the
    Appellant said that he  was  not  at  home  because  he  was  at  work.
    However, his wife had said that he had not lived  there  for  the  last
    week.  Only after the Appellant had been informed about what  his  wife
    said, did he accept that he indeed had not lived there for a week.  The
    reason he gave was that they had quarrelled and he had left.

23. Clearly, therefore, the judge was correct in stating  that  there  were
    discrepancies in the answers given which simply did not show  that  the
    parties were living in a genuine and stable  relationship  such  as  to
    comply with the requirements of the EEA Regulations.  Indeed, the judge
    held that "neither the Appellant nor  her  husband  was  able  to  give
    cogent reasons for the differences in their answers" (paragraph 19).

24. Accordingly, notwithstanding the  valiant  efforts  of  Ms  Mnamani  to
    persuade me otherwise, I am not satisfied that there is an error of law
    in the determination by the judge below.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        15th April 2015

