

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2015                               |On 6 March 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                           LEONARDO MARCIO SOARES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None (Appellant appeared in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. As it is common ground  and  agreed  between  the  parties  that  the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses an error  of
       law such that his decision to dismiss the  appeal  cannot  stand  and
       that the appeal must be determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal,
       it is necessary only briefly to identify the nature of that error and
       to confirm my agreement to that course.


    2. The appellant  appealed  against  a  removal  decision  made  by  the
       respondent after she had refused a request to reconsider  an  earlier
       refusal to grant the appellant leave to remain.  In doing so he asked
       that the appeal be determined without  a  hearing  on  the  basis  of
       written representations made on his behalf.


    3. That appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carroll  on  11
       November 2014 who said, at paragraph 6 of a brief determination, that
       the appellant had not submitted any evidence of ties  established  in
       the United Kingdom and nor had he provided any explanation why he and
       his family could not return to live in Brazil. Unfortunately,  as  is
       accepted by the  respondent,  the  appellant  had  filed  and  served
       written evidence which, he argues, established what was  required  to
       succeed in the appeal but that material, although  submitted  to  the
       Tribunal, was either not before the judge or, if it was, it  was  not
       taken into account.


    4.  In  either  event,  this  constitutes,  at   least,   a   procedural
       irregularity giving rise to unfairness such as to amount to an  error
       of law. The effect of that is that the appellant has not had his case
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal at all. Therefore, the decision
       of Judge Carroll will be set aside and the appeal will be remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh by a different  judge
       of that Tribunal.


  Summary of decision


    5. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  the  decision  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll to dismiss the appeal, contained in
       a determination promulgated on 17 November 2014, is set aside.


    6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the  extent  that  the
       appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh
       by a judge other than Judge Carroll.



                               Signed   [pic]


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    5 March 2015


