
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/26625/2015

                                                      IA/26631/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 December 2017                        |On 03 January 2018              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                             1) MRS SALMA RAHMAN
                                2) MASTER TT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Ashraf, Legal Representative, JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, who do not have extant leave to enter or remain, appeal
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 22 November 2016) dismissing their appeals against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  grant  them  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds either under the Rules  or  outside  the
    Rules.  The first appellant is the mother of the second appellant,  who
    was born in the UK on 10 October 2007.  TT's father  was  originally  a
    party to the appeals, but before his appeal was heard,  he  voluntarily
    returned to Bangladesh, and so his appeal was treated as abandoned.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On  20  October  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Alis  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal for the following reasons:

        The grounds of appeal argue that the Judge erred (a) by  failing  to
        have regard to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705;  (b)  failed  to
        identify the best interests of the child. The grounds as drafted are
        arguable.  The Judge did not consider the guidance in MA  (Pakistan)
        and there is no specific assessment of the  child's  best  interests
        before the reasonable assessment is undertaken.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  The  first  appellant,  Mrs
    Rahman, was born on 3 May 1984.  At all material times she was  married
    to TT's father, Mr Mahmud, who  had  been  born  in  Bangladesh  on  29
    November 1971.

 4. Mr Mahmud arrived in the UK as a student on 6 August 2005.  On  23  May
    2006 Mrs Rahman joined him in the UK  in  the  capacity  of  a  Student
    Dependant.  Following TT's birth in the UK on 10 October 2007,  he  was
    given limited leave to remain as a dependant  of  his  father.   On  30
    August 2011 Mr Mahmud's application for further leave to  remain  as  a
    student was refused, with a right of appeal, and  the  appellants  were
    refused in line with Mr Mahmud.

 5. Mr Mahmud lodged an appeal, which was allowed on human  rights  grounds
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 13 January 2012.  The  outcome  was  that
    his application for further leave  to  remain  as  a  student  was  re-
    considered on 30 April 2012, and Mr Mahmud was granted limited leave to
    remain until 29 September  2012  to  complete  his  current  course  of
    studies.  His dependants were granted leave in line with him.

 6. On 29 September 2012, Mr Mahmud applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1
    (Entrepreneur) with the appellants as his dependants.  The  application
    was refused on 9 September  2013,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  made
    concomitant decisions to remove Mr  Mahmud  and  his  dependants  under
    section 47 of the 2006 Act.  Mr Mahmud  appealed  against  the  refusal
    decision, and his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 23
    May 2014.  Permission to appeal was  refused  both  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and by the Upper Tribunal, and by mid-August 2014 Mr  Mahmud's
    appeal rights had been exhausted.

 7. Following further applications by Mr Mahmud and  the  appellants  being
    rejected, and following threatened proceedings for judicial review, the
    respondent agreed to reconsider the position of TT, who had now accrued
    seven years' residence in the UK, and hence to reconsider the  position
    of the family unit as a whole.  In a letter  dated  9  July  2015,  the
    respondent gave her reasons for refusing the  human  rights  claims  of
    each member of the family.

 8. With regard to Mr Mahmud, he did not meet the suitability  requirements
    of Appendix FM or  Rule  276ADE,  as  he  had  used  deception  in  his
    application of 29 September  2012.   During  an  administrative  review
    process, ETS had confirmed that his test scores for tests taken  on  16
    May 2012 had been obtained through deception.  There was an anomaly  in
    his speaking test indicating the presence of a proxy test-taker.

 9. On the issue of whether there were significant obstacles to the  family
    reintegrating into life in Bangladesh, it was evident from Mr  Mahmud's
    passport, and also from Mrs  Rahman's  passport,  that  they  had  both
    visited Bangladesh on several occasions since being present in the  UK.
    It was also noted that in the appeal determination dated 21  May  2014,
    the Judge had found that all Mr Mahmud's family members  were  residing
    in Bangladesh.  He and Mrs Rahman had had no  valid  leave  in  the  UK
    since 29 September 2012, and his appeal rights had become exhausted  on
    11 August 2014.  Since that time, they had remained in the  UK  without
    permission.  The Judge in the appeal determination of 21 May 2014 found
    that it was quite clear that the parents were aware that their leave in
    the UK was only temporary.  The fact that they had a child did not give
    them any extra rights in the UK.  They had  no  legitimate  expectation
    that they would be granted further leave to remain in the UK.

10. Although their son was aged over seven, he was still a  child  who  had
    not yet entered his teenage years, which were  particularly  formative.
    It was not true that their son had no ties to Bangladesh.  His  parents
    were  both  Bangladeshi,  and  through  his   daily   interaction   and
    cohabitation with them, he  would  have  been  exposed  to  aspects  of
    Bangladeshi culture through the parents' shared heritage.  It was  also
    noted that the child had visited Bangladesh since his birth, and so  it
    could not be argued that he had never been there.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. At  the  hearing  before  Judge  O'Garro,  both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant,  who
    produced documentary evidence to show that Mr Mahmud had  divorced  her
    in Bangladesh.  She adopted  as  her  evidence  in  chief  her  witness
    statement signed by her on 30 October 2016,  the  principal  thrust  of
    which was that TT's health and welfare would be imperilled if  she  was
    required to return to Bangladesh with him as a single mother.  She  had
    no house in Bangladesh.  There was no one in that  country  to  provide
    them with financial support.  There was no  one  to  provide  financial
    support for medical treatment for TT if he became sick and ill,  or  to
    provide financial support for his educational expenses:

         In the absence of food, shelter, medication and education, it would
         not be reasonable for my child to return to Bangladesh with me.

12. In her subsequent decision, the Judge found at paragraph [27]  that  at
    the age of nine TT  was  still  young  enough  to  adjust  to  life  in
    Bangladesh, to adapt to  the  education  system  there  and  learn  his
    culture.  He had not yet reached secondary level education  "which  may
    have made a difference in my  consideration".   She  found  that  there
    would be  little  language  problems  for  him,  because  she  was  not
    persuaded that he did not speak Bengali at home with his mother.

13. At paragraphs [28] and [29], the Judge  addressed  the  mother's  claim
    that she would have no support in Bangladesh, and her claimed  fear  of
    her former husband (who she said had been violent towards  her  in  the
    past).  She had provided documentary evidence that her  former  husband
    had divorced her.  She said that he had since re-married.  If that  was
    the case, then he would have no interest in pursuing her to  cause  her
    any harm, as he was happily married.  Further, if she seriously  feared
    threats of harm from her former husband, the authorities in  Bangladesh
    could offer her  protection.   To  her  knowledge,  Bangladesh  had  an
    effective legal system.

14. At paragraph [30], she rejected the mother's claim that she would  have
    no family support from her parents  and  siblings  in  Bangladesh.  The
    Judge continued in paragraph [31]:

         The appellants have no right to be in the United Kingdom and I have
         been  provided  with  no  evidence  why  they  cannot   return   to
         Bangladesh.  The first appellant is young and fit, and I have  been
         provided with no evidence why  she  should  not  be  able  to  find
         employment and adjust to life in  Bangladesh  with  [TT].  She  has
         managed to remain in the United Kingdom  and  been  resourceful  in
         getting support from charitable organisations and from the  friends
         she made in the community.  I see no  reason  why  she  cannot  use
         these same resourceful skills in adjusting to life in Bangladesh.

15. The Judge concluded, in paragraph [32], that it was reasonable for  the
    child to leave the UK with his  parent,  which  meant  that  the  first
    appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM via the parent
    route.  By the same token, the child could not meet the requirements of
    Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).

16. At paragraph [34], the Judge  pronounced  herself  satisfied  that  the
    first appellant could not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE  as  she
    had provided no credible evidence  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration into life in Bangladesh.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Ashraf developed the case advanced in the grounds of appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  He also sought to rely on the fact that TT had now
    accrued over ten years' residence in the UK (as of 10 October 2017) and
    had now applied to register as a British citizen  pursuant  to  section
    1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1984.

18. He submitted that the reasoning of the Judge was flawed, as she  failed
    to identify any powerful reason as to why TT should not remain  in  the
    UK.  The Judge's finding that TT was still young and able to adjust  to
    life  in  Bangladesh  was  speculative.   She  did  not   advance   any
    explanation as to how she had reached  such  a  conclusion.   The  same
    applied to the Judge's finding that the child would be able to adapt to
    the education system in Bangladesh.  He received no  financial  support
    from his father, and his mother had confirmed that  she  would  not  be
    able to afford to educate him privately in Bangladesh.   The  potential
    difficulty with a free Government school was that, although English was
    a compulsory subject, lessons were taught in the Bengali medium.   Even
    if he had some knowledge of spoken Bengali,  he  had  no  knowledge  of
    reading and writing Bengali as he had not been required  to  learn  the
    same.   This  would  certainly  drag  him  into  unwanted  and  serious
    hardship.

19. Mr Avery adopted the Rule 24 response settled by a colleague,  opposing
    the appeal.  He submitted that the Judge had correctly directed himself
    on the law by reference to Azimi-Moayed & Others  (decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC)  and  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Her correct  starting  point  had  been  that  the
    length of the child's residence was a significant factor  as  to  where
    his best interests lay.

Discussion

20. There are aspects of the error of law challenge advanced by  Mr  Ashraf
    in his skeleton argument which  are  no  more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement with findings of primary fact which were  reasonably  open
    to the Judge, in circumstances where she did not find  various  aspects
    of the mother's evidence to be credible. The live issue is whether  the
    Judge materially  erred  in  law  in  her  assessment  of  the  related
    questions  of  where  TT's  best  interests  lay  and  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to leave the country.

21. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in law in the  failure  to  take  into
    account the guidance provided in the case of MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705.

22. In that case Elias LJ said at paragraph [45]:

         In my judgment, the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
         applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the  public  interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6).  ...  The critical point is that  Section  117C(5)
         is in substance a  free-standing  provision  in  the  same  way  as
         Section 117B(6), and even so the court in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to me that it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         Section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  Section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.

23. At paragraph [46] Elias LJ said that the published Home  Office  Policy
    guidance merely confirmed what is implicit in adopting  a  policy  [the
    seven year rule] of this nature:

         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less when the children are very  young
         because the focus of their lives will be on their families, but the
         disruption becomes more serious as they  get  older.  Moreover,  in
         these cases there must  be  a  very  strong  expectation  that  the
         child's best interests will to be remain in the UK with his parents
         as part of  a  family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment.

24. At paragraph [48] Elias LJ cited with approval the explanation given by
    Clarke LJ in EV (Phillipines) at  [34]-[37]  as  to  how  the  Tribunal
    should apply the  proportionality  test  where  wider  public  interest
    considerations are in play, in circumstances where the  best  interests
    of the child dictate that he should remain with his  parents.  At  [36]
    Clarke LJ said that  if  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain, the need to maintain immigration control may  well
    not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests
    to remain, but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
    way), the result may be the opposite. Clarke LJ continued in [37]:

         In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

25. The appellants were represented before the First-tier  Tribunal  by  Mr
    Khan of Lincoln Chambers Solicitors.  He did  not  rely  on  either  MA
    (Pakistan) or upon the IDIs of August 2015, which provide  that,  where
    the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there need  to  be
    strong reasons for refusing leave.

26. I accept that this is not determinative of  the  question  whether  the
    Judge nonetheless erred in law in not referring to the guidance  of  MA
    (Pakistan) of her own motion.  However, I am not persuaded that express
    reference to MA (Pakistan) was essential.

27. At paragraph [24], the  Judge  correctly  identified  the  over-arching
    question which she had to decide, which is whether  it  was  reasonable
    for the child to be removed with his  mother  to  Bangladesh.   At  the
    beginning of paragraph [25], she reminded herself that  the  child  was
    now aged nine years old. She said that in considering  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to leave the  UK  with  his  parent,  she  was
    reminding herself of the guidance given in Azimi-Moayed. The Judge went
    on to set out this guidance,  which  includes  the  following  at  sub-
    paragraph (iii):

         Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin  can
         lead to the development of social, cultural  and  educational  ties
         which it would be inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
         compelling reason to the contrary." [my emphasis].

28. The significance of the italicised words is that the Upper Tribunal  in
    Azimi-Moayed made essentially the same point as was made  later  in  MA
    (Pakistan) with regard to the significance of a  child  having  accrued
    seven years' residence. There is no material difference between  saying
    that there has to be a "compelling reason to the contrary"  to  justify
    disruption of social, cultural  and  educational  ties  acquired  after
    seven years of residence in the host country, and  the  requirement  in
    the IDIs, which  Elias  LJ  endorsed,  that  there  should  be  "strong
    reasons" for refusing leave to remain to a child who  meets  the  seven
    years' residence requirement.

29. Moreover, the Judge went on,  in  paragraph  [26],  to  cite  the  same
    passages from  the  judgment  of  Clarke  LJ  in  EV  (Philippines)  at
    paragraphs  [34]-[37],  which  Elias  LJ  cited  with  approval  in  MA
    (Pakistan).

30. For the above reasons, Ground 1 is not  made  out.  The  Judge  has  in
    substance followed the guidance given in MA (Pakistan).

31. The  thrust  of  Grounds  2-5  is  that  the  Judge  adopted  a  flawed
    methodology in answering the question  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK, and that she failed to  consider  the
    child's best interests first in isolation from other factors,  such  as
    his and his mother's lack of status.

32. Viewed in isolation, the best interest consideration in paragraphs [27]
    to [31] presents as unbalanced, as the Judge's main  focus  is  on  the
    prospects for the child on return to Bangladesh.  However, it is  clear
    from what the Judge has said earlier that she takes it as read that the
    child's  length  of  residence  in  the  UK  is  a  significant  factor
    militating in favour of him remaining in the host country in accordance
    with the third principle of Azimi-Moayed. In paragraphs  [27]  to  [31]
    the Judge is rightly addressing "the principal important  controversial
    issues" relating to the child's best interests raised by his mother  in
    her witness  statement,  all  of  which  relate  to  his  prospects  in
    Bangladesh, and none of which relate to his life in the UK.

33. I accept that there is  one  flaw  in  the  assessment,  which  is  the
    declaration - at the beginning of paragraph [31] - that the  appellants
    have no right to be in the United Kingdom.  This is not a finding which
    belongs in the assessment of the child's best interests.  It belongs to
    a discussion of wider proportionality considerations, after  the  Judge
    has decided whether it is in the child's best interests to remain or to
    leave; and, if to remain, whether it is overwhelmingly in  the  child's
    best interest that he should remain or whether it is only  on  balance,
    with some factors pointing the other way.

34. However, I do not consider that the Judge's error is material.  It  was
    open to the Judge to attach considerable weight to the fact that TT had
    not yet reached the stage of embarking upon  his  secondary  education.
    The fifth principle in Azimi-Moayed is that "seven years from age  four
    is likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven  years
    of life". In light  of  this  weighty  consideration  and  the  Judge's
    sustainable findings of fact on the prospects for  the  child  and  his
    mother in Bangladesh, it was clearly not overwhelmingly in the  child's
    best interests that he should remain in the UK, such that the  need  to
    maintain immigration control might well not tip the balance.

35. In conclusion, I  consider  that  the  Judge  has  given  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for finding that it was reasonable for TT to  leave
    the UK.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

These appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that the appellants require anonymity for these proceedings in  the
Upper Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 27 December 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






















