
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26663/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 March 2014                                |ON 25 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Rowshon Ara BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bashir, Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Rowshon Ara Begum, was born on 10 January 1948 and is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  The appellant had applied to the respondent for
    indefinite leave to remain as the  dependent  relative  (mother)  of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom.  The application  was
    refused on 13 June 2013 and the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hands) which, in  a  determination  dated  12  November
    2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had been refused under paragraph 317 of HC 395:


    317. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the parent, grandparent or
    other dependent relative of a person present and settled in the United
    Kingdom are that the person:
    (i) is related to a person present and settled in the United Kingdom in
    one of the following ways:
    (a) parent or grandparent who is divorced, widowed, single or separated
    aged 65 years or over; or
    (b) parents or grandparents travelling together of whom at least one is
    aged 65 or over; or
    (c) a parent or grandparent aged 65 or over who has entered into a
    second relationship of marriage or civil partnership but cannot look to
    the spouse, civil partner or children of that second relationship for
    financial support; and where the person settled in the United Kingdom
    is able and willing to maintain the parent or grandparent and any
    spouse or civil partner or child of the second relationship who would
    be admissible as a dependant; or
    (d) parent or grandparent under the age of 65 if living alone outside
    the United Kingdom in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances;
    or
    (e) parents or grandparents travelling together who are both under the
    age of 65 if living in the most exceptional compassionate
    circumstances; or
    (f) the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over the age of
    18 if living alone outside the United Kingdom in the most exceptional
    compassionate circumstances; and
    (ii) is joining or accompanying a person who is present and settled in
    the United Kingdom or who is on the same occasion being admitted for
    settlement; and
    (iii) is financially wholly or mainly dependent on the relative present
    and settled in the United Kingdom; and
    (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together with any
    dependants, without recourse to public funds, in accommodation which
    the sponsor owns or occupies exclusively; and
    (iva) can, and will, be maintained adequately, together with any
    dependants, without recourse to public funds; and
    (v) has no other close relatives in his own country to whom he could
    turn for financial support; and

    (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds  a  valid  United  Kingdom  entry
    clearance for entry in this capacity; and

    (vii) does not fall for refusal under the general grounds for refusal

    At the time of her application to the  respondent,  the  appellant  had
    been aged under the age of 65 years.  By the time  the  appeal  hearing
    came before the First-tier Tribunal, she had attained  the  age  of  65
    years.  She was, as a consequence, no longer required to show that  she
    would  be  living  alone  in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances.  However, prior to the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Home Office had written to the appellant's solicitor  and
    to the Tribunal on 31 October 2013 in the following terms:

         The refusal letter of June 2013 raises the  single  issue  of  Rule
         317(i)(d), the respondent concedes that the appellant  is  now  age
         65.

         However,  the  respondent  will  seek  to  argue,  subject  to  the
         permission of the judge,  that  Rule  317(a)  and  317(v)  are  not
         satisfied.  I apologise for the  late  notice  of  this  issue  but
         believe the respondent's current position to be  supported  by  the
         authority of RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India  [2006]  UKAIT
         00039  (18 April 2006).

         The position of the respondent  has  altered  after  reviewing  the
         evidence submitted in  support  of  [the  appellant's]  visit  visa
         application  and  appeal  (VA/16176/2009)   and   I   enclose   the
         application form, the evidence provided in support  of  the  appeal
         and the determination of Judge Bircher.

 3. By a letter dated 31 October 2013, the appellant's solicitor  responded
    to the letter from the Home Office:

         If the learned  judge  decides  to  include  this  [the  additional
         grounds under paragraph 317(a) and (v)] then we would not be  in  a
         position  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  and  we  will  seek   an
         adjournment.

         Therefore the appellant seeks guidance from the Tribunal.   If  the
         above Rules are to be included then I have no option but to seek  a
         five weeks' adjournment  to  enable  us  to  gather  new  evidence.
         However, if the above is not to be included then the appellant will
         not seek an adjournment.  However, it would be unfair to adjourn on
         the hearing date given the costs involved.

 4. The Tribunal considered the adjournment request and  refused  it  by  a
    letter dated 1 November 2013:

         The additional basis for the respondent's refusal simply relies  on
         the material of which the appellant will be well-aware since it  is
         material relating to her own application for  entry  clearance  and
         its inconsistency with her current application.  No good reason  is
         offered fro the inability of the appellant to deal with this or for
         the inability of her representatives to appear on her behalf.

 5. The matter then came before Judge Hands at North Shields.   At  [3]  et
    seq the judge dealt with the renewed adjournment application made by Mr
    Bashir.   She  also  considered  whether  it  was  just  to  allow  the
    respondent to raise new grounds of refusal.   As  to  the  latter,  she
    wrote at [5]:

         I note that the appellant was not 65  at  the  time  she  made  her
         application and had the respondent acted with  more  alacrity,  the
         ground on which it was refused was applicable.  However, because of
         the delay, the appellant has now attained the age of 65 and has the
         benefit of her appeal being considered in the light of  that  fact.
         I am satisfied therefore that what the respondent should  be  given
         the benefit of the additional time and the decision being  reviewed
         in the light of the fact the appellant is now 65  and  was  at  the
         date of the decision the refusal was based on the fact that she had
         applied before her 65th birthday.  I therefore allow the amendment.

 6. It is important to note  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal assert that the judge was wrong to refuse an  adjournment;  it
    is not suggested by the appellant  that  the  judge  acted  wrongly  by
    allowing the respondent to raise new grounds of refusal.

 7. The judge continued at [6] to note that the adjournment application had
    been refused on the papers.  She set out  the  reasons  given  for  the
    refusal (see above).  She then went on to say:

         No good  reasons  have  been  offered  for  the  inability  of  the
         appellant to deal with this matter or  for  the  inability  of  her
         representatives to appear on her behalf.  No additional reasons for
         the adjournment were placed before me and I refused the application
         to adjourn for those same reasons.

 8. I consider that the judge acted properly in  refusing  the  application
    for an adjournment.  As I have noted above, the addition of new grounds
    of refusal has not been challenged  by  the  appellant.   Further,  the
    point made by the judge who refused the adjournment on the papers is  a
    good one; it cannot be said  that  the  appellant  has  been  taken  by
    surprise by "new evidence" since the evidence now relied  upon  by  the
    respondent is the appellant's own previous application for a visit visa
    and the appellant can properly be regarded as having knowledge  of  the
    contents of that application.  The letter from the  Bashir  Consultancy
    seeking an adjournment  simply  refers  to  the  need  to  "gather  new
    evidence."  No indication was given what that evidence might be or  why
    it would take five weeks in order to obtain it.  I acknowledge that the
    timescale between the Home Office's letter of 31 October 2013  and  the
    appeal hearing before Judge Hands no 4 November was a  tight  one.   It
    was, however a timescale adequate, in my opinion, for  the  appellant's
    solicitor  to  take  instructions  from  the  appellant  regarding  the
    apparent inconsistencies between her evidence in the present appeal and
    that submitted in support of a previous visit visa.  At  no  point  has
    any explanation been given as to why evidence other than directly taken
    from the appellant herself  would  be  required  to  explain  away  the
    inconsistencies in the appellant's own evidence.  I find that the judge
    was right to refuse the renewed oral application  for  an  adjournment.
    As she pointed out, no "additional reasons" had  been  put  before  her
    over and above those put before the judge who refused  the  adjournment
    on the papers.  There was no reason at all for her to take a  different
    view of the application from that taken by the judge  who  refused  the
    first adjournment request.

 9. Significantly, the grounds of appeal make no attempt at all  to  detail
    how the evidence which the appellant sought to  obtain  might  indicate
    that the judge's findings of fact were wrong.  The judge found at  [26]
    that  the  appellant  "has  [not]  provided  satisfactory  evidence  to
    demonstrate she is separated from her husband or that she is wholly  or
    mainly financially supported by her son.  I find she did not  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 317."  The judge found  that  the  appellant
    was still married to her husband and she found that it was "not  to  be
    true" that the couple had separated, as the appellant had claimed.   In
    my view, those were findings available to the  judge  on  the  evidence
    before her, including that contained in the appellant's previous  visit
    visa  application.   They  were  findings  which  were  fatal  to   the
    appellant's appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules.   There  is  no
    challenge in the grounds of the Upper Tribunal of the judge's dismissal
    of the appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  In  essence,  the
    judge found that the appellant could return to Bangladesh  to  continue
    family life with her husband.  I can identify no error of  law  in  the
    judge's determination of the appeal under the Immigration Rules  or  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
