
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/26214/2015

                                                IA/26216/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th August 2017                      |  On 11th September 2017            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              Mrs Sandeep Kaur
                              Mr Ankit Chhabra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs P Glass, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors (Southall)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Adio  promulgated  on  21st
    December 2016 following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross  on  22nd  November
    2016.  The Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  are  both  Indian
    citizens and unmarried but in a relationship which is not and  was  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  They sought leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds outside of Appendix FM because Appendix FM did not
    apply to them.  The appeal proceeded on the basis  of  allowed  to  the
    extant that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its
    entirety and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
    rehearing.  paragraph  276ADE(6)   of   the   Immigration   Rules   and
    freestanding Article 8.

 2. The judge in his Decision set out the Appellants' case, which was  that
    they are of different castes and different religions that both sets  of
    parents have withdrawn any support from them  and  indeed  they  argued
    that they were at risk of an honour killing.

 3. The judge noted in the Decision, however, that there had been no asylum
    claim and then went on to deal with just the 276ADE point about whether
    they were entitled to  succeed  on  the  basis  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to their reintegration into India.  However,  the
    judge did not apply that test.  He simply applied  a  test  of  whether
    there were significant obstacles.  He made no reasoned findings  as  to
    whether they would be able to obtain employment and support  themselves
    in India.  They claimed that they would not be able to but he  made  no
    finding on that.  It was argued in front of me that the  judge  clearly
    had in mind the risk of an honour killing although the  judge  did  not
    make any reasoned finding about that in his judgment and  what  was  in
    his mind is irrelevant.

 4. The reasons behind the judgment are wholly  inadequate  and  apply  the
    wrong legal test.  The President of the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of
    Treebhawon (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances  test)  [2017]
    UKUT 00013 (IAC) makes clear that very significant obstacles means what
    it says, a self-evidently elevated threshold such that  mere  hardship,
    mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience,  even
    when multiplied, will generally be insufficient in  this  context.  The
    philosophy and reasoning, with appropriate adjustments,  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in its exposition of the sister  test  "unduly  harsh"  in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 at paragraph 46 apply.

 5. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's Decision  and  while  I
    would have redecided it had there been an interpreter present  today  I
    am unable to do so.  I am told that although it is claimed  the  second
    Appellant is well-integrated in the UK her English is  insufficient  to
    conduct the hearing without an interpreter and for  that  reason  I  am
    left with little alternative but to remit the matter to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.

 6. The appropriate First-tier Tribunal remains Hatton Cross.   Accordingly
    it is my Decision that the Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
    allowed to the extent that the Decision  is  set  aside  and  the  case
    remitted for a full rehearing.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  decision
is set aside in its entirety and the matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a full rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



































