
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26583/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 19 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                 QIANG CHEN
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Shilliday, Home Office Presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Brennan, Martin Brennan solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of China, born  on  17  December  1968.    He
    sought to appeal against the decision of Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department dated 21  June  2013  refusing  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community Law as the primary carer of an EEA national exercising treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 21 June 2013 did  not  take  issue
    with the fact that the claimant was the primary carer but rather raised
    an objection whether or not the child qualified to be a self-sufficient
    person by having the necessary funds as required under the Regulations.
     No consideration was given to Article 8 for reasons as stated  in  the
    decision.

3.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hutchinson on 8 July 2014.  The  Judge
    found that the  financial  requirements  for  the  child  to  be  self-
    sufficient were indeed met on the evidence provided.   There  has  been
    no challenge  to that finding.

4.   The Judge, however, drew the attention of  the  parties  to  Regulation
    15A(2) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    which provided that:


         "(a) The appellant is the primary carer of  an  EEA  national  (the
             relevant EEA national) and


         (b)  The relevant EEA national


             (i)  is under the age of 18;
             (ii) is residing in the UK as a self-sufficient person and
             (iii)    would be unable to remain in the UK if their  primary
                  carer were required to leave the UK.

5.   The Regulation that had been referred to represented a  change  in  the
    Regulations from the date of the application.

6.   It is not in issue that there was no expectation that the  child  would
    not remain in the United Kingdom because  the  claimant's  wife  was  a
    British citizen  who  also  was  caring  for  the  child.   Given  that
    possibility, it would seem that the claimant would not have met the new
    test  of  primary  carer,  particularly  having  regard  to  Regulation
    15A(2)(b)(iii).

7.    Quite  properly,  therefore,  the  Judge  raised   that   matter   for
    consideration in these terms:-

         "14.  Although  not  raised  by  the  respondent,  I  raise  as   a
             preliminary  issue  the  definition  of  primary  carer  under
             Regulation 15 of the  2006  Regulations  which  the  appellant
             (claimant) does not meet as his wife  is  a  British  citizen.
             However  Mr  Brennan  pointed   out   that   the   appellant's
             application was  made  on  10  May  2012  which  predates  the
             amendment to the 2006 Regulations implementing  Regulation  15
             which was made in July 2012 but which Mr  Brennan  argued  was
             not operative  until  October  2012.   Therefore  Mr  Brennnan
             argued that this more restrictive definition of primary  carer
             did not apply to the appellant.


         15.  Mr Williams, on behalf of the Home Office, indicated  that  he
             agreed with Mr Brennan's position and it is significant in  my
             view that the respondent did not raise any issue as to whether
             the  appellant  could  qualify  as  a  primary  carer;  in  Mr
             Brennna's view it was not raised as it  does  not  apply.   In
             view of the respondent's position both in the  refusal  letter
             and at the appeal hearing, I accept that this is the case."


8.   The Judge went on therefore to uphold  the  contention  made  that  the
    claimant was the primary carer for the purpose of the appeal  and  thus
    the appeal was  allowed.   The  Judge  did  not  make  any  substantive
    findings as to Article 8 of the ECHR in the circumstances.

9.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department now seeks,  through  the
    grounds of appeal, to challenge that finding of  the  Judge  and/or  to
    withdraw the concession which was made at the hearing.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted.  Thus the matter comes before me  in  pursuance  of
    that grant.

10.  Mr Shilliday, who represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ,contends that it was immaterial that the  application  made
    on 10 May 2012 predated the implementation of Regulation 15A{2}  on  16
    July 2012.  The new  Regulation  was  applicable  to  all  applications
    decided on or after 16 July 2012 even if the application had been  made
    before the date.  There were no transitional provisions  affecting  the
    operation of that particular Regulation.

11.  He accepts that the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  should
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 21 June 2013 have taken that point
    but did not.  It was simply wrong for the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department to have accepted that the claimant was a primary  carer
    under the Regulations.  Similarly the information which was provided to
    the Judge at the hearing concerning the operation of Regulation 15A was
    simply incorrect as a matter of law given the hearing on 8 July 2014.

12.  In that connection he invites my  attention  to  the  decision  of  the
    House of Lords in Adeola [2009] UKHL 25.

13.  Their lordships were concerned with the construction of  the  Statement
    of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules.  The  Rules  were  not  subordinate
    legislation but detailed statements by a Minister of the  Crown  as  to
    how the Crown proposes to  exercise  its  executive  power  to  control
    immigration.

14.  The court focused upon the issue of the change  in  the  substance   of
    the Immigration Rule between application and decision.

15.  It was contended that the Rule should be applied as it was at the  date
    of application, not at the date of decision.  A fee had  been  paid  by
    the appellant in that case on the basis of the law that was in place as
    at the date of application with the reasonable  expectation  that  that
    would be the situation at the date of decision.  Thus it was said  that
    to move the position between application and decision was unfair.

16.  That proposition was not accepted by their lordships.   The  court  did
    not find that the appellant in that  case  had  a  vested  right  or  a
    legitimate expectation and found  in  any  event  that  the  aspect  of
    unfairness was slight which could be compensated by the return  of  the
    wasted fee.

17.  He submits that the Presenting Officer at the hearing was in  error  in
    making the concession which was made.  In any event it was a concession
    that that was wrong as a point of law  and  that  it  would  be  wholly
    inappropriate for the Tribunal to condone a concession which  continued
    to perpetrate an error of law rather than an acceptance  of  fact.   He
    invites me, therefore, to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

18.  He also seeks to argue that no application  was  made  in  relation  to
    Article 8 and therefore the Judge was perfectly entitled  not  to  deal
    with it.  It was not a live issue until such time as an application was
    made.

19.  Mr Brennan, who represents the claimant, invites me to  find  that  the
    concession was not as clear cut in its terms of error as is relied upon
    by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.  He  invites  me  to
    find that the 2006 Regulations are declaratory of rights that  vest  in
    an appellant at a time when the application  is  made.   They  are  not
    declaratory of the Secretary of State's declared intention of  how  the
    Rules should operate but rather are a statement of what the rights that
    apply to any appellant are. In those circumstances  he  invites  me  to
    consider that a distinction can be made between the  Immigration  Rules
    as a statement of intent and the 2006 Regulations as a  declaration  as
    to rights.

20.  Applying the reasoning in Adeola he submits that the claimant  had  the
    requisite right at the time of application and that should not be taken
    away.

21.  A similar argument was advanced by Mr Drabble  before  their  lordships
    as can be seen in paragraph 36 of the judgment relying upon  the  Chief
    Adjudication Officer v Maguire [1999]  1WLR  1778.   The  Judge  noted,
    however, in paragraph 37 of that judgement that if there  were  such  a
    vested right it would be surprising that any application  needs  to  be
    made.

22.  Mr Shilliday responds in any event to that contention  by  inviting  me
    to consider that Regulation 15A although coming into force in 2012  was
    in fact merely declaratory of the legal position  as  determined  by  a
    number of cases determined before that such as  Zambrano  and  McCarthy
    (European Citizen)[2011] EUECJ C-434/09 .  He seeks to argue that  even
    if there were a vested right it was vested in the right  as  determined
    by the legal authorities and merely encapsulated in the amendment.

23.  It seems to me, however, and I so find that given the general  comments
    by their lordships in Adoela it would be reasonable to expect that here
    to have been some clear wording should it have been  the  intention  of
    Parliament to have preserved the position upon application rather  than
    at decision.

24.  I note, however, the comments made by their lordships in the course  of
    the judgment concerning retrospectivity  and  the  need  to  take  into
    account the potential unfairness if such a presumption is not  to  take
    effect.  The general fairness of one interpretation over another is, at
    least potentially, a relevant factor.

25.  I note paragraph 57 of that judgment in particular:

         "57. The notion that the  unfairness  of  a  change  in  the  Rules
             applying to existing applications can be  taken  into  account
             when deciding if they do so apply, even if no vested right  is
             involved, is also supported by a passage, cited with  approval
             in Wilson [2004] 1AC 816, paragraph 200 from the  judgment  of
             Staughton LJ and Secretary of  State  for  Social  Security  v
             Tunnicliffe [1991] 2AllER 712, 724.  He said that it 'was  not
             simply a question of clarifying an enactment as  retrospective
             or not retrospective' but that 'it may be well be a matter  of
             degree - the greater the unfairness, the more it  is  expected
             that Parliament will make it clear if it  is  intended'.   The
             fact that the weight to be given to the presumption varies  in
             this way assists the conclusion that one can take into account
             the  fairness  of  the  result  when  considering  whether  an
             amendment applies to  existing  applications,  even  where  no
             vested right is involved'."

26.  What is clear in this case is  that  substantial  unfairness  has  been
    occasioned to  the  claimant,  not  so  much  in  the  wording  of  the
    Regulation itself, but by the  failure  and  repeated  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department to engage with the issue.

27.  The application was made on 10 May 2012. It was  the  position  as  set
    out  in  the  decision  letter   that,   subject   to   the   financial
    considerations being resolved in favour of the  claimant's  child,  the
    claimant would meet the definition of primary carer.  The  Secretary of
    State for the Home Department in the decision of 1 June  2013  did  not
    take the issue and indeed at the hearing on 8 July  2014,  specifically
    accepted the proposition advanced that Regulation 15A(2) did  not  have
    application to defeat  the  application  of  the  claimant.   Thus  the
    application  and  hearing  for  over  two  years  was  made  upon  that
    assumption and in the legitimate  expectation  that  the  Secretary  of
    State would consider the application of the claimant on  the  basis  of
    that which was in operation at the time of the application.

28.  It must be a matter of speculation as  to  why  a  specific  Article  8
    Application was not made but understandably there is no  need  to  make
    it, given the issues which were highlighted in the reasons for decision
    and canvassed at the hearing, namely the financial requirements  to  be
    met.

29.  Although the Immigration Rules set out how the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department will approach a particular  issue,  it  has  always
    been open to the Secretary of State to deal exceptionally  outside  the
    Rules.  The fact that there is an Immigration Rule does not necessarily
    prohibit the Secretary of State from dealing with a matter  on  a  more
    liberal or generous basis. For my part I cannot see why that  reasoning
    should not apply to the 2006 Regulations.

30.  The distinction of course is that it is common ground that it  was  not
    a conscious departure from the Rules but a misunderstanding about them.



31.  Mr Shilliday invites my attention  to  the  decision  of  NR  (Jamaica)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 856 in which the Tribunal permitted the  withdrawal  of
    concessions because the concessions made, albeit  statements  of  fact,
    were not supported by the background  material  that  had  been  relied
    upon.  He invited me to find that was  authority  for  the  proposition
    that it was open to the Tribunal to permit a withdrawal of a concession
    ,particularly when it was clear that it arose as a mistake of fact  or,
    as in this case, a misunderstanding of law.

32.  It seems to me, however, that the issue  is  not  whether  or  not  the
    Tribunal  has  the  jurisdiction  to  permit  the  withdrawal  of   the
    concession but whether in the circumstances  of  this  particular  case
    that should be the result.

33.  Mr Shilliday further invites my attention to the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in Rabindra Jung Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260.

34.   In  general  it  was  a  decision  dealing  with  unrelated   matters,
    particularly the requirement or otherwise to serve a Section 120 notice
    and the consequences if one was served and if one were not.  He  relies
    upon paragraphs 42 to 44 of the judgment for the proposition  that  the
    Tribunal is a creature of statute and must determine  jurisdiction  for
    itself.  He submits that there is a distinction to be  made  between  a
    concession of fact and a concession of law, particularly if the  latter
    is inaccurate.

35.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  case  turns  not  on  so  much  upon  the
    construction of Regulation 15A(2) and whether or not it applied at  the
    time of application or should have done, but whether, as  a  matter  of
    fundamental fairness, the Secretary of State having not taken the point
    against the claimant when it could have  been  taken  at  the  time  of
    decision and having  expressly  excluded  the  point  at  the  time  of
    hearing, it is fair  to the claimant now to permit that  correction  to
    be made over two years into the appeal process.  The effect of doing so
    would in practical terms mean that the appeal  process  would  have  to
    start again on the basis of Article 8  and  the  costs  that  would  be
    occasioned to the claimant in so doing.

36.  It seems  to  be  not  in  dispute  that  there  is  a  genuine  family
    relationship, he living with a British citizen and  with  their  child.
    Without knowledge of the domestic and family circumstances, it would be
    a matter of speculation as to whether that application  was  reasonably
    likely to be  successful.  Given  the  absence  of  any  countervailing
    factors it is difficult to imagine that it would not.

37.  As I have indicated before, the fact that a Regulation is expressed  in
    a particular term does not prevent the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  in  her  discretion  from   accepting   a   more   generous
    arrangement. It seems to me that this  is  matter  that  revolves  very
    substantially upon the  fundamental  principles  of  fairness  and  the
    entitlement of a claimant to know  the  case  which  he  has  to  meet.
    Throughout the two years the case was presented on  one  basis  by  the
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  and  it  seems  to  me,
    therefore, that it would not be appropriate in this case to  grant  any
    leave to withdraw the concession made.  The Judge is entitled  to  rely
    upon a basis of proceeding as agreed by the parties in order to come to
    a judgment on the matter.  The Judge most properly raised the issue for
    consideration and it was resolved in a particular way.  On  that  basis
    the decision came to be made.

38.  I find, therefore, no material error in law in the  approach  taken  by
    the Judge and, even if  there  were,  I  find  that,  as  a  matter  of
    fundamental fairness in these proceedings, the concession made  by  and
    on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home Department should  not
    be withdrawn.

39.  In the circumstances, therefore, the appeal by the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely that the appeal
    is allowed under the EEA Regulations on the basis  of  the  concessions
    that were advanced.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Regulations.



Signed        Date 18 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

