
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26916/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th August 2016                       |On 14th September 2016            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR RONALD CORDOVA CALLAO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This decision, to which both members of the panel  have  contributed,
       determines the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James
       promulgated on 23rd December 2015, in which she  allowed  the  appeal
       against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department of 13th July 2015 to refuse Mr. Callao leave to remain  on
       Article 8, family and private life grounds.


    2. The appellant before us is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent to this appeal, is Mr Callao.   However
       for ease of reference, in the course of this determination  we  shall
       adopt the parties' status as it was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       We shall in this determination, refer to Mr Callao as the  appellant,
       and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. The matter was called on  for  hearing  at  12:20pm.   There  was  no
       appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  The Notice  of  Hearing
       had been sent to the appellant on 13th July 2016  and  there  was  no
       explanation for his absence.  We note  that  the  appeal  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal was determined on the papers, at the  request  of
       the appellant.  We were informed by Mr Kotas that the  appellant  has
       made an EEA application on 30th September 2015.  That application was
       refused on 21st March 2016  and  the  appellant  has  appealed.   The
       appeal has not yet been listed for hearing.


    4.  In  the  absence  of  any  application  for  an  adjournment  or  an
       explanation for the failure of the appellant to attend  the  hearing,
       we consider it appropriate to proceed with the  hearing,  as  we  are
       permitted to do, under Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008.  We are satisfied that the appellant  has  been
       notified of the hearing, and that reasonable steps have been taken to
       notify the appellant of the hearing.  We also consider that it is  in
       the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.


Background


    5. The appellant is a Philippine national. He arrived in the UK  on  5th
       May 2010 with leave to enter as a student valid until 31st July 2011.
         The appellant then enjoyed the  benefit  of  successive  grants  of
       leave to remain until 30th August 2015.  However, by a  letter  dated
       3rd February 2015, the appellant  was  notified  that  his  leave  to
       remain in the UK had been varied such that it expired  on  7th  April
       2015.  The letter to the appellant  informed  him  that  he  was  not
       entitled to appeal that decision,  because  he  still  has  leave  to
       remain in the UK and that he was not required to leave the  UK  as  a
       result of that decision.  The appellant was informed that  his  leave
       to remain would expire on 7th April 2015 and that  he  should  either
       make plans to depart before his leave expires, or  make  any  further
       application for leave to remain.


    6. On 2nd April 2015, the appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the
       UK on the basis of his private life in the UK.  The  application  was
       refused for the reasons set out in the respondent's  decision  letter
       dated 13th July 2015 and it was that decision that gave rise  to  the
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    7. First-tier Tribunal Judge  James  notes  at  paragraph  [10]  of  her
       decision that the appellant confirms that  he  was  informed  of  the
       curtailment of his leave to remain, by telephone on 20th January 2015
       and he then received a letter on 5th February 2015.  The Judge states
       at paragraph [12]:


             "12. I thus have no documentary evidence before me of  the  60
             day letter being issued, if at all, to the Appellant regarding
             the possibility of obtaining a further CAS.   This document is
             absent from the Respondent's bundle, suggesting no such letter
             was issued, as  indeed  was  the  right  referred  to  in  the
             application form. In the absence of this  material  letter  it
             appears the Respondent has failed to  follow  her  own  policy
             regarding tier  4  PBS  dated  5  October  2009  (and  updated
             thereafter}. Therefore the  refusal  decision  has  failed  to
             consider relevant material  matters  under  basic  public  law
             principles, and it appears the Respondent has failed to adhere
             to her own policy in  the  absence  of  the  relevant  letter.
             Thus the refusal decision is not in accordance  with  the  law
             and the appeal is allowed on this  point  alone,  taking  into
             account the difficulties facing the  Appellant  in  proving  a
             negative i.e. that he did not receive such a letter."


    8. The Judge went on to consider at  paragraphs  [13]  to  [17]  of  her
       decision, the appellant's Article 8 claim.  The  Judge  concludes  at
       paragraph [17] of her decision that Article 8  is  not  engaged,  but
       even if it were, the respondent's decision to refuse the  application
       for leave to remain in the UK was reasonable and proportionate in all
       the circumstances.


    9. The respondent appeals on the grounds that the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal discloses a material error of law.  The Judge  proceeds
       upon a mistake as to fact because she records at  paragraph  [10]  of
       her decision that the appellant confirms that he was informed of  the
       variation of his leave to remain such that it expired  on  7th  April
       2015, by telephone on 20th January 2015 and that he received a letter
       on 5th February 2015.  However, the Judge concludes at paragraph [12]
       that the respondent's refusal of the application for leave to  remain
       in the UK is not in accordance with the law because the appellant had
       not been permitted the usual 60 days grace.


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  on
       28th June 2016. The matter comes before us to consider whether or not
       the determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  James  involved  the
       making of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.




   11. We have no hesitation in finding that the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses a material error of law.  It  was  uncontroversial
       that the appellant had received notification from the respondent that
       his leave to remain had been  varied,  first  by  telephone  on  20th
       January 2015 and followed up in a letter that the appellant  received
       on 5th  February  2015.   Whether  or  not  the  respondent's  policy
       applied, the appellant had in fact received 60 days' grace.   On  his
       own account, the appellant received notification in  writing  on  5th
       February 2015, that his leave to remain would end on 7th April  2015.
        The appellant was informed that he was not required to leave the  UK
       as a result of the decision itself, and that he  should  either  make
       plans to depart  before  his  leave  expires,  or  make  any  further
       application for leave to remain.   On  2nd  April  2015,  before  his
       leave to remain expired, the appellant made an application for  leave
       to remain on the basis of his private life in the UK.


   12. The respondent considered the application by reference to Appendix FM
       and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  application
       was refused for the reasons set out in  the  respondent's  letter  of
       13th July 2015.  On appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge
       records at paragraphs [5] and [13] of her decision that the appellant
       failed to submit a bundle in support of  the  appeal  and  there  was
       little or no information or documentary evidence before her.   It  is
       in our judgement plain that the appellant was unable to  satisfy  the
       requirements of the immigration rules and the Judge was right to find
       that Article 8 is not engaged and even if it were,  any  interference
       is reasonable and proportionate in all the circumstances.


   13. It follows that the appeal of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside.


   14. We remake the decision  and  dismiss  the  appeal  of  Ronald  Callao
       against the decision of 13th July 2015 refusing his  application  for
       leave to remain in the UK


 Notice of Decision


   15. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James involved  the  making
       of an error on a point of law and is  set  aside.   We  substitute  a
       fresh decision and dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules and
       on Article 8 grounds.


   16. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                           Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia             14th September 2016




FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appellant's appeal and there can be no fee award.

Signed
                                                 Date
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia             14th September 2016
