
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26601/2015
                                                               IA/26604/2015
                                                               IA/26608/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 October 2017                         |On 01 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                  Murad Mangalji Tinwala (First Appellant)
                  Firdsoi Murad tinwala (Second Appellant)
                   RIYAAZ MURAD tinwala (Third Appellant)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Raw, of Counsel of Middlesex Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  The first and second  appellants
    were born on 13 December 1962 and 15 May 1961 respectively.   They  are
    the father and mother of  the  third  appellant  who  was  born  on  16
    February 1990.  They entered Britain as visitors in June 2005 with  the
    third appellant and their second son, Aaman, who was born on 1 November
    1995.

2.   They appeal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Widdup who in a decision promulgated on 3 February 2017 dismissed their
    appeals against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  them
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.   He  did  however  allow  the
    appeal of Aaman on human rights  grounds  giving  as  his  reason   for
    allowing Aaman's appeal  that he believed that he qualified  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules because he had  spent  more
    than  half his life in Britain. That decision was, of course  wrong  as
    the application had been made in 2008  when  Aaman  had  not  lived  in
    Britain for more than half his life,  but  the  reality  is  that  that
    decision of Judge Widdup was not appealed by the Secretary of State.

3.   Having entered Britain in 2005 as visitors the  appellants  overstayed.
     In September 2007 they were encountered and arrested and  served  with
    forms IS151A.  They applied in August the following year for  leave  to
    remain on human rights  grounds  together  with  an  application  under
    Article  3  of  the  ECHR  which  they  later  withdrew.    There   was
    correspondence between the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  appellants'
    solicitors in 2011 when further evidence was requested,  and  again  in
    2013 the respondent  advised  the  appellants'  solicitors  that  their
    application was still under consideration.  It was however  refused  in
    2015, detailed reasons being given in refusal letters dated  July  that
    year.

4.   The appellants appealed and their appeals were heard  by  Judge  Widdup
    on 26 January 2017.

5.   The judge considered the evidence before  him  noting  that  the  first
    appellant had said that he had had an  estate  agency  business  and  a
    "nuts and bolts" business in India which he had closed before coming to
    Britain.  He had a property there which he had not sold.  He said  that
    he did not want to return to go back to India as his family  was  here,
    although he had referred, in evidence given to the Secretary  of  State
    in 2011, to brothers and sisters in India.  The appellant  had  claimed
    to have no relations with his brothers in India and said that he had no
    relatives in Britain.  His wife, however, did have brothers and sisters
    in India.  The first appellant's reason for remaining  in  Britain  was
    that he liked this country and had a future here  and  had  decided  to
    stay illegally.  He said that he had not been  given  notice  to  leave
    Britain when he had been arrested in 2007.  His wife stated  that  they
    had stayed on so that their children  could  benefit  from  an  English
    education.  Neither she nor the first  appellant  said  that  they  had
    worked here:  stating that they had been supported by a woman who  they
    helped with her small child.

6.   In paragraphs 40 onwards the judge set out his  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions.  He found that the first two appellants had entered not as
    genuine visitors but intending to stay if they could,  having  deceived
    the Entry Clearance Officer by stating that they intended only a visit.
     He considered that the first  appellant's  evidence  about  having  no
    family in India was incorrect and noted that their assertion that  they
    had never been a burden on public funds here was wrong in that  medical
    treatment had been received by the second appellant  and  the  children
    had had state education.  He did not find it credible  that  the  first
    two appellants had not been working.  He concluded  that  in  2008  the
    appellants could not have succeeded under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    indeed at that stage long residence for a period of at  least  fourteen
    years was required.  He stated that the appellants  could  not  succeed
    unless they could show that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    their  integration  in  India.   He  found  that  there  were  no  such
    obstacles, significant or otherwise.  He pointed out the length of time
    that the appellants had lived in  India  -  the  first  two  appellants
    having lived until they were in their 40s.   They  had  retained  their
    family home in Mumbai and had family there.  He stated that  the  first
    two appellants and their sons could  return  to  India  together  as  a
    family unit and stated that he could see  no  distinction  between  the
    parents and the children when  considering  the  issue  of  significant
    obstacles.  He referred to the third appellant  and  Aaman  and  stated
    that while they had not lived in India since 2005 they had  received  a
    good education in the UK and they had the acquired skills, which  would
    be of advantage to them in India.  He therefore dismissed  the  appeals
    of the first three appellants under the Immigration Rules.

7.   The judge then went on to consider the situation of the family  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  He accepted that Article  8  was  engaged,  but
    considered that the decision was lawful and was proportionate.  He made
    a brief reference to Section 117B of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   He
    noted the first appellant did not speak English and that  none  of  the
    appellants were working.  Their  private  lives  had  been  established
    while they had lived in Britain as overstayers.

8.   He went on to say that the only countervailing factors were the  delay,
    the health issues of the second  appellant  and  her  husband  and  the
    interests  of  the  fourth  appellant.   He   stated   there   was   no
    justification for the delay but having had regard to the principles  in
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in EB (Kosovo) [2008]  UKHL  41  he
    did not consider that the appellants had been prejudiced - the  passage
    of time had meant that the appellants had consolidated their  lives  in
    Britain and they might conceivably have been given some hope  that  the
    inactivity of the respondent might mean  that  their  claims  might  be
    allowed.

9.   He went on to consider the medical  evidence  relating  to  the  second
    appellant who is a type 2 diabetic, as indeed is the  first  appellant.
    The second appellant had,  he  noted,  heart  disease  which  had  been
    diagnosed in 1987 and she had had treatment in India in that year.   He
    did not consider that they were entitled to continue to be a burden  on
    the NHS.  With regard to the fourth  appellant  he  stated  that  under
    Chikwamba principles there would be no point in him leaving to have  to
    return to India  and  that  was  a  further  reason  for  him  granting
    permission to that appellant to remain.   Again,  as  I  have  said,  I
    consider that that decision was incorrect.

10.  In any event, the judge, although he  allowed  the  fourth  appellant's
    appeal, dismissed those of the other three appellants.

11.  Lengthy grounds of appeal focused primarily on the issue of the  public
    interest in the removal of appellants arguing, in effect that where the
    Home Office has delayed in issuing a decision  to  refuse,  the  public
    interest in the removal of the appellants  is  diminished.   They  also
    argued that with regard to the third appellant the fact that he came to
    Britain as a child, meant that the illegality of his overstaying should
    not be taken against him in any proportionality assessment.

12.  Although permission was refused in the First-tier, Judge of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Pitt granted permission briefly stating that it  was  arguable
    that the judge had taken an incorrect approach to the  delay  of  seven
    years and failed to address whether  this  altered  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest.

13.  At the hearing before me Mr Raw  emphasised  the  length  of  time  the
    appellants had lived in Britain since 2005 and stated that three  years
    had passed after they had made their application before the  respondent
    asked for further information.  Having been given that information they
    had been informed two years later that the respondent  was  considering
    their applications.  He emphasised that they had reported on a  regular
    basis and that there were  numerous  references  to  their  being  good
    citizens.   He  said  that  the  appellants  no  longer  spoke   Hindi,
    particularly referring to that assertion in the statement of the  third
    appellant and the fact that their lives had been consolidated here.  He
    argued that the  position  of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  was
    correct.  He  had  prepared  a  brief  skeleton  argument  which  again
    emphasised that the appellants had not absconded and  referred  to  the
    delay in a decision being made, and indeed to the fact that  the  judge
    allowed the appeal  of  the  fourth  appellant.   He  stated  that  the
    appellants had built up their family and private life here.

14.  He further added that the judge had been wrong to  consider  the  first
    and second  appellants  separately  from  the  position  of  the  third
    appellant and argued that their cases were "inter-grooved".  He  argued
    that there were insurmountable and significant obstacles  to  stop  the
    appellants returning to India.

15.  Mr Tufan referred to the judgment  in  EB  (Kosovo)  stating  that  the
    appellants were not prejudiced by that and pointed to the fact that the
    first appellant had required an interpreter at appeal.  He stated  that
    there was no obstacles to the family returning to India.

Discussion
16.  I find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    Judge of the First-tier.  The reality is that although the delay in the
    case does diminish the public interest in  removal  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B of the 2014 Act deal clearly with the issue of private and
    family life which is built up when appellants have no extant  leave  to
    remain.  Sub-section 117B(4) makes it clear that little  weight  should
    be given to a private life formed  when  a  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and indeed little weight should be given to  private
    life established when an immigration status is precarious.   The  judge
    did not penalise the  third  appellant  because  the  decision  of  his
    parents to remain in Britain without authority.  He properly considered
    the third appellant's situation as it stood, that is that he had  built
    up his private life here at a time  when  he  did  not  have  leave  to
    remain.  He does not qualify under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules  and
    the judge was entitled to consider that given that his parents would be
    returning to India, that they had a home there, that his father had had
    a business there, and that the third  appellant  himself  had  obtained
    qualifications through the British educational system here  meant  that
    he would be in a position to obtain work in India.  Indeed, it could be
    argued that the aims of his parents had  been  achieved  in  that  they
    wished him to have an education here.   Although  the  third  appellant
    stated in his statement that  he  could  no  longer  speak  Hindi,  the
    reality is that not only is English often the  language  of  choice  at
    work in India, but the third appellant lived there until he was 15  and
    he must have continued to speak to his father in Hindi  as  his  father
    does not speak English, as was shown by the fact that he  had  required
    an interpreter at the appeal.  The third appellant is, of  course,  now
    27.  He is likely to form a separate family unit at some stage.

17.  The judge was therefore entitled, on  considering  the  application  of
    the third appellant on his own to find that there were no insignificant
    or indeed any obstacles to his returning to India with his parents.

18.  It is for Aaman to decide whether or not he wishes to return  to  India
    with them.

19.  There is nothing in the health of the first and  second  appellants  to
    indicate that they could not return to India where they have a home and
    relatives and should they require it they  would  be  able  to  receive
    medical treatment there as indeed as the second appellant  has  already
    done.

20.  The reality is that the judgment in  EB  (Kosovo)  does  not  say  that
    delay entitles a person to leave to remain.  What it does say  is  that
    during a period of delay individuals may  well  strengthen  their  ties
    with this country and build up their private and family life  here.   I
    would comment that that does not appear to have been the case here with
    regard to the first and second appellants who have not worked, although
    I accept that it is the case with regard to the  third  appellant.   Be
    that as it may, neither he nor his parents qualify for leave to  remain
    either under the Rules or under the provisions  of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, and I therefore find that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and that therefore
    his decision to dismiss these appeals shall stand.



Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 30 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 30 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

