
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26375/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 3 January 2017                  |On 5 January 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                          FASIHUDDIN AHMED MOHAMMED
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Ali of ZA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. The Appellant was born on 24 March 1988 and is a national of India.
4. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge A D Smith promulgated on 15 April 2016 which  allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  10  July
   2015 to refuse an application dated 30 May 2014 for leave  to  remain  in
   the UK as a Tier 4 Student under paragraph 322(2)  and  245ZX(a)  of  the
   Immigration Rules..
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) In support of an application dated  22  December  2012  for  leave  to
      remain the Appellant submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS  that  ETS
      have since declared to be invalid.
   b) The Appellant was therefore not awarded any of the points claimed  for
      a CAS or maintenance.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Smith ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
   finding that there was no evidence to support the  proposition  that  the
   Appellants test had been subject to voice verification tests when he  had
   a bundle including the lookup tool confirming  the  Appellants  test  was
   invalid and the statements from Peter Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings;
   the materiality of the grounds are unaffected by the unreported  decision
   in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
   Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229  (IAC)  because  that  case
   post dated this decision.
8.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Page gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that:

   a) The Judge made a material error in paragraph 14  of  the  decision  in
      stating that there  was  'no  evidence'  before  him  to  support  the
      proposition that the appellants tests  had  been  subjected  to  voice
      verification tests.' He relied on the case of Shehzad [2016] EWCA  Civ
      615 to suggest that the evidence of Collings and  Millington  and  the
      look up tool were sufficient to discharge the legal burden of proof on
      the Secretary of State of  proving  that  the  TOEIC  certificate  was
      procured by dishonesty.

   b) The Judge  approached  the  evidence  from  a  flawed  position  which
      contaminated his other findings.

   c) The Judge failed to consider or weigh in the  countervailing  evidence
      that the certificate was invalid.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Ali submitted that:

   a) He relied on his response.

   b) The Judge looked at the evidence in the round.

   c)  The  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  gave  evidence   about   the
      circumstances in which he took the test and was asked no questions  by
      the HOPO in cross examination.

   d) The Judge noted that the Appellant spoke very good English.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. I note that the  Grounds  of  Appeal  argue  that  Judges  decision  was
   unaffected by the decision in Qadir because  it  post  dated  the  Judges
   decision and 'no UTT decision has retrospective effect.' Mr Bates  before
   me then sought to argue that the Judge was in error in being  unsatisfied
   with the evidence of fraud before him because Shahzad suggests that  such
   evidence is sufficient: I note that  Shahzad  was  before  the  Court  of
   Appeal on 29 June 2016 and also post dated the Judges  decision  in  this
   case.

13. I am satisfied that the Judge dealt with the case as the  law  stood  at
   the time of the decision and as it  was  argued  before  him.  The  Judge
   properly set out the burden and standard of proof at paragraph 4  of  his
   decision recognising that were there was an allegation of  fraud  by  the
   Respondent the burden of establishing such fraud was  on  them  and  made
   reference to the case of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD 2010 EWCA Civ  773  to  that
   effect.

14. The Judge noted at paragraph 9 that he asked the HOPO  that  apart  from
   the 'general evidence' of Millington and Collings what evidence there was
   that  that the Appellants test was examined in the way that is  suggested
   in the refusal letter which was  'ETS  has  a  record  of  your  speaking
   test...ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to the SSHD  that
   there was significant evidence to  conclude  that  your  certificate  was
   fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.' Given  that  the
   Respondent bears the burden of proving the fraud the Judge was  therefore
   entitled to note that there was no  evidence  of  the  recording  of  the
   Appellant, or the  check  of  that  recording  or  what  the  significant
   evidence was that led to the conclusion the Appellant used a  proxy  test
   taker. None of the evidence specifically  referred  to  in  this  refusal
   letter was produced before him. What was produced before him was  generic
   evidence from Millington and Collings explaining the  general  nature  of
   the fraud and the tests undertaken and confirmation that his  tests  were
   declared invalid (the lookup tool)

15. Therefore the Judge was identifying in paragraph 14  that  the  specific
   evidence referred to in the refusal letter, which was not the evidence of
   Millington and Collings and the look up tool, had never been produced.  I
   am satisfied that in this case that entitled him to find that  there  was
   no evidence of fraud by this Appellant.  While I accept that a later case
   found such evidence passed the initial legal burden that was clearly  not
   the basis on which the case was argued before the Judge as  the  HOPO  in
   final submissions relied only on the the refusal letter which no  mention
   of the 'generic evidence'.

16. Moreover even had the Judges approach to the generic  evidence  been  an
   error I am satisfied that it would not have been material to the outcome.
   It was always open to the Appellant to proffer  an  innocent  explanation
   and if that explanation met a basic level  of  plausibility,  the  burden
   switched back to the SSHD to answer that evidence. At the end of the  day
   the SSHD bore the burden of proving dishonesty. Therefore the  Judge  did
   not simply stop after determining that there was no evidence of fraud but
   went on to the second stage  and  went  on  to  consider  the  Appellants
   explanation. The Judge recorded at paragraph 7 the unchallenged  evidence
   given by the Appellant, in English which was of a high  standard,  as  to
   when and where he took the test and how long it took. The Appellant  drew
   the Judges attention to the fact that he had an IELTS  certificate  dated
   21 October 2009 showing an overall band score of 6 which was evidence  of
   language proficiency from an unchallenged source  pre  dating  the  TOEIC
   certificate and lends significant weight to his case that he had no  need
   to cheat. He noted that no questions were put to  the  Appellant  and  no
   suggestion was put to him therefore that he had  not  attended  the  test
   centre as he claimed he had done: It would have been open to him to  find
   that given that the evidence of fraud produced in court was different  to
   that identified in the refusal letter that the Appellants  oral  evidence
   should,, in fairness have been challenged  by  the  HOPO.  The  Judge  in
   paragraph 14 quite clearly accepted that while ETS may have been involved
   in a fraud that all of the evidence taken together did not show that this
   Appellant had obtained his certificate by fraud. These were findings that
   were open to him on the evidence and on the basis of the  caselaw  as  it
   stood on 9 April 2016.

CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
4.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
