
 [pic]




Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/26754/2014



                                                  THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                    |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                   |Promulgated                           |
|On 16th November  2015             |               On 4th January 2016    |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before


                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY



                                   Between



                                 MASTER IWB
                                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent





Representation:

For the Appellant:       No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S.Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


     1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing I will continue to
        refer the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal for the
        sake of convenience.


     2. Application was made on the appellant's behalf under section 10 of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for a certificate
        to confirm he had the right of abode in the United Kingdom. To get
        this he must have a parent who is either a British citizen or who
        was settled in the United Kingdom at the time of his birth.

     3. The appellant is a national of Ghana. He was born in the United
        Kingdom on Christmas Day 2011. His mother is a Ghanaian .His father
        is originally from Ghana and holds German nationality.

     4. The application was based upon his father having a permanent right
        of residence by reason of regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA)
        Regulations 2006. This can be achieved in various ways, including
        his father having resided in accordance with the regulations for
        five years or by being a worker or self-employed person who have
        ceased activity.

     5. A difficulty for the appellant was the fact his father is estranged
        from his mother and has no contact with her or the appellant.
        Consequently, proofs were limited. The application indicated that
        his father had been working at Newham General Hospital since 2005.

     6. The application was refused on 10 June 2014. The basis for the
        refusal was that he had failed to demonstrate his father was
        exercising Treaty rights as required.

     7. The appellant's appeal came before Designated Immigration Judge
        Manuell on the 26 February 2015. The appeal adjourned with
        Designated Immigration Judge Manuell requiring the SSHD to obtain
        from HMR&C all tax records relating to his father. It was known his
        father had been issued with residence documentation on 18 March
        2013. The respondent did not have any record of his father being
        issued with confirmation of a right of permanent residence.

     8. The appeal was relisted on 9 June 2015 before First-tier Judge
        Symes. Reference is made to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
        and Immigration Act 2009 which requires decision-makers to have
        regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
        children. Reference was made to the decision of MK (section 55
        -tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 which held that
        where it is contended that the duties in section 55 have been
        breached the onus rests on the appellant and the civil standard of
        the balance of probabilities applies. Reference is made to the
        tribunal's powers of adjournment and case management.

     9.  First-tier Judge Symes at paragraph 8 of the decision stated that
        where probative evidence is in the custody of public authorities,
        such as tax records or national insurance contributions, steps
        should be taken to secure that information. At paragraph 9 the
        judge said that the section 55 duty had been breached and though
        the evidence was scant allowed the appeal. The judge referred to
        the respondent's lack of response to Designated Immigration Judge
        Manuell's Directions. Although the judge allowed the appeal a
        further direction was given to the respondent to produce records
        held relating to the appellant's father.


The Upper Tribunal.

    10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis
        the decision was wrong in law because it reversed the burden of
        proof. Furthermore, it was contended the judge heard in allowing
        appeal out right given the lack of evidence. Permission to appeal
        was granted on the basis the judge was arguably wrong in allowing
        the appeal out right.

    11. At hearing, Mr Kotas questioned whether there was any section 55
        issue of substance arising in the application given that there was
        no intent to remove the appellant. The judge had referred to ZH(
        Tanzania)[2011] UKSC 4 and the importance of a child's nationality
        when considering their best interests. However, Mr Kotas pointed
        out that this was dealing with a British child.

    12. First-tier Judge Symes may well have been frustrated at the
        apparent lack of response to Designated Immigration Judge Manuell's
        Directions. However, in the absence of the necessary evidence the
        judge materially erred in law in allowing the appeal out right. The
        decision is also inherently contradictory in that having allowed
        the appeal outright the judge goes on to give Directions.

    13. The decision materially errs in law and cannot stand. Ultimately,
        the burden of proof is upon the appellant and this has not been
        met. The papers would suggest that the respondent has made some
        searches and the only documentation found was a residence document
        for the appellant's father but nothing to indicate a right of
        permanent residence. In the circumstance I see no merit in further
        adjourning the matter. Instead, I would dismiss the appeal given
        the lack of proofs









      The Decision

    14.  The decision of First-tier Judge Symes allowing the appeal
        materially errs in law and cannot stand. I set the decision aside
        and remake it, dismissing the appeal.



   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

