
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26443/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2016                     |On 09 January 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR SHANE [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by MA Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse the respondent's application for leave to remain in the UK on
    the basis of his private and family life.  The respondent's ensuing
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Pacey.  In a decision promulgated on 7 July 2016, the judge
    allowed the appeal.

Background

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago who came to the UK
    in August 2002 as a visitor.  He was granted further leave as a student
    until 23 August 2006.  On 10 August 2006 he applied for further leave
    but was refused and remained thereafter without lawful leave.

 3. The factual findings of Judge Pacey, which are not in dispute, can be
    summarised as follows:

      a) the appellant has serious mental health problems for which he
         requires medication and there is a high risk of relapse if he fails
         to take the medication;

      b) he has been an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital;

      c) he is vulnerable requiring ongoing support from mental health
         services;

      d) his mother is a mental health nurse who gives him considerable
         support.

 4. The judge also found that mental health facilities in Trinidad and
    Tobago are minimal.  He further found that the appellant's mother could
    not reasonably be expected to go with him to Trinidad due to her
    British citizenship and career in the UK.

 5. At paragraph 16 the judge concluded:

          "[I]n my judgment then there will be very significant obstacles to
         [the respondent's] integration into Trinidad and Tobago since in
         summary he would be alone in that country vulnerable and highly at
         risk".

 6. After concluding that there would be "very significant obstacles" to
    integration, the judge proceeded to consider the appeal under Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules and concluded that the factual
    circumstances give rise to circumstances such that the respondent's
    removal from the UK would be a disproportionate interference with his
    family and private life.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground is that the judge
    gave no reasons for allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.
    The grounds state that this aspect of the decision is "wholly
    unreasoned".

 8. The second ground of appeal challenges the Article 8 assessment outside
    the Rules, arguing that the judge erred in law by failing to give
    sufficient weight to the public interest in the proportionality
    assessment.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane.
    Judge Keane granted permission only in respect of the ground of appeal
    concerning the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly the only issue before me
    is whether the judge erred in law by failing to give reasons for
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

10. At the error of law hearing Mr Walker stated that whilst he was not in
    a position to withdraw the appeal he accepted that the judge had at
    paragraph 16 made reasoned findings regarding the Immigration Rules and
    that relevant evidence regarding the respondent was assessed at
    paragraph 10 of the decision.

Consideration

11. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules provides for the grant
    of leave to remain on the basis of private life where an applicant
    would face "very significant obstacles" integrating into the country to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

12. The judge gave several reasons for finding there would be very
    significant obstacles to the respondent's integration into Trinidad and
    Tobago. These are set out, inter alia, in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the
    decision, where the judge considers the absence of family support or
    adequate drug treatment for the respondent in Trinidad and Tobago, his
    reliance on his mother who would most likely not relocate with him and
    that the respondent would be "alone..., vulnerable and highly at risk"
    in Trinidad and Tobago.

13. As the judge has given reasons to support his finding that there would
    be "very significant obstacles" to integration into  Trinidad and
    Tobago, I consider there to be no merit to the Secretary of State's
    contention that reasons were not given for allowing the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.

Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.


   |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 January 2016                |

