
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26281/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9th September 2016                    |On 23rd September 2016              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                           Muhammad Junaid Majeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge promulgated on 29th February 2016 in  which  Judge
    Lodge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom  based  on
    his family life for the purposes of Article 8.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his decision noted that the  Appellant
    had a partner, Mrs Sabir, in the UK and although satisfied at paragraph
    27 that that they were living together and have been for some  time  in
    fact, he found at paragraph 28, that if that were the  only  factor  in
    the appeal he would not have  been  able  to  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return with the Appellant to Pakistan, as
    she had entered into a  relationship  with  him  at  a  time  when  his
    presence in the UK was  either  unlawful  or  precarious  and  she  had
    entered into their relationship with her eyes wide open.

 3. However, the Judge went on to find that the real issue in the case  was
    the fact that the couple had British Citizen children, who were then at
    that stage a little over 4 years old, 3 years old and 2 years old.  The
    children were combination of one who  was  the  appellant's  biological
    child, one who he had previously thought was his biological  child  and
    one step child. The eldest had  just  at  that  stage  started  primary
    school education. The only issue was proportionality.

 4. The judge in his decision considered in paragraph 31 that the  children
    were young and had not developed social and educational ties, but  went
    on in paragraph 32 to note that they were British citizens with British
    passports and that they were entitled to the benefits, social, cultural
    and educational, of British citizenship  and  that  further  they  were
    entitled to grow up in the country in  which  they  were  citizens.  He
    found that he was satisfied that it was  in  their  best  interests  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and he was satisfied that removal  of  the
    Appellant would be a disproportionate interference with  the  right  to
    family life. He also found that it would be unreasonable to expect  the
    children to follow their stepfather to Pakistan.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on at paragraph 33 to  consider
    the question as to whether it would  be  proportionate  to  expect  the
    Appellant to make an application for entry clearance  from  abroad  and
    the judge went on between paragraphs 33 to 36 to find that it would not
    be  unreasonable  or  disproportionate  to  expect  the  Appellant   to
    temporarily be parted from his family and to return to Pakistan to make
    an application for entry clearance and on that basis, although he found
    that it would be a disproportionate  interference  with  the  right  to
    family life and it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    follow their father and stepfather to  Pakistan  that  the  Appellant's
    human rights were not breached as a result of the decision made by  the
    Respondent and he  therefore  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The Appellant has now sought to appeal against that  decision  for  the
    reasons set out in full within the Grounds of Appeal.  That is a matter
    of record and is therefore not repeated in full here, especially  given
    the concessions that have now been made by Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the
    Secretary of State.

 7. In summary, within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued  that  the  judge
    failed to consider Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended and  that  the  judge  also  erred  in  that
    despite his findings at paragraph 32  of  the  determination  regarding
    what would be the best interests of the children in that it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK, to then find that
    the appeal should be dismissed and that the Appellant could be returned
    to Pakistan to make an entry clearance application from there.

 8. I have heard from Mr Harris, Counsel for the  Appellant,  and  from  Ms
    Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  for  the  Respondent.
    Ms Fijiwala accepts today that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    did contain errors of law and she accepted that Section  117B  was  not
    considered at all by the judge and further accepted that the judge  was
    wrong to consider that the  Appellant  should  have  returned  back  to
    Pakistan to make an application for entry clearance  from  Pakistan  as
    that, she concedes, was not envisaged by Section 117B(6).

 9. In that regard she quite properly conceded  that  there  were  material
    errors in the decision and argued that the case should be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. Mr Harris on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant asked that I take the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraph 32 of the decision and apply those findings that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the children to follow their father and
    stepfather to Pakistan to the actual facts of the case  and  to  decide
    the case on that basis rather than remitting it back.

My Finding on Error of Law Materiality

10. When one looks at the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lodge,  he
    has not made any reference as he is required to do when considering the
    appeal on the basis of Article 8 outside of the  Immigration  Rules  to
    the provisions of Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 as amended by the Immigration Act 2014. He has failed specifically
    in respect of this case to mention the provisions of  Section  117B(6),
    which deals with the position of British citizens and whether or not it
    was reasonable to expect them to return in this case  to  Pakistan  and
    whether it was reasonable to expect  them  to  leave  the  UK  for  the
    purposes of Section 117B(6).

11. Given the concession quite properly made by Ms Fijiwala I do accept and
    find as a fact that the judge has materially erred in  that  regard  in
    failing to consider the mandatory requirement of Section  117B  and  in
    particular in this case the provisions of Section 117B(6).

12. I also agree with Ms Fijiwala that the judge also erred in law,  having
    made his findings at paragraph 32, to go on to consider whether or  not
    the Appellant should be expected  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance from abroad.  This is a case in which it was not being sought
    to be argued that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
    or private life continuing abroad but that it would be disproportionate
    to require the Appellant to make an  application  for  entry  clearance
    from abroad such as in the case of R (on the  application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba)
    [2015] UKUT 00180.

13. This is a case where  in  fact  the  question  that  should  have  been
    considered by the judge was a consideration as to whether or not it was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave under Section 117B(6) and Ms
    Fijiwala quite properly concedes obviously that it was wrong  in  those
    circumstances for the judge to go on to  consider  whether  or  not  an
    application should have been made from abroad.

14. If the requirements of Section 117B(6) were met then, as stated by Lord
    Justice  Elias  in  the  case  of  MA  (Pakistan)  v   Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  then
    Article 8 is breached.

15. Lord Justice Elias in the case of MA (Pakistan) & Ors when  considering
    that particular Section considered the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not
    Section 117B(6) was purely child-centred or whether  the  consideration
    as to whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK
    involved  a  consideration  of  the  wider  public   interest   factors
    applicable in the case.

16. Although Judge Elias made it clear that  he  thought  himself  that  it
    should be a consideration of the best interests of the child,  he  felt
    constrained by the previous Court of Appeal decision in MM (Uganda) and
    that that he ought not to depart from the previous decision and that  a
    consideration under Section 117B(6) therefore had to consider the wider
    public interest criteria in considering whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a child to leave.

17. When one looks at the  wording  of  the  judgment  by  Judge  Lodge  at
    paragraph 32 he has clearly considered that the children  were  British
    citizens with British passports, entitled to grow up in the country  in
    which they were citizens and found that it was in their best  interests
    for them to remain in the UK.  He then goes on to state simply:  "I  am
    therefore  satisfied  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with the right  to  family  life  and  it
    would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to   follow   their
    father/stepfather to Pakistan."

18. It is unclear from that paragraph as to whether or not he has  actually
    then taken into account the wider public  interest  considerations,  as
    required by the Court of Appeal in  the  case  of  MA  (Pakistan).   He
    appears from his wording simply to have looked at what is in  the  best
    interests of the children and there is no  reference  to  wider  public
    interest criteria such as the immigration history of the appellant.

19. In those circumstances I do not consider that it is a case in  which  I
    can safely adopt the findings of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge as being
    an full and proper analysis of the wider public interest considerations
    applicable under  Section  117B(6).  Therefore,  I  consider  that  his
    analysis and findings in respect of the whole case should be set  aside
    and reconsidered by a different First-Tier Tribunal, given  the  amount
    of fact-finding that that will require.  I find that the case should be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before any judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lodge  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside.  I remit the case  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing to be heard  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me.


Signed                                  Dated 21st September 2016

R F McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
