
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                          mr Michael George Douglas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Quee, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala , a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  taken
    on 3 June 2014 to refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.



Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 5 September 1966.
     The appellant arrived in the UK on 2 May 2007 with leave to remain  as
    a visitor until 23 March 2008.  He remained in the UK at the end of his
    leave unlawfully.  During the course of his stay in the UK  he  married
    his wife, a British citizen, on 14 July 2011.  In  September  2011  the
    appellant was encountered by  an  official  of  the  Home  Office.  The
    appellant voluntarily departed the UK in December 2011 in order to seek
    entry clearance to return to the UK to join his wife.   On  10  January
    2012 the appellant was issued with entry clearance to return to the  UK
    as a spouse, his entry clearance was valid until  10  April  2014.   On
    8 April 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis  of  his  private  life  and  exceptional   circumstances.    The
    respondent refused that application. The respondent considered that the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  The respondent considered  that
    at the time of the application the  appellant  was  aged  47  and  that
    having spent 40 years in Jamaica and in the absence of any evidence  to
    the contrary it was not accepted that he had lost his ties to his  home
    country.   The  respondent  also  considered  whether  the   particular
    circumstances constituted exceptional circumstances which might warrant
    a grant of leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent
    acknowledged that the appellant wanted more time to  try  to  reconcile
    his  marriage,  however,  the  respondent  did  not  see  this  as   an
    insurmountable obstacle to his family life continuing in Jamaica.   His
    application for leave to remain was therefore refused.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 15 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the
    appellant did not satisfy paragraph 276ADE.  The judge considered  that
    the appellant had only spent about six years in the UK and  he  was  an
    overstayer in the United Kingdom from  23  March  2008  until  December
    2011.  The judge considered that the appellant had spent over 40  years
    in Jamaica and he  had  strong  ties  to  that  country  and  that  the
    appellant's presence in the UK had always been  precarious  as  he  was
    only ever a visitor.  He considered that caring for his  aunt  did  not
    amount to a sufficiently good reason to allow the appellant  to  remain
    in the UK.  The judge accepted that the appellant had problems  in  his
    marriage  but  he  did  not  consider  that  that  was  a  sufficiently
    compelling reason to extend his leave. The judge did not consider  that
    the appellant's removal would be  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved such that the United Kingdom would  be
    in breach of its obligations  under  the  1950  Convention  as  regards
    Article 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  7
    July 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frankish  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 11 September  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman granted the appellant permission to appeal.  The grant of
    permission sets out that the judge made a factual error at paragraph 24
    in that the appellant has been lawfully residing in  the  UK  since  13
    February 2012 and that thus his presence has not always been precarious
    nor that of a visitor.  It is just arguable that  this  is  a  material
    error in respect of the proportionality assessment.  It was also stated
    that it is arguable that the judge was required to do more at paragraph
    32 than just refer to Section 117B.  Judge  Chapman  did  not  consider
    that it was arguable that the judge erred in his consideration  of  the
    assistance the appellant provides to his aunt.  Thus, the  appeal  came
    before me.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. Mr Quee indicated that there was new evidence that would be relevant if
    a material error of law was found. The  appellant  was  now  reconciled
    with his wife.

Summary of the Submissions

 6. The Grounds of Appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  a
    material error at paragraph 24 of the decision because the  judge  made
    unfair, inaccurate findings, namely, that the appellant's  presence  in
    the UK had always been precarious as he was only ever a visitor.  It is
    asserted that the appellant has not always had a precarious immigration
    status in the UK.  The grounds assert that the appellant  had  lawfully
    returned to the UK having obtained prior entry clearance leave and that
    the judge overlooked this fact considering him to  be  a  visitor.   Mr
    Quee submitted that this has the effect of undermining  the  subsequent
    Article 8 considerations in the case as the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise was predicated on an erroneous basis.

 7. It is asserted that insufficient consideration was given to  the  issue
    of the assistance  that  the  appellant  gives  to  his  aunt.   It  is
    submitted that the fact that the appellant's  aunt  may  apply  for  an
    attendance allowance should not have  been  permitted  to  dismiss  the
    requirement of a detailed balancing exercise.  The appellant relies  on
    the case of Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39  for  the  principle  that  the
    effect of removal on the appellant's aunt was an issue  that  ought  to
    have been given more or adequate consideration.

 8. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, at paragraph  32
    of the decision, indicates that he has had regard to  Section  117B  of
    the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 ("2002  Act")  but  the  judge
    omits consideration of Section 117B(1) and (2).  Mr Quee asserted that,
    as the appellant fluently speaks English. That counts as a  plus  under
    the proportionality balancing exercise.  It is also submitted that  the
    appellant is not a burden  on  UK  taxpayers  and  has  never  had  any
    recourse to UK public funds for the entire period of his  residence  in
    the UK which is in his favour.  Mr Quee submitted that the appellant is
    able to integrate into the UK society and has so integrated.

 9. The grounds  assert  that,  although  the  judge  states  that  he  has
    considered the questions in Razgar, the determination is not indicative
    of  an  adequate  balancing  exercise  having  been  undertaken.    The
    appellant relies on the case of AS Pakistan [2008]  EWCA  Civ  1118  at
    paragraph 22 for the principle that a careful assessment of the factors
    at play in an individual case both those favouring the interests of the
    appellant and any  others  whose  rights  may  be  affected  and  those
    favouring the interests of the public must be considered and set out by
    the judge.

10. The appellant relies on the case of Marvolyn Ann Marie  Ferron  v  SSHD
    [2007] EWCA Civ 1153 arguing that that case establishes  that  what  is
    required is an analysis sufficient to show that the conclusion  reached
    by the judge is properly explained.  It is asserted that the Judge,  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal, not only inadequately explained  the
    finding but is further vitiated by an error in making  a  finding  that
    the appellant's presence in the UK had always been precarious.

11. The Secretary of State submitted a Rule 24 (of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  The respondent  relies  on  the
    case of Singh v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74.  The respondent relies in particular on  paragraph  61  of
    the Singh case which refers to the approach set  out  in  the  case  of
    Nagre - in order to venture into a freestanding  Article  8  assessment
    there has to be compelling circumstances which are not covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary  of  State  submits  that  there  was
    nothing compelling in the appellant's circumstances and there  were  no
    issues which were not catered for by the Rules.  Ms Fijiwala  submitted
    that the appellant's status was always precarious.

12. The respondent relies on the case of AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260
    (IAC).  The respondent asserts that the ratio of the case of AM Malawi,
    as enunciated in the head  note  of  the  determination,  is  that  the
    appellant cannot obtain a positive right to a grant of leave to  remain
    from either Section 117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of  his  fluency
    in English or the strength of his financial  resources.   The  case  is
    also relied on as it provides clarification between what  is  meant  by
    unlawful status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  precarious  immigration
    status.  In the head note at  4  the  Tribunal  held  that  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious if their continued presence in the  UK
    will be dependent upon them obtaining a further grant of leave.

13. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the new evidence should not be considered as
    it was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge.  If  the  appellant
    wishes to rely on a change in circumstances  he  should  make  a  fresh
    application.

Legislative Provisions

14. Part 5A of the 2002 Act, introduced by section 19  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 establishes a new regime under the rubric "Article  8  of  the
    ECHR: Public Interest Considerations". Section 117A provides:

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

15. Section 117B, embraced by the cross heading "Article 8: Public Interest
    Considerations Applicable in All Cases", provides:

          "(1)    The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious...

Discussion

16. Ground 1-  the  Judge  made  a  material  error  by  finding  that  the
    appellant's presence in the UK had always been  precarious  as  he  was
    only ever a visitor.  Whilst it is incorrect  that  the  appellant  was
    only ever a visitor, this is not material.  The issue  that  the  judge
    was  considering  was  the  immigration  status,  namely  that  it  was
    precarious.  In considering the chronology in this  case  it  is  clear
    that the appellant's immigration status has been  not  only  precarious
    but also unlawful.  When his visitor visa  expired  in  March  2008  he
    became an overstayer and therefore his presence in the  United  Kingdom
    was unlawful.  He remained in the UK unlawfully until  he  returned  to
    Jamaica in December 2011.  When he entered the UK on 13 February  2012
    he entered lawfully as a spouse with leave to  remain  that  was  valid
    until 10 April 2014. However, his stay in the United  Kingdom  at  that
    point, although lawful, was  precarious.   I  accept  the  respondent's
    assertions that the case of AM Malawi clarified that a person who is in
    the United Kingdom pursuant to a  grant  of  leave  that  requires  the
    obtaining of a further grant  of  leave  in  order  to  continue  their
    presence in the United Kingdom has a precarious status.   That  is  the
    status of this appellant as evidenced by his  application  on  8  April
    2014 for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 4
    of the head note in AM Malawi the Upper Tribunal set out:

         "(4) Those who at any given  date  held  a  precarious  immigration
             status must have held at that date an otherwise  lawful  grant
             of leave to enter or to remain.  A person's immigration status
             is 'precarious' if their continued presence in the UK will  be
             dependent upon their obtaining a further grant of leave".

17. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    finding that the appellant's immigration status was precarious.

18. It is asserted that the judge  did  not  give  adequate  or  sufficient
    consideration to the effect  on  the  appellant's  aunt  of  him  being
    removed from the United Kingdom.  The judge  at  paragraphs  25  to  29
    takes into consideration both the role of the  appellant  in  assisting
    his aunt and her position should the appellant be unable to  attend  to
    her needs.  The judge took account of the fact that the appellant  gave
    no details of the actual amount of time he spent with his aunt for  the
    purpose of looking after her.  The judge referred  to  the  appellant's
    aunt's  witness  statement  which  indicated   that   the   appellant's
    assistance consisted of preparing and bringing her meals and any  other
    items she may require.  The judge also considered that the  appellant's
    aunt was living in sheltered accommodation and as such  it  was  likely
    that her care needs had been assessed before she had  been  moved  into
    the accommodation.  The judge has considered the effect of  removal  of
    the appellant on his aunt. On the facts there is no material  error  of
    law in the judge's assessment of the aunt's position.

19. There is no  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in
    relation  to  paragraph  fr276ADE  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    The
    respondent asserts that there are no compelling circumstances that give
    rise to a consideration under Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules.   The
    First-tier Tribunal has not adopted a clear approach. However the judge
    considered the position in relation to the appellant's aunt.   This  is
    not a matter that would have been considered  under  the  private  life
    provisions in paragraph 276ADE under the Immigration Rules. Therefore I
    consider that the judge was correct to consider Article  8  outside  of
    the Rules.  The grounds of appeal in essence argue that the  judge  has
    failed to carry out a proportionality exercise adequately.

20. The proportionality exercise undertaken by the  judge  is  very  brief.
    However, the judge did consider the position of the  appellant's  aunt.
    The issue is simply  whether  or  not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    adequately weighed all the relevant factors in favour of the  appellant
    and those against the appellant when concluding  that  removal  of  the
    appellant would not be a disproportionate interference with his, or his
    aunt's,  Article  8  rights.   When  undertaking  that  proportionality
    exercise the judge was mandated to have regard to Section 117A and 117B
    of the 2002 Act.  The appellant asserts that the judge failed to  weigh
    in favour of the appellant the fact that he speaks English fluently, is
    not a financial burden on the taxpayer and has fully integrated into UK
    society.  The case of AM Malawi makes it clear that  an  appellant  can
    obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain  from  either
    Section 117B(2) or (3).  The judge, at paragraph  32,  considered  that
    Section 117B required him to consider that control of  immigration  was
    in  the  public  interest.   He  clearly   factored   that   into   the
    proportionality exercise weighing  that  in  the  balance  against  the
    interests of the appellant that he  had  set  out  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's private life with his aunt.  In the case of Forman  (ss117A
    to C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC) sets out in the headnote:

         "(i) the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted
             by the consideration that a  person  pursuing  a  claim  under
             Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden  on  the
             state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so
             indefinitely the significance of these factors is  that  where
             they are not present the public interest is fortified".

21. The failure of the judge to consider Section 117B(2) and (3)namely that
    the appellant fluently speaks English and is not a  burden  on  UK  tax
    payers does not assist the appellant,  as  no  positive  right  can  be
    obtained from those factors and they are not matters that weigh in  the
    balance such as to dilute  the  public  interest  in  firm  immigration
    control.

22. The judge failed to consider Section 117B(4).   Had  he  done  so  this
    would not have assisted the appellant, as little weight is to be  given
    to a private life or a relationship formed with  a  qualifying  partner
    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  At 117B(5) the judge was required to afford
    little weight to the appellant's private life as it was established  at
    a  time  when  his  immigration  status  in  the  United  Kingdom   was
    precarious.

23.  Although  the  reasons  and  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    undertaken by the judge were set out very briefly in the decision there
    was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  The appellant's immigration status has been either  unlawful
    or at best precarious therefore little weight should be afforded to his
    private life.  The interference in  the  appellant's  private  life  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls.  The judge's  conclusion
    that removal of the appellant would not cause the United Kingdom to  be
    in breach of its obligations under the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights was one that was open to him.

24. The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  respondent
    stands.

25. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction.   No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
    Having considered all the circumstances and evidence I do not  consider
    it necessary to make an anonymity direction.



Decision

The appellant has not discharged the burden upon him of showing  that  there
is any material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  without
which that decision is not susceptible to being set aside.   The  appeal  is
therefore dismissed.  The decision of the respondent stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 18 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

