
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26552/2014
                                                               IA/26543/2014
                                                             & IA/26549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th November 2014                           |On 12th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Idowu Babajide Aboaba,
                         Mr Olunbenga Adeolu Aboaba
                        & Mrs Omowunmi Rashed Aboaba
                        (No aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sain, Counsel instructed by Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The first  two  appellants  are
    applying to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants under the points-based system, specifically paragraph  245  DD
    and Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  The  remaining  appellant  is
    applying as a dependent and her status stands to be determined in  line
    with that of the first two appellants.

 2. I have considered whether  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction in respect of these proceedings. Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I do not consider such a direction necessary

 3. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge W Grant promulgated on 24 September  2014,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against  the  decisions  of
    the respondent dated the 6 June 2014 to refuse the  appellants  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereupon to  make  decisions
    to remove the appellants from the United Kingdom.

 4. By decision made on 13th October 2014 permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The case appears before me to  determine  in  the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law in  the
    original determination.

 5. According to the application forms submitted by  the  appellants,  they
    were applying to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants at NQF  level
    6. In section 3A G Attributes  the  appellants  claim  that  they  were
    employed as directors or engaged in business activity in an  occupation
    at degree level (group d). Thereafter in the application form  the  job
    title as set out at G.24  of  the  respective  application  forms  were
    Purchasing Officer/Director or Marketing Officer /Director, both with a
    standard occupational classification (SOC) at G.25 of 1133.

 6. The appellants have produced the Occupation Skills Codes for NQF  level
    6. SOC 1133 appears in Occupations skilled to  NQF  level  6.  Level  6
    occupation titles as set out in the codes  of  practice  are  Marketing
    Director or Sales Director and  the  practice  describing  details  the
    functions to be performed by such individuals are also set out  in  the
    Occupation Skill Codes

 7. The letters of refusal are dated on or about the 6 June  2014.  In  the
    letters of refusal it is noted that the appellants  have  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 245DD and of Appendix A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 8. The letter of refusal continues by raising the requirements  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 41 SD(c)(iii) and 41SD(e)(iv) of Appendix A. It
    is specifically alleged  that  the  contract  between  the  appellant's
    business and Floxx & Thrane Nigeria was not acceptable,  as  it  was  a
    photocopy and as each and every page had not been signed as required by
    the rules. Accordingly the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(c)  and  (d)
    of Appendix A had not been met.

 9. The letter of refusal continues by setting out that the appellants  had
    failed to submit evidence that their occupation skill was at NQF  level
    4 as required. As there was no evidence that  the  appellant's  company
    was selling products to other companies, they had failed to demonstrate
    that the occupation skill level was at the required skill level of  NQF
    4. Therefore the respondent had put in issue  whether  the  appellants'
    business was  carrying  on  economic  activities,  where  the  required
    occupation/skill level was at level NQF4. Clearly there was a  mismatch
    between the application and the decision.

10. In the circumstances the appellants were not awarded any  points  under
    part A Attributes, whether that be under access to funds  as  required,
    funds held in a regulated financial institution or funds disposable  in
    the United Kingdom. The appellants required 75 points under Attributes.
    The letter of refusal states  that  the  appellants  do  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  245DD  (b)  appellants.  It  was  for  the
    appellants to prove that they were entitled to the  points  by  proving
    that they meet the criteria in the rules.

11. It certainly therefore appears that whilst the appellants were applying
    at NQF level 6 consideration was given to  these  applications  by  the
    respondent at the lower-level of NQF level 4. It is accepted  that  NQF
    level 6 encompasses occupations at a higher and more responsible level.



12. Documentation had been submitted by  the  appellants  to  the  Tribunal
    relating to NQF level 6.  In  part  the  submissions  relating  to  the
    appellants' case asserted that the respondent  had  applied  the  wrong
    standard and that fairness  and  evidential  flexibility  or  paragraph
    245AA  required  that  the  respondent  should  have  written  to   the
    appellants for further documentation, specifically the original of  the
    contract.

13. Whatever can be said, the respondent  had  put  in  issue  whether  the
    appellants' occupations satisfied the requirements under attributes.

14. In paragraph 14 of the determination the judge has  clearly  considered
    the business being carried on by the appellants' company and the actual
    functions undertaken by the appellants. The judge found that  a  single
    procurement contract with a company in Nigeria for a limited number  of
    items and some advertisements were not sufficient to  demonstrate  that
    the appellants' business and  the  appellants  themselves  carried  out
    occupations at the relevant level. The judge has  therefore  considered
    the evidence as to the functions of the appellants and determined  that
    it had not been proved that the appellants were carrying  out  the  job
    tasks set out within the relevant Codes at NQF level 6.

15. The copies of the Codes for NQF  level  6  had  been  provided  by  the
    appellants in evidence. The judge not only considered the  applications
    under NQF level 6 but also under level  4,  but  such  is  not  to  the
    detriment of the appellants but rather to their benefit. The letter  of
    refusal had assessed that the appellants had failed to prove that there
    were carrying out activities at the lower level of  NQF  level  4.  The
    judge considered both level 6 and level 4.

16. The appellants had sought to assert that they met the  requirements  of
    NQF level 6 and claimed to have produced evidence to substantiate that.
    The judge clearly found on the basis of the evidence that they did  not
    met the requirements of NQF level 6 as is evident from paragraph 14  of
    the determination. That was a finding the judge was entitled to make on
    the evidence.

17. However to the benefit of the appellants he considered whether  or  not
    in line with the letter of refusal they met  the  lower  level  of  NQF
    level 4. The judge also found that the appellants on the basis  of  the
    evidence  presented  did  not  meet  the  requirements  at  the   lower
    occupation level.

18. Whilst criticism is made of the appellants' failure to  give  evidence,
    the judge was satisfied on the evidence submitted that  the  appellants
    had failed to discharge that burden of proof that was upon them to show
    that they  met  the  requirements  of  the  rules  in  respect  of  the
    application made.

19. The appellants in the original submissions to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had sought to argue that there were issues of  fairness  and  that  the
    respondent had failed to  give  effect  to  the  policy  of  evidential
    flexibility applying paragraph 245AA. The judge  has  also  dealt  with
    that issue. In paragraph 15 the judge clearly refers to the  fact  that
    that policy or the provision of the rules would not have  assisted  the
    appellants as the occupation were not  at  the  required  skill  level.
    Seeking to apply evidential flexibility and to ask the  appellants  for
    further documentary evidence would not have solved the problem that the
    business of the appellants  and  the  appellants'  employment  did  not
    satisfy the requirement of NQF level 6

20. The judge has considered the evidence presented to him and  found  that
    the appellants do not meet the requirements of the rules in respect  of
    level NQF 6. Those were findings of fact which the judge  was  entitled
    to make on the evidence and the judge has given valid reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached.

21. The fact that the judge has also considered the application  consistent
    with the letter of refusal on the lower basis of NQF level 4 would have
    only been to the benefit of the appellants as the appellants were being
    given a further opportunity to succeed under the rules. The  fact  that
    he has thereafter dismissed it on that basis also makes  no  difference
    to the substance of the decision that the appellants do  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules in respect of the application that they made.



22.  With regard to the assertion is that the evidential flexibility policy
    or paragraph 245 AA should have applied and  the  immigration  officers
    should have requested that the original contract be produced, the judge
    has clearly dealt with that in paragraph 15. The judge  concludes  that
    that would not have assisted the appellants as they have not proved  in
    any event that there occupations were  at  the  required  skill  level.
    Those were the findings of fact that he was entitled  to  make  on  the
    evidence presented.

23. Whilst the judge does make adverse comment  about  the  fact  that  the
    appellants of failed to give evidence that does not  detract  from  the
    fact that the evidence submitted was  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  the
    judge that the appellants met the requirements of the rules.

24. In dealing with the issues the judge had obtained copies of  the  Codes
    of Practice for Skilled Workers relating to NQF level 4.  Challenge  is
    made of the judge as it is alleged  that  the  judge  should  not  have
    obtained the Codes of Practice as such was a matter of evidence  to  be
    proved in the normal way. [see Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank  letters;
    evidential flexibility)(Rev1) [2014] UKUT 295 (IAC).

25. Whilst the practice of the  judge  making  his  own  enquiries  on  the
    evidence is not to be encouraged, in the circumstances of  the  present
    case it would not have altered the fact that  the  appellants  did  not
    meet the requirements with regard to NQF level 6  and  would  therefore
    have made no difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.  Thus  if  such
    constituted an error on the part of the judge it  was  not  a  material
    error of law.

26. There is no material error of law in the determination.  I  uphold  the
    decision to dismiss these appeals on all grounds.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

