
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26132/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th December 2017                     |On 6th February 2018              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                  hena [r]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal  born  on  23  November  1969.   He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet dated 1
    December 2016 dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

Immigration History

2.   The Appellant entered into an arranged marriage with his wife in  Nepal
    on 25 November 2003 and their son, [RR], was born  on  [  ]  2007.  The
    Appellant's father, [MR], [the Sponsor] was issued  with  a  settlement
    visa on 3 November 2006 and arrived in the UK on 21 January  2007.  His
    mother entered the UK for settlement on 17 September 2009.

3.   The Appellant arrived in the UK in June 2010  with  a  Tier  4  Student
    visa valid  until  January  2012,  which  was  later  extended  on  two
    occasions up to September 2015. On  24  November  2015  his  leave  was
    curtailed so as to expire on 27 January 2015 as his  college's  licence
    had been revoked. On 26 January 2015, he applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules relying  on  his  rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR, based upon his being the adult child of a former Gurkha
    soldier, who served  in  the  British  Army  from  1954  to  1990.  The
    Appellant appealed against the refusal of 6 July 2015.

4.   It is the Appellant's case that he would already be settled in  the  UK
    had the Respondent not wronged his father. The starting point  is  that
    the Appellant should be put in the position that he would have been  if
    that wrong had not  occurred.   Article  8  is  effective  because  the
    Sponsor's application was delayed by the Respondent's  previous  policy
    which denied all Gurkhas discharged before 1997 an opportunity to apply
    for settlement on discharge. That denial was recognised as an  historic
    injustice in R (Limbu) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin).

5.   The Appellant's father was discharged from the army in  1990.  At  that
    time, the Appellant was 21 years old and was living with  his  siblings
    and grandmother in Nepal. His father and mother  were  living  in  Hong
    Kong. He would have settled with his father in the UK if his father had
    been able to apply for settlement at that time. The Appellant  remained
    dependant on his father and now his father was dependant  on  him.  The
    Appellant lives with his parents, his brother and his brother's  family
    in the UK. When the Appellant was studying, he worked  part-time  as  a
    hospital cleaner. He was  now  his  parent's  carer.  His  father,  who
    receives a pension based on his  service  with  the  Gurkhas,  provides
    financial support to his wife and child in Nepal and also supports  the
    family in the UK. His brother also provides financial assistance.


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


6.   The Appellant cannot meet  the  criteria  of  the  Respondent's  policy
    [Annex K], under which adult children of former Gurkhas may  settle  in
    the UK, issued on 5 January 2015. He has applied within the UK,  rather
    than from outside the UK and  he  was  aged  45  on  the  date  of  the
    application and not between the ages of 18 and 30. He was not under the
    age of 18 when his father was discharged in 1990 and he entered the  UK
    in June 2010, three years after his father.

7.   In addition to the above undisputed facts,  the  judge  concluded  that
    there were strong arguments for the Appellant not being  able  to  meet
    the requirements of Annex K. As the Appellant  is  married  and  has  a
    child, he is not emotionally dependent upon his Gurkha father  and  any
    financial dependence is as a result of his current  immigration  status
    in the UK; he has lived apart from his father for more than  two  years
    and he has formed an independent family unit.


8.   The judge concluded at paragraphs 26 and 27: "I do not accept that  the
    Appellant's case has a special and compelling character. He is  looking
    after his parents as their carer, but I am  not  satisfied  that  their
    medical condition is such that such  care  is  strictly  necessary  and
    cannot be provided by the Appellant's brother, who also lives with  the
    parents, (or his brother's wife) or by  other  means.  The  Appellant's
    parents' medical conditions are being controlled by medication  and  in
    any event are the result of old age. His father is suffering from gout,
    hearing loss, a dislocated right elbow and  has  recently  had  an  eye
    operation.  He is aged 77.
    Applying the five-fold test set out in Razgar [2004]  the  main  factor
    for my consideration is whether such interference with the  Appellant's
    right to respect for his private or family life is proportionate to the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved. I  am  satisfied  that  it
    does. I accept that this is  a  balancing  exercise,  but  taking  into
    account the many ways in which the Appellant cannot meet  the  criteria
    set out in Annex K, I do not uphold his claim under Article 8 ECHR.  It
    is accepted that he cannot meet the Immigration Rules."

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  on  5
    October 2017 for the following reasons : "The Appellant  was  over  the
    age of 18 when his Gurkha father was discharged from the army  and  was
    46 years old at the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision. He  could
    not meet the requirements of the Respondent's policy on  settlement  of
    adult children of former Gurkhas  issued  in  January  2015,  Annex  K.
    Although paragraph 26 of the determination suggests that  the  FtJ  did
    not find the Appellant's relationship with his  parents  sufficient  to
    trigger the protection of article 8, either when  considered  from  the
    perspective of  family  life  or  private  life,  he  then  states,  at
    paragraph 27, that the main factor for his consideration is  the  issue
    of proportionality. This may suggest that the FtJ  was  satisfied  that
    there was a sufficient  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    parents such as to trigger the operation of article 8. Although  it  is
    not apparent how the  Appellant  would  have  obtained  notional  entry
    clearance as an adult on his father's discharge in  1990  but  for  the
    historic injustice, it is nevertheless arguable that the FtJ  may  have
    failed to consider whether the historic injustice was a relevant factor
    in  the  balancing  exercise  and  this   may   have   undermined   his
    proportionality assessment."


Appellant's submissions

10.  Mr Jesurum submitted that there was no clear  finding  on  family  life
    and family life was clearly argued before the judge  at  paragraphs  17
    and 18 of the skeleton argument. Why should the Appellant's father have
    to give up family life with his son or move to Nepal  in  order  to  be
    able to enjoy it.  Although the judge did not have the benefit  of  the
    case of Jitindra Rai v Entry Clearance Officer (New Delhi) [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320, he  was  clearly  aware  of  the  case  of  Kugathas  and  the
    definition  of  dependence:  support  which  was  real,  committed   or
    effective. It was clear from paragraph 36 of Rai that the judge  should
    pay much more attention to support which was a threshold rather than  a
    consideration.

11.  Mr Jesurum submitted that  whether  Article  8(1)  was  engaged  was  a
    question of fact  and  bonds  of  choice  were  only  material  to  the
    proportionality assessment under Article 8(2). The issue in  this  case
    was whether it was right and proper to expect  a  man  who  served  his
    country for 32 years, twice in combat, to give up the  company  of  his
    son. The judge had erred in law because  there  was  no  adequate  self
    direction of the law on family life. The judge had in fact elevated the
    test and there was no  analysis  of  how  the  injustice  had  affected
    proportionality.  Had the judge directed his mind to the  key  question
    the outcome might have been different.

12.  Mr Jesurum submitted that this was  an  historic  injustice  case  even
    though the Appellant was over 18 at the date of discharge  and  he  had
    subsequently married.  The Appellant's  father  was  a  victim  of  the
    injustice. There was a reciprocal bond and it would not  be  reasonable
    to expect his father to  give  up  the  ties  he  had  with  his  adult
    dependent son. The fact that the Appellant was over the age of  18  was
    not  an  obstacle  to  the  case  succeeding.  The  policy,  which  was
    summarised at paragraph 3 of the decision, failed to include  the  last
    two paragraphs which stated that if the policy was not met then Article
    8 should be  considered.  The  policy  was  phrased  in  terms  of  the
    Appellant's dependence and dependence by the Sponsor on  the  Appellant
    was not covered.  It  was  clear  however  from  Ghising  that  it  was
    appropriate to look  at  reciprocal  bonds  and  the  judge  failed  to
    consider this.

13.  Further, the Appellant's age was not an  obstacle  because  the  policy
    looked at dependence. The  Appellant  had  lived  in  the  family  home
    throughout  his  life  and  was  21  years  old  when  his  father  was
    discharged. He was, at that stage, an integral part of the family  unit
    and would have satisfied Article 8 at the time of discharge even though
    he could not bring himself within the policy. The reason the  Appellant
    was over the age of 18 at the date of  discharge  was  because  of  the
    nature of the service rendered  by  his  father.   His  father  had  an
    outstanding career with the Gurkhas  and  had  been  promoted  thirteen
    times from rifleman to major. It would be wrong that,  because  of  the
    outstanding service of his father, the Appellant would not be  able  to
    benefit and be compensated for the historic injustice.

14.  The Appellant's father could  not  apply  for  settlement  until  2004,
    notwithstanding he was discharged in 1990 and the court  had  concluded
    that the policy was irrationally restricted from 2004 until  2009.  The
    Sponsor was denied settlement when he first  applied.  The  policy  was
    rejected in 2004 in Limbu because there was no account  of  meritorious
    service, or of the ties that were  unlikely  to  be  acquired  and  the
    Respondent failed to  honour  the  military  covenant.  Settlement  was
    normally granted after four years in  service.  Great  weight  must  be
    attached to the historic injustice following Ghising. The mere fact  of
    the injustice was sufficient to tip  the  balance  in  the  Appellant's
    favour. Following Rai there was greater weight for those serving for  a
    longer time and for those who had taken part in conflict and  had  been
    promoted to the rank of officer. The facts  of  this  case  showed  the
    strongest record of service that could possibly be  attained  short  of
    gallantry awards. The Sponsor was discharged in 1990 and  had  to  wait
    until 2006, sixteen years, for the historic wrong to be corrected,  and
    he had to go through an appeal process in order to achieve  settlement.
    The Appellant had been thoroughly mistreated by the  policy.  The  fact
    that he attained majority was a relevant consideration, but it did  not
    assist the Respondent and it was no bar to the  judge  finding  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

15.  Mr Jesurum submitted that, following Gurung, the fact that  the  policy
    is expressed in terms of exceptionality did not show where the  balance
    of proportionality lies. The weight to be attached to the policy was  a
    matter for the court. It was not a rule and had not  been  laid  before
    Parliament.  In  any  event  the  policy   specifically   states   that
    consideration must be given to Article 8.  In weighing  the  policy  in
    his assessment  of  Article  8  the  judge  had  erred  in  law.  Multi
    generational households  were  the  norm  in  most  jurisdictions.  The
    Appellant's wife had joined the family and his  family  life  warranted
    the protection of Article 8 despite his marriage. Family life  was  not
    broken by marriage just because lack of independence is  supportive  of
    family life continuing. The judge should have paid  more  attention  to
    'support'. On the facts of this case family life had  never  ceased  to
    exist and age was no bar  to  the  continuation  of  family  life.  The
    Appellant is the Sponsor's carer. There was uncontested evidence of the
    Sponsor's medical needs and of the role the Appellant  carried  out  in
    caring for his father.

16.  Normally in assessing Article 8 cases there was  a  requirement  for  a
    compelling case, although that was not determinative. This however  was
    not an ordinary case. The principles in Ghising applied to the  Sponsor
    and his bond with his son. The judge failed to take those into account.
    Although  there  was   nothing   compelling   about   the   Appellant's
    circumstances,  because  this  is  an  historic  injustice  case,   the
    Respondent had to show something over and  above  immigration  control.
    Whether there  were  'compelling  circumstances'  was  not  a  relevant
    consideration. Section 117B did not apply in an historic injustice case
    for the reasons given at paragraphs 55 to 57 of Rai.

17.  Mr Jesurum submitted that Section 117B(2) and (3) carried no weight  in
    this case because of the historic injustice.  If  this  was  a  private
    life case only, whilst ordinarily little weight should be  attached  to
    private life, because  of  the  historic  injustice  then  this  was  a
    compelling case. The Appellant was relying on the Sponsor's rights  and
    the judge failed to consider this at all. Had he done so he could  have
    found in the Appellant's favour. Even if the Appellant was not a direct
    victim of injustice, the Sponsor was and his father's need  of  support
    was sufficient for the case to succeed on Article 8.

18.  Mr Jesurum referred me to the witness statements of the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor and the medical evidence. The Appellant had a close  bond  with
    his father and was his carer. The fact  that  the  Appellant's  parents
    could be looked after by the Appellant's brother was not an  answer  in
    this case. The issue was whether the father should have to give up  his
    relationship with the Appellant.


Respondent's submissions

19.  Mr Clarke submitted the case of  The  Queen  (on  the  application  of)
    Sharmilla Gurung, Rijen Pun, Motiraj Gurung  and  Tika  Chandra  Rai  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8.   He
    relied on paragraph 42 of the judgment which states:

          "... If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic injustice, he
         would have settled in the UK at a time  when  his  dependant  (now)
         adult child would have been able to accompany him  as  a  dependant
         child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that
         it is proportionate to permit the adult child to  join  his  family
         now."

20.  Mr Clarke submitted that the Sponsor could not  propose  to  settle  in
    the UK until his service had finished. On the Appellant's own evidence,
    in 1990 when his father was discharged from the army, the Appellant was
    living with his siblings and grandmother in Nepal and he was  21  years
    of age. It cannot be right that someone who was not British would  have
    greater rights than British citizens. The dependent relative route  was
    a strict test and the idea that the Sponsor's service put the Appellant
    in a better situation than a British citizen had no basis in any of the
    jurisprudence. There was no historic injustice in this case.

21.  Mr Clarke accepted that the policy was not determinative of  the  claim
    and the judge made findings consistent with that approach at paragraphs
    25 and 26. The Appellant was 45 years old, married with a child and was
    not emotionally dependent  on  his  father.  He  was  only  financially
    dependent and had lived apart from his father for more than two  years.
    In the case of Rai, relied upon by the Appellant, there  was  emotional
    dependence.  Without this emotional dependence the Appellant could  not
    satisfy the threshold for the engagement of Article  8.  There  was  no
    family life established in this case. The judge was purely  looking  at
    private life at paragraph 26 and  this  was  a  standard  private  life
    claim.

22.  Mr Clarke submitted that there was no historic  injustice  here  to  be
    considered. The judge conducted the proportionality assessment  on  the
    basis of private life and he took into account  all  relevant  factors.
    Even if the judge had concluded that the  Sponsor  had  some  emotional
    dependence on the  Appellant  that  would  not  materially  affect  the
    decision because it was not strictly necessary  for  the  Appellant  to
    provide care of his parents. Such care could be provided by his brother
    and the Sponsor could rely on his rights as a settled person in the UK.
    However, the judge found that there was no emotional dependence in this
    case and this finding was not challenged in the grounds of appeal.  The
    judge did not consider the case from the perspective of the Appellant's
    father, but this was not material in this case.  This  case  relied  on
    financial dependence which was insufficient to succeed under Article  8
    and family life.


Appellant's response

23.   Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  any  submissions  on  materiality   were
    irrelevant to the remaking of the decision. Paragraph 42 of Gurung, Pun
    and Rai did not  address  what  would  happen  to  someone  born  after
    discharge and the policy was not determinative of where the balance  of
    proportionality would lie. There may be cases where it  was  proper  to
    give weight to the family life of a  man  who  would  serve  the  Crown
    rather than someone who did not. The judge should have  looked  at  the
    support provided by the Appellant to the Sponsor and he did not.

24.  In finding that the Appellant was  not  emotionally  dependent  on  his
    father the judge failed to consider the Article 8  jurisprudence  which
    was not the same as under the policy. Dependence meant support  and  no
    more. Financial dependence was not decisive.  If  financial  dependence
    was provided because of bonds which were more than emotional ties, then
    family life was engaged. The relevant consideration was Patel  at  page
    104 of the authorities' bundle which shows that family life  can  exist
    without  dependence  and  the  judge  failed  to  consider   reciprocal
    dependence. There was family life in the household in the UK.

25.  Mr Jesurum submitted that the care provided by the  Appellant  did  not
    have to be strictly necessary because he was  the  victim  of  historic
    injustice. Although the Appellant was 21 at the time  the  Sponsor  was
    discharged from the army, he would have benefited under Article  8  and
    the quality and duration  of  the  Sponsor's  service  was  a  relevant
    consideration.  The situation should be looked at on the basis of  what
    would have happened if the historic injustice had not taken place.  The
    historic  injustice  still  applied  because  the  Sponsor  could  have
    resigned his commission to settle in the UK, if that was available. The
    authority for historic injustice is at paragraphs 1, 11 and 14 of Patel
    and the Court of Appeal in Gurung accepted it was bound by Patel.  This
    gives rise to an error of law in this case. Whether the Appellant would
    succeed on the rehearing was another matter. The current situation  was
    many miles from the ordinary Article 8 and the judge fell well short of
    assessing this case to the appropriate standard.


Discussion and Conclusions

26.  The judge concluded that the Appellant was  not  emotionally  dependant
    on his father, he was married with a child, he had lived apart from his
    father for more than two years and he had formed an independent  family
    unit. These findings were open to the judge on the evidence before him.

27.  The judge's failure to make a specific finding  on  whether  there  was
    family life did not amount to an error of law because on the particular
    facts of the case the Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  more  than
    normal emotional ties which would give rise to family  life.  Financial
    dependence in these circumstances was insufficient. The judge's failure
    to make a finding was therefore not material because on  the  facts  of
    this case family life was not established.

28.  Mr Jesurum submits that family life does exist because the  Sponsor  is
    dependent on the Appellant who provides care for himself and his  wife.
    Had the judge considered the  position  from  the  perspective  of  the
    Sponsor he  would  have  concluded  that  there  was  family  life  and
    therefore the failure to deal with it amounted to an error of  law.   I
    am not persuaded by Mr Jesurum's submission for the following reasons.

29.  The judge concluded that there was  no  emotional  dependence  in  this
    case and the dependence was purely a financial one. The  care  provided
    by the Appellant for his father and mother was not  strictly  necessary
    and could be provided by other family members. The  medical  conditions
    of the Appellant's parents are a  result  of  old  age  and  are  being
    controlled by medication. Therefore, the level of support  required  to
    amount to effective, committed or real support was not present in  this
    case and family life was not engaged. In any event, the judge took into
    account the care the Appellant provided for his parents at paragraph 26
    and then went on to consider proportionality.

30.  The issue of whether there is an historic injustice is relevant to  the
    assessment of proportionality. The judge makes no  mention  at  all  of
    whether there was historic injustice in this case,  although  he  finds
    that the Appellant could not benefit from the  Gurkha  policy.  On  the
    facts of this case, at the time the Sponsor  was  discharged  from  the
    army, the Appellant would not have qualified for settlement  under  the
    policy. Therefore, it  cannot  be  said  that,  but  for  the  historic
    injustice, the Appellant would have already obtained settlement in  the
    UK.

31.  Mr Jesurum seeks to persuade me that at the age  of  21  the  Appellant
    was still part of the Sponsor's family when he was discharged from  the
    army and therefore his appeal would have  succeeded  under  Article  8.
    However, that is not evident from the facts in this case. At that stage
    the Appellant was living with his grandmother and siblings in Nepal and
    was not living with the Sponsor. Their family life had  been  disrupted
    for some time at that point.  Accordingly,  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there is an historic injustice in this case such that the  judge  erred
    in law in failing to properly assess  proportionality.   The  Appellant
    would not have qualified for settlement when his father was  discharged
    from the army and it could not be said that, but for  the  government's
    failure to offer settlement to Gurkha servicemen, the  Appellant  would
    be settled in the UK.

32.  Accordingly, this was not a case where the proportionality balance  lay
    in the Appellant's favour. There was no error in the judge's failure to
    consider whether there was in fact historic injustice since the judge's
    findings supported his conclusion that the Appellant could not  qualify
    under the policy and would not have been  eligible  for  settlement  in
    1990. It was accepted that the Appellant could not satisfy Annex K.

33.  The judge proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  should  show
    compelling circumstances. There were none in this case.   His  parents'
    medical conditions did  not  amount  to  exceptional  circumstances.  I
    appreciate that the Sponsor may wish to be cared for  by  his  son  and
    does not wish his son to return to  Nepal  and  that  some  recognition
    should be given  to  his  service  in  the  Gurkhas.  However,  on  the
    particular facts of this case, it could not be said that, but  for  the
    historic injustice, the Appellant would  be  settled  in  the  UK.  The
    judge's conclusion that the refusal of leave was proportionate was open
    to him on the evidence before him. There was no error  of  law  in  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality.

34.  I find that there is no error of law in the judge's decision  dated  16
    November 2016 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 2 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 2 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
