
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26508/ 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR arvinder singh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Singh (ATM Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Moore)  by  which,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 20th December 2013, he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application  because  the  Appellant
    was required, in order to claim  30  points  for  his  Confirmation  of
    Acceptances for Studies (CAS), to submit "an original English  language
    test certificate from an English language test provider approved by the
    Secretary of  State  for  these  purposes  as  listed  in  Appendix  O"
    (paragraph 118(b)(ii)(4)). The Appellant had in  fact  submitted  three
    TOEIC certificates from the Educational  Testing  Service  and  so  the
    Secretary of State found he was not entitled to the 30 points.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge agreed and dismissed the appeal  on  that
    basis. The Judge dealt with the case on the papers as requested by  the
    Appellant.

 4. The Appellant then sought permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    Judge's  interpretation  of  the  English  language  requirements   and
    Appendices  A  and  O  to  the  Immigration  Rules  was  incorrect.  In
    particular, the requirement in Appendix O that all elements  be  passes
    at a single sitting was introduced on 1st October 2013 which was  after
    the decision under appeal.

 5. This is an argument commonly run before the First-tier Tribunal, namely
     that prior to the changes contained in HC 628 on 1st October  2013  it
    was acceptable for an applicant to  put  forward  various  test  scores
    which cumulatively indicated a  pass  at  the  appropriate  level  even
    though the applicant had not been able to pass all of the  elements  at
    the same time.

 6. Prior to the changes brought in on 1st October 2013 the requirement  of
    Appendix A, paragraph 118(b)(ii)(4) was as follows:-

      "(4)  the  applicant  provides  an  original   English-language   test
        certificate from an English language test provider approved by  the
        Secretary of State for these purposes  as  listed  in  Appendix  O,
        which is within its validity date, and clearly shows:

         (i) the applicant's name,

        (ii) that the applicant has achieved or exceeded level  B2  of  the
           Council  of Europe's  common  European  Framework  for  Language
           Learning in all four components (reading, writing, speaking  and
           listening), unless exempted from  sitting  a  component  on  the
           basis of the applicant's disability, and

         (iii) the date of the award".

7.   At the same time; prior to 1st October 2013 changes, the head  note  of
    Appendix O read:-

         "Appendix O: list of English Language Tests that have been approved
         by the UK  Border Agency  for  English  language  requirements  for
         limited leave to enter or remain under the Immigration Rules

         Only the level (s) of test specified for each test are approved".



8.   After 1st October 2013 paragraph 118(b)(ii)(4) reads:-

         (4) the applicant provides the specified documents from an  English
         language test provider approved by the Secretary of State for these
         purposes as listed in Appendix O, which clearly show:

         (i)  the applicant's name,

         (ii) that the applicant has achieved or exceeded level  B2  of  the
         Council of Europe's Common European Framework for Language Learning
         in all four components (reading, writing, speaking and  listening),
         unless exempted from sitting  a  component  on  the  basis  of  the
         applicant's disability,

         (iii) the date of the award, and

         (iv) that the test is within its validity date (where applicable)"

9.   After 1 October 2013 Appendix O contains a head  note  which  reads  as
follows:-

         "1. Where two or more components (reading,  writing,  speaking  and
         listening) of an English language test  are  examined  and  awarded
         together, for example a combined exam and certificate  for  reading
         and  writing  skills,  the  specified  evidence  submitted  by  the
         applicant must show that he achieved the required scores in all the
         relevant components  during  a  single  sitting  that  examination,
         unless exempted from sitting  a  component  on  the  basis  of  his
         disability. This requirement does not apply  to  applications  made
         under part 8 or Appendix FM unless Appendix KoLL applies".

10.  Accordingly, at the date of decision in the extant case,  namely  prior
    to the changes of 1st October 2013 the requirements are  quite  clearly
    set out in paragraph 118 of Appendix A as set out above. The  Appellant
    must produce "an original certificate" (my emphasis). It is not open to
    him to provide several  original  certificates.  In  this  case  it  is
    accepted that he had produced three separate certificates having passed
    different elements on different occasions. That clearly does  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules. He does not therefore earn the requisite
    30 points and his application was rightly refused by the  Secretary  of
    State and the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 18th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

