
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26734/2013
     IA/26758/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 August 2014                    |On 18 November 2014                 |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                  PARESH DHIRUBHAI JADAV (FIRST appellant)
                 KINJALABEN PARESH JADAV (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr V Makoi, Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Paresh Dhirubhai Jadav and Kinjalaben Paresh Jadav, are
    citizens of India.  They are husband and wife.  I shall  refer  to  the
    first appellant as "the appellant" in this  determination;  the  second
    appellant is the  first  appellant's  spouse  and  dependant  upon  his
    appeal.  The appellants were refused further leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student and dependent spouse by decisions of the respondent
    dated 14 June 2013.  They appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Mailer)  which,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  4  April  2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellants now appeal, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had made a number of applications for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a student migrant.  The issue in the appeal which
    is determinative concerns the appellant's failure to claim 30 points in
    the category "Attributes - Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies".
    The determination at [36] records:

         [The appellant] was referred to paragraph  120-SD  of  Appendix  A.
         The specified documents that must be provided are  identified.   In
         the case  of  evidence  relating  to  previous  qualifications  the
         appellant must provide, for each qualification,  the  evidence  set
         out.  He said he forgot to do so because he was in a rush.

 3. The relevant party of  paragraph  120-SD  of  Appendix  A  provides  as
    follows:


    (a) In the case of evidence relating to previous qualifications, the
    applicant must provide, for each qualification, either:
         (i) The original certificate(s) of qualification, which clearly
         shows:
             (1) the applicant's name,
             (2) the title of the award,
             (3) the date of the award, and
             (4) the name of the awarding institution;
         (ii) The transcript of results, which clearly shows:
             (1) the applicant's name,
             (2) the name of the academic institution,
             (3) their course title, and
             (4) confirmation of the award;

 4. The list of documents  required  included  a  postgraduate  diploma  in
    hospitality and tourist management; professional  graduate  diploma  in
    information technology; advanced  diploma  in  information  technology;
    diploma in information technology (London Community Training  College).
    The refusal letter noted that the appellant had failed to provide those
    items and that "it has therefore been decided that you have not met the
    requirements and no points have been awarded for your CAS".

 5. At [72-73] the judge found:

         It is evident that the appellant has not provided all the  required
         specified documents.  That evidence should have  been  provided  at
         the date of application.   This  was  a  new  application  and  the
         appellant  was  not  excused  from  compliance  with  the  rigorous
         requirements of paragraph 120-SD(a) of Appendix A to the Rules.

         The fact that the appellant may have  provided  such  a  document/s
         several years earlier does not constitute a permissible  basis  for
         omitting them in the current application.  It is not  the  duty  of
         the respondent to search for any potential documents  that  may  or
         may not have been submitted in the past.

 6. The appellant asserts that the academic institution  which  had  issued
    the CAS had sight of the necessary documents and it was  therefore  not
    necessary for the respondent  to  also  see  them  in  support  of  the
    application.  That submission is  contrary  to  the  plain  wording  of
    paragraph 120-SD which I have quoted above.  Had the Rule only provided
    that the appellant produce a CAS, he would have  been  awarded  the  30
    points which he had claimed.

 7. Secondly, paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  of  little
    assistance to the appellant.  The qualification documents were not (for
    example, like a series of bank statements)  documents  in  a  sequence.
    Rather, they  were  certificates  relating  to  specific  and  separate
    qualifications.  Further, the fact that the  documents  may  have  been
    supplied with previous applications does not assist the appellant.  The
    appellant had not supplied the missing documents at all, let alone only
    some documents in an incomplete sequence.  Also there was no suggestion
    that he had supplied  documents  which  did  not  contain  all  of  the
    necessary information.  In any event, it is at the  discretion  of  the
    Secretary of State to  request  further  documents  ("may  contact  the
    applicant or his representative  ...").   There  is  also  considerable
    force in Mr Tufan's submission to expect  the  respondent  to  have  to
    refer back to previous applications to find documents which may or  may
    not have been submitted with those applications  and  place  impossible
    demands upon the respondent's administration.  I accept his  submission
    that each and every application for further leave to remain  should  be
    supported by all required  documents  and  that  it  matters  not  that
    documents may have been supplied  with  previous  applications.   Every
    applicant for leave should, on the occasion of making any  application,
    ensure that all the necessary documents are sent to the respondent.

 8. I also note that the appellant made his application on 3 May 2013.  His
    only reason for failing to supply the required documents  was  that  he
    had been "in a rush" and no explanation has been given as to why he did
    not send the missing documents to the respondent before the application
    was determined in June 2013.  It is not clear to me why the  respondent
    (or, indeed, the Tribunal) should assist the appellant when he has made
    no attempt to help himself.

 9. Mr Makoi also raised the  questions  of  the  respondent's  flexibility
    policies.  However,  as   the   Upper   Tribunal   noted   in   Durrani
    (Entrepreneurs: bank letters; evidential flexibility) [2014]  UKUT  295
    (IAC)) "a question of whether a policy exists is one of fact.  There is
    no evidence that some policy on evidential flexibility, independent and
    freestanding of paragraph 245AA,  survived  the  introduction  of  that
    paragraph in the Immigration Rules".  Mr Makoi was unable to provide me
    with evidence that the appellant's application was covered  by  such  a
    policy, even assuming that one continued to exist at the  time  of  his
    application.



10. In my opinion, the First-tier Tribunal  adopted  the  correct  approach
    and, on the facts, reached the only available outcome in  this  appeal.
    In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

11. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 8 August 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


