
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26712/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR. MAHABIR SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr. A. Chohan of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge  promulgated  on  9  March  2015  which
    allowed Mr. Singh's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal  to
    issue him with an EU residence card as  the  unmarried  partner  of  Ms
    Angelikia Pudlo, a citizen of Poland, in  accordance  with  Regulations
    8(5) and 17(4) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  "EEA
    Regulations").

 2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  refer  to  Mr.  Singh  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was in respect of Mr. Singh and
    Ms Pudlo.  The appeal was brought only in relation to  Mr.  Singh,  and
    not in relation to the decision insofar as it relates to Ms. Pudlo.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that Judge Lodge erred in law by  allowing
    the Appellant's appeal outright.  The Respondent had not exercised  her
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA  Regulations  to  grant  a
    residence card.  As the Appellant had been  found  to  be  an  extended
    family member under Regulation 8(5), it was submitted  that  the  judge
    should have remitted the case to the Respondent for consideration under
    Regulation 17(4), instead of allowing the  appeal  outright.   Reliance
    was placed on the case of Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT
    00340.

 5. Ihemedu states in the headnote, paragraph (iii):

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

 6. Mr. Avery submitted that the case should have been  sent  back  to  the
    Respondent to consider the  exercise  of  discretion  under  Regulation
    17(4).  Mr. Chohan agreed that this was the right  approach,  and  that
    the appeal should have been allowed only to the extent of remitting  it
    back to the Respondent.  It was  agreed  that  the  only  part  of  the
    decision under challenge was the decision to allow the appeal outright.



 7. Once the First-tier Tribunal  had  found  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    extended family member for the purposes of Regulation 8(5), given  that
    the Respondent had not considered whether  to  exercise  discretion  to
    issue the Appellant with a residence card under Regulation  17(4),  the
    judge should have remitted the matter to the Secretary of State.  Judge
    Lodge therefore made an error of law in allowing the appeal outright.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.

The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal is preserved up to and including
paragraph [21].

Paragraph [22] and the final decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set
aside.  The decision is remade as follows.  The appeal is allowed to the
extent that the refusal is not in accordance with the law.  The matter is
remitted to the Secretary of State to consider whether she will exercise
discretion to issue a residence card in accordance with Regulation 17(4) of
the EEA Regulations.

I do not make an anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

