
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
ia/26124/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 February 2018                     |        On 5 March 2018              |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    M I T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel, instructed by Rehoboth Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed  hearing  of  the  Appellant's  appeal  following  my
    decision to set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  My error  of
    law decision is annexed to this remake  decision.   In  summary  I  had
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had,  when  assessing  the
    Appellant's Article 8 case, failed to  take  account  of  an  expressed
    concession by the Respondent that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    the Appellant's British children to leave the United  Kingdom.   I  had
    not gone on to remake the decision at the error of law hearing  because
    Mr Duffy indicated that the Respondent may wish to pursue  an  argument
    as to  the  interpretation  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.  I therefore adjourned the
    case and issued directions to the parties.

 2. Following the  adjournment,  the  Appellant  submitted  a  consolidated
    bundle, as directed, and Mr Pipi submitted a  skeleton  argument.   For
    his part Mr Duffy did provide a skeleton argument but only very late in
    the day (it arrived on my desk on the morning of the  hearing  and  had
    not got through to Mr Pipi before  the  hearing  actually  began).   Mr
    Duffy apologised for the lateness of this document.  A break was  taken
    in the proceedings to allow Mr Pipi to read  and  consider  Mr  Duffy's
    skeleton argument.  On resumption Mr Pipi confirmed that he was content
    to proceed.  Mr Duffy expressly confirmed that the concession  made  by
    the Respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  (that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's two children to leave  the  United
    Kingdom) was being maintained.  It was also agreed that in light of the
    way in which the case was argued before me previously and my  error  of
    law decision, the focus of this appeal  remained  squarely  on  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Submissions of the parties

 3. Mr Duffy relied on his skeleton argument.  In particular  he  submitted
    that there was  a  legitimate  argument  to  the  effect  that  if  the
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant's British children could not  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom,  any  Tribunal  considering  this
    issue would not need, or would not be able, to assess whether or not it
    would in fact be reasonable for that to occur.  Mr  Duffy  acknowledged
    that there could be said to be a "tension" between the  words  used  in
    section 117B(6) and the submission being put forward by the Respondent.
     He accepted that there was a degree of ambiguity in  the  Respondent's
    guidance (the document entitled Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life 10-
    Year Route, dated August 2015, at paragraph 11.2.3).

 4. In addition, Mr Duffy submitted that there were relevant factors in the
    Appellant's history which strongly  counted  against  him,  namely  the
    conviction and the conduct associated with  it,  his  use  of  a  false
    document, and his generally poor immigration record.  He submitted that
    a separation of the Appellant  from  his  children  would  in  all  the
    circumstances be proportionate.

 5. Mr Pipi relied on his skeleton argument  (drafted  before  he  had  had
    sight of Mr Duffy's).  He could not fully understand the nature of  the
    Respondent's new position on section 117B(6).  He  submitted  that  the
    Respondent's new argument appeared to suggest that  if  the  Respondent
    conceded that it was not reasonable to expect  a  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, the whole issue  fell  away,  and  Tribunals  would  in
    effect be precluded from applying the substance of section 117B(6). The
    Respondent's position  appeared  to  undermine  the  application  of  a
    provision of primary legislation.  I  was  asked  to  accept  that  the
    Respondent's guidance should not be used as an aid to the  construction
    of a statute.  As to the suitability issue under Appendix FM,  Mr  Pipi
    submitted that the Appellant's 2009 conviction was now spent and was an
    irrelevant matter.  In respect of the forged  document,  the  Appellant
    had never been charged and I should treat  this  point  as  though  the
    Appellant was somebody who had received a caution,  not  a  conviction.
    In respect of the best interests of the  children  I  was  referred  in
    particular to page 69 of the Appellant's new bundle.

Relevant findings of fact

 6. In reality there are no factual disputes in this appeal.  I  find  that
    the Appellant is and has been in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his wife at all material times,  and  that  the  couple  have  two
    British children born in 2004 and 2006.  I find that the Appellant  was
    in fact convicted of indecent assault in 2009  and  received  a  twelve
    months' Probation Order.  I find that the Appellant was  in  possession
    of a false document (namely an ILR vignette contained in his passport).
     I find that he used this document between 2001 and the point at  which
    this document was detected by the Respondent in 2014.

 7. In respect of the Appellant's older son, I accept that he suffers  from
    kidney problems as set out in the medical evidence in  the  Appellant's
    new bundle (pages 35 to 36).  It is clear from  the  letter  from  this
    child's primary school at page 69 of the Appellant's  bundle  that  the
    Appellant is heavily involved in his son's education.  The school is of
    the view that the son would suffer if his father were to be removed and
    notes that the child is at a critical stage of his school life  (he  is
    in Year 6 and will be taking SATS in the summer term).

Conclusions

Article 8 within the context of the Rules

 8. In respect of Appendix FM), the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  already
    found that the suitability requirement under S-LTR1.6  applied  to  the
    Appellant. Although the judge had not  spelt  this  out  in  any  great
    detail, it is clear enough that this was based not simply on  the  2009
    conviction but the  Appellant's  conduct  as  a  whole,  including  the
    immigration history.  This particular aspect of  the  judge's  decision
    had not been challenged in the grounds of appeal and had not  been  the
    subject of submissions at the error of law  hearing.   At  the  resumed
    hearing Mr Pipi confirmed the focus of the Appellant's case remained on
    section 117B(6).

 9. For the avoidance of any doubt,  I  too  conclude  that  the  Appellant
    cannot rely on Appendix FM because  of  the  suitability  issue.   Even
    accepting that the 2009 conviction was spent, there remains the adverse
    immigration history including the  use  of  a  false  document  over  a
    protracted period of time.

Article 8 outside the context of the Rules

10. I turn immediately to section 117B(6), this being the agreed core issue
    in the appeal.

11. The Appellant's two children are clearly qualifying children: they  are
    both British and resident in this country.

12. The clear statutory wording of the second limb of section 117B(6) is as
    follows:

         "...the public interest does not require the person's removal where

         ...

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

13. In respect of Mr Duffy's position in this  appeal,  I  confess  that  I
    remain somewhat unclear as to what  precisely  is  being  put  forward.
    Paragraph 18 of his skeleton argument appears to suggest that once  the
    Respondent concedes that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  British
    children to leave the United Kingdom, the  issue  need  not  or  cannot
    arise on appeal.  It is said (or at least appears to be said) that this
    is because the  question  of  whether  or  not  it  would  actually  be
    reasonable is purely hypothetical.

14. I reject this argument for five reasons.

15. First, in interpreting the provision, I give  the  words  contained  in
    section  117B(6)(b)  their  natural  and  ordinary  meaning.  The  word
    "expect" is  used,  not  "actually"  or  "required".  The  Respondent's
    position in this appeal appears to be an attempt to read  words  in  or
    otherwise materially change the framework of the provision.

16. Second, I agree with Mr Pipi's point, namely that  the  effect  of  the
    Respondent's argument is that by making a  concession  in  the  initial
    decision, the utility of section 117B(6)(b) is severely  undermined  or
    even obviated altogether.

17. Third, I adopt the approach that whatever guidance  may  exist  on  the
    Respondent's part cannot be used as a tool for the  construction  of  a
    statute. It is of course open to the Respondent to take the position on
    how she will apply statutory provisions as a matter of policy guidance,
    but that is clearly not the same as how a Tribunal should approach  the
    interpretation of the provision itself.

18. Fourth, the Court of Appeal has looked at section 117B(6) several times
    now, and I can see nothing in any of  its  judgments  to  indicate  any
    potential support for the  Respondent's  new  position.  In  fact,  her
    argument would appear to run contrary to the general tenor of  what  is
    said at paragraphs 17-21 of MA (Pakistan) to the  extent  that  section
    117B(6) says what it means, should not be given a gloss, and that if an
    appellant  satisfies  the  two  limbs  (including   the   'expectation'
    element), they will succeed in their appeal.

19. Fifth, I fully appreciate the Respondent's wish  to  be  able  to  take
    criminality and other misconduct  into  account  when  assessing  cases
    involving British children. Yet that is precisely what the construction
    provided by MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and AM (Pakistan)  [2017]
    EWCA  Civ  180  allows  for  already,   without   having   to   perform
    interpretative gymnastics and apply dubious distinctions.

20. In view of the above, I interpret section 117B(6)(b) to  mean  that  if
    the Appellant can show that it would be unreasonable to expect  one  or
    both of his British children to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  he  will
    succeed.

21. In answering this key question I note that it was expressly conceded in
    the reasons for refusal letter (that concession being maintained before
    me) that it would be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  That concession was made in the  very  same  terms  as
    those expressed in section 117B(6).  I appreciate the  Respondent  goes
    on to say that separation of the Appellant from his children  would  be
    justified on the facts of this  case.   The  insurmountable  difficulty
    with this argument is that the express  concession  in  and  of  itself
    means that  the  Appellant  succeeds  in  his  appeal  because  section
    117B(6)(b) has been satisfied.  There is simply no getting around this.



22. The Appellant's appeal succeeds on this primary basis.

23. In any event, even if my rejection of  the  Respondent's  arguments  on
    section 117B(6) is found to be wrong and/or even if the  concession  is
    not determinative of this appeal, I  would  nonetheless  conclude  that
    separating the Appellant from his  children  at  this  stage  would  be
    disproportionate.

24. This is not a case in which the children  are  particularly  young  and
    have only spent a short time with their father: his two  sons  are  now
    thirteen and eleven, respectively, and the  Appellant  has  lived  with
    them their entire lives.  It is quite clear from the school  letter  at
    page 69 of the Appellant's bundle  that  the  Appellant  takes  a  very
    active part in his younger son's education and the school  regards  him
    as being extremely important to the child's educational wellbeing.   It
    is the case that the younger son is in Year 6  and  soon  to  take  the
    important SATS.  All of this has a direct bearing on the progression to
    secondary school.  I place significant weight on the view of the school
    (it being the expert provider involved in the child's  education)  that
    he is at a critical stage of his school life.  For the Appellant to  be
    removed from his son's  life  at  this  point  would,  I  conclude,  be
    extremely disruptive, and would quite clearly be contrary to  the  best
    interests.  Further, whilst the older son may not be at such a critical
    stage of his education (although in my view it  is  very  difficult  to
    classify  any  particular  of  a  child's  basic  education  as   "non-
    critical"), he is nonetheless a boy entering into an important stage of
    his emotional development. Removal of his father is also very likely to
    be detrimental to his  overall  wellbeing  and  contrary  to  his  best
    interests too.

25. I of course take into account the public interest factors, which are in
    this case significant.  The 2009 conviction is spent  for  reasons  set
    out clearly in Mr Pipi's skeleton argument.  However, I take account of
    the conduct relating to the conviction  and,  importantly  the  adverse
    immigration history.  Use of a forged document is always adverse to  an
    individual. In this case it was used over a prolonged period  of  time.
    This counts heavily against the Appellant.  I also  take  into  account
    the fact the Appellant does not seem to be financially  independent  at
    the present time.  Further,  the  Appellant's  immigration  status  has
    rested in the unlawful category for a long period of time now and  this
    involves a significant reduction in the weight to be attributed to  his
    family and private life. Overall, the public interest is powerful.

26. In weighing up all relevant  factors,  the  scales  are  fairly  evenly
    balanced. By a narrow margin (as will often be the case)  they  tip  in
    the Appellant's favour. In essence, this is because the children's best
    interests are very strong.

27. The Appellant's appeal succeeds on the alternative basis as well.

Anonymity

28. I do now make an anonymity direction in this case.  Although  none  has
    been made in the proceedings thus far, the appeal involves a child  and
    my remake decision will be published.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and I have set it aside.

I remake the decision, allowing the Appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that
the Respondent's refusal  of  his  human  rights  claim  is  unlawful  under
section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  a  full  fee
award of �140.00. The Appellant has won his appeal on  the  basis  of  facts
known to the Respondent throughout and in  light  of  the  applicable  legal
tests.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

ANNEX:  ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   [M I T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel, instructed by Rehoboth Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pears (the judge), promulgated on 11 November  2016,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 7 July 2015, refusing a human rights claim.  That claim was
    essentially based upon the  Appellant's  relationship  with  an  Indian
    national with indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    their two British citizen children.  The Appellant had two  convictions
    against him which, in the Respondent's view, meant that he fell foul of
    the  suitability  requirements  under  Appendix  FM   to   the   Rules.
    Significantly, the Respondent had, at page 5 of the reasons for refusal
    letter, accepted that it would not be reasonable for the  two  children
    to leave the United Kingdom.

The Judge's Decision

 2. The judge took various factors relating to the Appellant and  his  wife
    into account when assessing Article 8.  He concluded that the  presence
    of the Appellant was not conducive to the public  good.  He  recognised
    that the children were both British. Having considered certain  matters
    relating to them into account, he concluded, at paragraph 61,  that  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Five  paragraphs  later  he  considers  the  children's  best
    interests and concludes that the family unit could all return to India.



The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

 3. The brief grounds complain about the judge's approach to the Article  8
    assessment,  in  particular  that  relating  to   the   two   children.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  on  5
    September 2017.

The Hearing before Me

 4. Mr Duffy confirmed that in light of the reasons for refusal letter  the
    Respondent had never contended that the children could reasonably leave
    the United Kingdom.  He emphasised that this was the case  particularly
    in light of the Respondent's guidance on Appendix FM (Appendix FM 1.0b,
    August 2015, at paragraph 11.2.3.).  It was apparent that the judge had
    failed to appreciate this when assessing Article  8.   The  core  issue
    before him was whether a separation of the Appellant from the  rest  of
    his family was justified, particularly in light of the convictions. The
    judge had clearly failed to deal with this issue.  In light of this  Mr
    Duffy accepted that there had been a material error of law.

Decision on Error of Law

 5. In light of Mr Duffy's fair and quite properly made concession  I  find
    that the judge did materially err in law.

 6. I have some sympathy for him in that it is less than clear  as  to  how
    the case was argued before him by the  representatives,  in  particular
    the Presenting Officer.  However, the reasons for  refusal  letter  was
    clear: the Respondent  was  not  suggesting  that  the  children  could
    reasonably be expected to leave the United Kingdom.  In light  of  this
    the issue was whether the Appellant could be justifiably separated from
    his children (and presumably his wife as well).  It is apparent that in
    light of the judge's misapprehension as to what  the  case  before  him
    really involved, he failed to deal with the separation issue.   It  was
    by no means the case that a separation would inevitably  be  justified.
    In light of the foregoing, the error in approach is material and I  set
    aside the judge's decision.

Disposal

 7. I have decided to retain this case in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. Initially I was of the view that I could remake  the  decision  on  the
    evidence  currently  before  me.   The  judge's   conclusion   on   the
    suitability issue has not been challenged by the Appellant and in light
    of that he could not succeed  in  respect  of  Appendix  FM.   However,
    section 117B(6) is clearly  relevant.   Mr  Duffy  indicated  that  the
    Respondent may wish to pursue a particular argument in respect of  this
    provision.  On instructions he may be  required  to  suggest  that  the
    issue of expectation within section 117B(6) could be interpreted so  as
    to defeat the Appellant's Article 8 claim. However, at  this  stage  he
    was not in a position to state whether or not such an argument would be
    pursued.  He suggested that the  matter  be  adjourned  for  a  resumed
    hearing in due course.  Mr Pipi did not argue to the contrary.

 9. I accede to Mr Duffy's suggestion and adjourn this appeal for a resumed
    hearing to be  conducted  before  me  in  due  course.   I  will  issue
    directions to the parties to ensure that all relevant matters are fully
    considered on the next occasion.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing  to  take  place  in  the  Upper
Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Directions to the parties will be issued separately.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 6 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
