
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26224/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 June 2015                          |On 15 July 2015                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               Cintia Lendvai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Cintia Lendvai, was born  on  23  June  1996  and  is  a
    citizen of Hungary.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision to remove her, the respondent having determined that
    the appellant and her husband (hereafter referred to  as  the  sponsor)
    were parties to a marriage  of  convenience.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge K Henderson), in a determination promulgated on 7 October  2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  at  Bradford  on  15  June  2015,  the
    appellant did not attend.  I had received a letter dated  1  June  2015
    from RKS Solicitors notifying the Tribunal  that  they  were  "formally
    withdrawing" their representation of the appellant.  The letter  states
    that the "sponsor" (sic) may be contacted at her home address of [ - ].
     That is the address to which the notice of hearing  was  sent  to  the
    appellant by first class post on 22 May 2015.  The  appellant  has  not
    provided any satisfactory explanation for her failure to attend.  I  am
    satisfied that the notice of hearing has been duly served upon her.  In
    the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing in the absence  of  the
    appellant/any representative.

 3. The grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's  finding  that  there
    was "insufficient evidence to show the appellant was exercising  Treaty
    Rights as a qualified person  in  her  own  right."  [33].   The  judge
    considered the various  items  of  evidence  which  the  appellant  had
    produced which the appellant claims  showed  that  she  was  exercising
    treaty rights as a worker.  The judge noted  that  the  respondent  had
    "referred to the fact that [the appellant]  has  no  qualifications  or
    work experience" as a secretary; she produced a  letter  from  Alliance
    Careers Limited indicating that she was employed as a  secretary  on  a
    part-time basis.  The appellant had told the  respondent  at  interview
    that she was qualified as a hairdresser.  The judge wrote,

         "[The appellant] stated at the interview she did not  complete  the
         course.  I am not satisfied on the information  provided  that  she
         has a qualification to work as a secretary or that the provision of
         this  job  was  anything  other  than   assisting   her   husband's
         application.  There was insufficient evidence to show that  she  is
         exercising treaty rights as a Qualified Person  in  her  own  right
         under Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations. "

    I consider that that finding was available to the judge on the evidence
    before her.  She has supported her finding with proper analysis of  the
    evidence and adequate and cogent reasons.  The grounds of  appeal  are,
    therefore, as regards the exercise of treaty rights by  the  appellant,
    are nothing more than a disagreement with  findings  available  to  the
    judge.

 4. The grounds of appeal also take issue with the judge's finding that the
    appellant and sponsor were engaged in a marriage of convenience.   Once
    again, I find that this ground is little more than a disagreement  with
    the judge's finding.  The judge has  conducted  an  extremely  thorough
    examination of the evidence, including the oral evidence  given  before
    her in court.  She noted numerous inconsistencies in  the  evidence  of
    the appellant and sponsor as to  their  relationship  and  was,  in  my
    opinion,  fully  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  couple  had  little
    knowledge of each other's lives and that they had contracted a marriage
    of convenience.  The grounds complain that the judge  should  not  have
    found that the appellant had attempted to  "construct  evidence"  of  a
    genuine relationship when there was clear evidence that  the  appellant
    and sponsor had been present together at the  same  address  when  that
    address had been visited by an enforcement team.  The grounds appear to
    suggest that the fact that the couple were together at the date of that
    visit is conclusive evidence of the genuineness of their  relationship.
    That submission is without  merit.   The  judge  has,  quite  properly,
    identified evidence which was in favour of a finding  that  the  couple
    were engaged in a genuine marriage [51].  However, it was the  task  of
    the judge to weigh the evidence as a totality and it was  plainly  open
    to  her  to  conclude   that   the   relationship   was   not   genuine
    notwithstanding the evidence  regarding  the  enforcement  team  visit.
    Indeed, the inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor identified by the judge were such  that,  in  my  opinion,  the
    judge was entirely justified in concluding that  the  relationship  was
    not genuine.

 5. Further, the judge did not err in dismissing the appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR  grounds.   Having  concluded  that  the  marriage  was   one   of
    convenience and that the relationship was not  genuine,  there  was  no
    prospect of the appeal succeeding on Article 8 family life grounds.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
