
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/26594/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 22 September 2015                  |                   On 25 September    |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                ANILA CALLAJ
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kerr of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant a citizen of Albania, born on 26 August 1988 appealed the
    respondent's decision dated 10 June 2014 to remove her from the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was allowed by
    Judge M P W Harris in a decision promulgated on 8 March 2015.  He found
    the appellant  was  entitled  to  rely  upon  the  respondent's  policy
    "Immigration Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
    s.1.0.(b) dated 2014 at s.11.2.3.  See [18] of the decision.  He  found
    the appellant satisfied paragraph EX.1(b) and succeeded under  Appendix
    FM.

 3. The grounds claim the  judge  misapplied  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction I have referred to above.

 4. At [18] the judge made reference to the IDI on Family  Migration  dated
    November 2014 and found that the appellant was able to  rely  upon  the
    IDI to assist in his interpretation of what was reasonable.  See [22].

 5. A consequence of that was that the judge found after application of the
    IDI that relocation for the appellant's  children  outside  the  United
    Kingdom would be unreasonable.  See [24] of the decision.

 6. The grounds claim that the judge relied upon the IDI out of context and
    in error.  In quoting the IDI at [18] he was referring to a  "Zambrano"
    type situation where the parent or primary carer would  have  to  leave
    the EU and the child would be forced to leave the EU.  The judge  erred
    in  failing  to  acknowledge  that  the  IDI  provided  a   number   of
    instructions.  It was only if there was no other parent or guardian  or
    carer available to care for the child in the absence of  the  appellant
    that advice needed to be sought pending a Zambrano decision.  See pages
    52-54 of the IDI as follows:

         "Where the applicant has  made  an  application  under  the  family
         and/or private life Immigration Rules, the application must:

          a) be considered under those Immigration Rules first;

          b) where the applicant falls for refusal, the decision maker must
             go  on  to  consider  whether  there   are   any   exceptional
             circumstances that would warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain
             outside the Immigration Rules; and

          c) where the applicant falls for refusal  under  the  Immigration
             Rules and there are no exceptional  circumstances,  and  where
             satisfactory evidence  has  been  provided  that  all  of  the
             following criteria are met,  the  case  must  be  referred  to
             European Casework for review:

               i) the child is under the age of 18; and

              ii) the child is a British citizen; and

             iii) the primary carer (care responsibilities and court  orders
                  are examples of  evidence)  of  the  child  is  a  non-EEA
                  national in the UK; and

              iv) there is no  other  parent/guardian/carer  upon  whom  the
                  child is dependent or who could care for the child if  the
                  primary carer left the UK to go to a country  outside  the
                  EU.

             The originating decision maker should not issue a decision  on
             the  Immigration  Rules'  application  whilst  awaiting   this
             Zambrano decision."

 7. The grounds claim the judge arguably failed to understand what the  IDI
    was trying to achieve and misapplied the same.   As  a  consequence  he
    failed to adequately apply the Immigration Rules, notably EX.1.

 8. Judge Colyer considered the permission to appeal.  He found that it was
    arguable the judge erred by making a material misdirection  as  to  the
    law in terms of  the  IDIs.   It  was  arguable  the  judge  failed  to
    acknowledge that the IDI provided a number of instructions  and  failed
    to appreciate what the IDI was trying to achieve as a result  of  which
    he misapplied the IDI and failed to adequately  apply  the  Immigration
    Rules, notably EX.1.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge treated  the  guidance  at  11.2.3.
    "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK?" to be determinative of the appeal rather than it is  simply  a
    statement of the law in terms of Zambrano.  Because both  parents  were
    present in the United Kingdom, 11.2.3. did not apply.

10. Mr Kerr submitted that the IDI gave a clear view  as  to  when  it  was
    reasonable for a British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.  If
    there had been intended a discussion regarding other  possible  carers,
    the policy would have said so.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The Secretary of State's grounds argue that the  judge  misapplied  the
    guidance because he failed to take into account  the  guidance  in  its
    entirety.

12. What the judge did was to carry out an analysis of the Immigration Rule
    E-LTRP.1.2., 276ADE and EX.1.(a).  The judge  found  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  UK.   Mr  Kandola
    submitted that the guidance provided for the judge to take into account
    the fact that  the  children's  father  could  care  for  them  if  the
    appellant left the UK.  That guidance is contained in  11.2.3.  and  is
    only operative in circumstances where the application  has  first  been
    considered under the Immigration Rules and falls for refusal under  the
    Immigration Rules.  EX.1. carries no  such  qualification.   The  judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules,  in  particular,  under
    EX.1.(a)(ii).  The judge also found in the alternative under EX.1.(b).

13. I find that if the guidance was seeking to discuss circumstances  where
    another parent might be available to  care  for  the  children  in  the
    absence of an appellant, it would have said so.

14. The guidance at 11.2.3.(c)(iv) anticipates an EEA Zambrano decision and
    I bear in mind in that regard that  arguably,  Regulation  15A  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  anticipates  a
    higher threshold, that is, 15A(4A)(c):

         "the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the  UK
         or in another EEA state if P were required to leave."

    That is a different test  from  that  which  the  judge  applied  under
    EX.1.(a)(ii):

         "it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."

15. The judge carried out a  careful  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the
    family's  circumstances  set  out  against  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  He took into account the fact that  one  child  was
    aged 2 and the other was only a few weeks old as at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  Both children had British nationality.  The judge  took  into
    account the relevant case law and the guidance.  The judge bore in mind
    that British nationality did not automatically trump all other factors.
     He bore in mind the appellant's immigration history.

16. It might  be  that  another  judge  would  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion but I do not accept that the judge erred  in  his  analysis,
    findings or conclusion.  In my view, the judge was  entitled  to  reach
    the decision he made on the facts before him, for the reasons he gave.

17. In summary, I conclude that the decision does not  contain  a  material
    error of law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 22 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

