
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/26845/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd December 2016                         |On 29th December 2016        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                   Mr Sultan Abdullah Mohammed Al-Katheri
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Aslam instructed by UK Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant, a national of the Yemen born on 6th  June  1976  appeals
    with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp dismissing the appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   The  appellant  married  a
    Polish national in a civil registry in February  2008.   There  was  no
    challenge to the fact that the appellant or the sponsor had remained in
    the UK between those periods for the purposes of  the  EEA  Regulations
    and indeed the appellant was issued with an  EEA  residence  permit  on
    18th November valid until 18th  November  2014.   In  August  2013  the
    sponsor applied for naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen  which  was
    granted in October 2013.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp dismissed the appeal on the basis
    that when the appellant applied for his EEA residence permit  his  wife
    was a British national.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey
    on the basis that the acquisition by the sponsor  would  have  occurred
    after the appellant had qualified for permanent residence.

 4. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal it was  noted  that  the
    appellant's qualification for permanent residence under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 would have occurred after the
    period of five years, commencing with the marriage in February 2008 and
    ending in February 2013.  This indeed was prior to any application made
    by the sponsor for naturalisation and the 'bite' of Regulation 2 (1) of
    the EEA Regulations (a British citizen is not, for the purposes of  the
    Regulations at least, an EEA national).  The legal authorities OA  (EEA
    -retained right of residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT  00003  and  Idezuna
    (EEA - permanent  residence)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00474  (IAC)  both
    indicate that  a  family  member  may  acquire  a  right  of  permanent
    residence on the basis of historical facts.  The grant of the residence
    cards in these circumstances would simply have been declaratory.

 5.  Mr Tufan, very sensibly in my view, indicated that  he  would  concede
    the appeal and that the matter therefore could be resolved by  consent.
    He agreed as was found by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that  as  the
    sponsor had been granted naturalisation as a British citizen  then  she
    would have been found to have been exercising  treaty  rights  for  the
    relevant period.  This is reinforced by the  fact  that  the  appellant
    himself was granted a residence card as recorded above.

 6. In the light of this  I  indicated  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge would be set aside and the decision remade allowing  the
    appeal by consent.  I therefore allow the  appeal  by  way  of  consent
    under Rule 39 (1) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    because, in the circumstances, I consider it appropriate to dispose  of
    the proceedings in this way.



Order

Appeal Allowed



Signed                                             Date 22nd December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
