
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26691/2014
                                                               IA/26640/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 June 2015                      |On 9th July 2015                     |
|Determination prepared 16 June 2015  |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                    Mrs Kirandeep Kaur (first Appellant)
                    Mr Baljinder Singh (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Malhotra, Counsel instructed by Shri
                    Venkateshwara Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The first Appellant, a national of India, date of birth  10  May  1985,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  12  June  2014,  to
    refuse an application made on 28 March 2014 for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-
    based system and in combined  decisions  the  Respondent  made  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

2.   The  first  Appellant's  application  was  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to paragraph 115A of Appendix  A  and
    paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended).   In
    particular  the  matter  was  refused  because  there  was   no   valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

3.   The second Appellant, a national of India, date of birth 15 March  1985
    appealed against a decision, dated 12 June 2014, to refuse his leave to
    remain as a dependent partner of  a  points-based  system  migrant  and
    similarly to make removal directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

4.   The appeal against those decisions came to be considered by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K St John Wiseman (the judge), who on 23  November  2014
    dismissed their appeals.   It  followed  although  the  judge  made  no
    reference to it that their  appeals  against  removal  directions  must
    similarly have failed.

5.   Permission to appeal the judge's decision was refused but  renewed  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini on 5 May 2015 granted  permission  in
    the following terms:

         "...  There is only one ground  [contained  in  paragraph  8(v)(b)]
         upon which I am minded to grant permission as it forms the basis of
         an arguable error in the  FtTJ's  determination  whereby  the  FtTJ
         failed to consider the fact that the Respondent did  not  reply  to
         the Appellant's request to have her passport or a certified copy of
         it returned to her so that she could  sit  for  her  English  test,
         without which she would not be in a position to obtain a CAS.  That
         evidence does not appear to have been challenged by the  Respondent
         and resounds with the 'Patel' policy seen in Kaur (Patel  fairness:
         respondent's policy) India [2013]  UKUT  344  (IAC)  and  the  need
         applicants have for certified copies of their passports where these
         are in the Home Office's possession."

6.   The issue therefore was whether or not  factually  there  had  been  an
    error of law by the judge in failing to understand the  nature  of  the
    claims.

7.   The judge's decision was not wholly clear on a number of points but  it
    was clear that at some stage prior to the date  of  application  on  28
    March 2014, when the Appellants had applied  for  leave  to  remain  as
    student and student dependant that the first Appellant could  not  meet
    the relevant requirements because she had not passed examinations which
    would have exempted her from the requirement  to  provide  evidence  of
    English language skills.  Rather a provisional letter  was  written  by
    the Sponsor indicating that a CAS could be issued but it was  dependent
    upon the first Appellant passing the relevant language test.

8.    It  is  said  that  the  Appellant,   her   husband   and   her   then
    representatives made telephone requests for the return of her  passport
    to enable her  to  undertake  an  English  language  test  because  the
    relevant providers required either the passport  or  a  certified  copy
    issued by UKBA or the Home Office.  There are no  particulars  of  when
    and to whom these requests were made  nor  of  any  response.   It  was
    unfortunate that there was nothing in any documentary form to  evidence
    the claims of repeated requests as was submitted to me.

9.   The Appellant's later representatives, a different firm, wrote  to  the
    Respondent by letter dated 15 September 2014 essentially asking for the
    original passport or confirmation of a passport or an attested copy  to
    be provided.  The letter  postdates  the  Respondent's  decision.   The
    letter which I was shown does not set out  any  antecedent  history  of
    requests being made by either the Appellants or  the  Appellants'  then
    representative(s).

10.  In the circumstances it was  self-evident  that  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision, 21 June 2014, the Appellants could  not  produce
    the relevant evidence concerning the first Appellant's English language
    skills.  It seemed to be accepted that there was no reply  by  UKBA  or
    the Home Office to the representatives' letter of  15  September  2014.
    In the circumstances that matters not given the fact that  the  refusal
    had taken place some three months previously.

11.  The difficulty the first Appellant faced arose from the failure of  her
    dissertation, no doubt her personal circumstances being a young  mother
    and the fact that she may have been ill-advised.  I have  nothing  from
    the first Appellant's then representatives which  indicated  that  they
    accepted any fault on their part nor do I know if  they  have  actually
    been pressed to explain their conduct which it is said they undertook.

12.  I am therefore left with the position that the first Appellant  at  the
    time of application knew an English language test had  to  be  provided
    because she could not longer, as she had hoped, rely on the  course  of
    study she had been undertaking and did not provide that information  so
    as to enable a Confirmation of Acceptance to be provided  in  time  for
    the Appellants' application.

13.  Assuming as I do for the moment that the Appellants were ill-served  by
    the  advice  of  former   representatives,   not   I   emphasise   Shri
    Venkateshwara Solicitors, that unfortunately does not  demonstrate  any
    unfairness  by  the  Respondent  or  unfairness   in   the   Respondent
    determining the application on the matters and documents which had been
    submitted nor as I understand it was there any request made to stay the
    consideration of the March application pending providing  the  relevant
    English language test evidence.

14.  In the circumstances therefore, assuming that the  Appellants  were  in
    fact ill-served by those representing them at  the  material  time,  it
    does not seem  to  me  that  demonstrates  any  error  of  law  by  the
    Respondent.  I have considered the statement of the first Appellant and
    in particular the paragraphs making reference to attempting to  contact
    the Home Office.  The statement is dated 4 or 7 November 2014  and  the
    judge presumably had that evidence before him.  In the circumstances it
    seemed to me that that information does not demonstrate  any  error  of
    law by the  judge  nor  any  unlawful  conduct  or  unfairness  by  the
    Respondent to the appeals in failing to provide the  first  Appellant's
    passport.  I do not find the judge made any arguable error  of  law  in
    the assessment of the legal  requirements  which  the  first  Appellant
    ultimately could not meet.

15.  The judge also dealt with Article 8 of the ECHR which  in  the  context
    of the Appellant being a student was the more difficult to establish in
    any event; but the grounds do not raise the issue of  Article  8  as  a
    material error of law by the judge.  If it had been it does not seem to
    me on the face of it there would have been any merit  in  it.   I  note
    that in granting permission the judge who dealt with the matter in  May
    2015 did not find there was any obvious error of law on the part of the
    Respondent or indeed the judge.

16.  The original Tribunal made no error of law.   The  original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date 7 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

