
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26563/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2015                   |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            mr Abdul Kayume Mumin
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21  August  1990.   He
    appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Horvath  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 12 June  2014
    refusing him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    under the points-based system  ("PBS").   The  respondent  refused  the
    application because the appellant failed to meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245ZX(a) as he had been refused  under  one  of  the  general
    grounds for refusal set out in  paragraph  322(3)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The appellant  submitted  with  his  application  on  19  May  2014,  a
    certificate and a transcript both dated 25  April  2014  and  a  course
    completion letter dated 12 May 2014 from  London  West  Valley  College
    ("West Valley") for an EBMA Graduate  Integrated  Diploma  in  Business
    Administration.  However, he was granted leave to study  a  Diploma  in
    Business  Management  at   London   Churchill   College   ("Churchill")
    commending on 21 November 2011 until 21 January  2014.   The  appellant
    did not  submit  a  fresh  application  for  leave  to  study  an  EBMA
    Integrated Diploma in Business Administration.   He  was  therefore  in
    breach of Section 50 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 by commencing this study.  The Secretary of  State  was  therefore
    not satisfied that the  appellant  has  complied  with  the  conditions
    attached to his leave to remain.

3.   On 28 January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal Judge Horvath's decision.

4.   The appellant's appeal was heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chana
    on 17th March 2015 who upheld Judge Horvath's  decision  as  not  being
    materially erroneous  in  law.   DUTJ  Chana  held  that  as  such  the
    Secretary of State's appeal must be allowed.   The  appellant  appealed
    DUTJ  Chana's  decision  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins   granted
    permission because he found that there was no appeal by  the  Secretary
    of State.  In the circumstances  it  was  very  hard  to  see  how  the
    appellant can be confident that his case was considered  properly.   On
    the basis of Judge Perkins' decision, the Court of Appeal  quashed  the
    determination of DUTJ Chana 5 October 2015 and remitted the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration.

5.   The appellant represented himself at the hearing.  He contended  as  he
    did in his response to the reasons for refusal, and in his evidence  to
    the judge, that he did not breach any Immigration Rules because he  did
    not leave Churchill or  ceased  studying  with  them.   Whilst  he  was
    undertaking the diploma  course  at  Churchill,  he  also  undertook  a
    supplementary course of study, that is  the  EBMA  graduate  integrated
    diploma in business administration at  West  Valley  as  an  additional
    course by way of an extra measure to secure his career.  He stated that
    he was permitted to do so simultaneously with his main course according
    to the respondent's Tier 4 policy guidance.

6.   The judge was satisfied on the evidence that the appellant was  awarded
    the qualification certificate EBMA  dated  25  April  2014.   This  was
    following his successful completion of the course at West Valley.   She
    found that this evidence strongly indicated that although the appellant
    might well have continued to follow the course at Churchill,  and  that
    he might well have stayed with that college, the focus on  his  studies
    had shifted from Churchill to West Valley, such that the EBMA course at
    West Valley,  which  he  might  well  have  originally  intended  as  a
    supplementary course, had taken precedence  and  had  become  the  main
    course.

7.   We find that the judge erred in two ways:

8.   The first error  was  in  respect  of  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's failure to produce a qualification certificate for the ATHE
    diploma or the EBMA graduate diploma (pursued  at  Churchill)  strongly
    indicated that he had not taken the appropriate examinations or that he
    had failed them.  This finding was contrary  to  the  letter  dated  18
    March 2014 from Churchill which indicated that the appellant had passed
    a number of subjects which Churchill called "units".  The letter stated
    that the grades were provisional as they were  awaiting  approval  from
    the awarding body ATHE.  The grades were final and  could  change.   We
    find  therefore  that  although  the  appellant  failed  to  produce  a
    qualification certificate for  the  ATHE  diploma,  he  had  taken  the
    appropriate examinations and had not failed them as erroneously held by
    the judge.

9.   The second error was in respect of the judge's finding that  she  could
    not take into account  a  post  application  document  because  of  the
    provisions of Section 85(A).   Mr.  Kandola  submitted  that  this  was
    technically an error.  We find that it was a material error as  Section
    85A of the 2002 Act was repealed by the Immigration Act  2014  from  20
    October 2014.  This means that the judge could have taken into  account
    the letter from Churchill dated 26 August 2014 which confirmed that the
    appellant was a student  at  the  college,  that  he  had  successfully
    completed the EBMA Graduation Diploma in Business  Administration,  QCF
    level 6, course which started on 9  September  2013  and  ended  on  31
    January 2014.

10   There were two further letters from Churchill dated  2  September  2014
    and 8 May 2014.  The former stated that  the  college  had  decided  to
    transfer all AABPS  level  6  students  to  ATHE  level  6  Diploma  in
    Management programme.  The latter  confirmed  that  the  appellant  was
    studying at the college under the previous awarding body ATHE, that the
    course was expected to finish on 31 January  2014;  due  to  unforeseen
    circumstances the ATHE award would be delayed, so  that  after  careful
    consideration  Churchill  had  decided  to  assess  all  ATHE  level  6
    student's work through  EBMA  level  6  Graduate  Diploma  in  Business
    Administration programme.  We find that had the judge taken account  of
    the letters from Churchill, they would have made a material  difference
    to her decision.

11.  We find that the  errors  committed  by  the  judge  are  material  and
    consequently her decision cannot stand.  We remake the decision.

12.  The issue before us is whether the appellant's focus had  changed  from
    his main course of study at  Churchill  College  to  the  supplementary
    course at West Valley such that it hindered his progress  in  his  main
    course of study.

13.  We find that it is not the case.  The appellant  had  studied  the  two
    courses simultaneously.  He was not in breach of Section 50 of the 2009
    Act.

Notice of Decision

14.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun Date:
