
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26993/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th May 2015                         |On 26th May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                       FAZLUR RAHMAN FAROQUI MOHAMMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, instructed by Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded  as
    10th March 1989.  On or about 23rd May 2014 he made  application  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system.   On  16th
    June 2014 the application was refused and a decision was made to remove
    him by way of directions pursuant to Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.    In  refusing  the  application  the
    Secretary  of  State  relied  on  paragraph  322(1A)  and  (2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it being suggested that the Appellant had  submitted
    a documentary evidence that was not genuine.

 2. The Appellant appealed. His appeal was heard  on  29  January  2015  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Henderson  sitting  at  Taylor  House.
    She considered the evidence that was before her and then dismissed  the
    appeal.  Not content with that decision by Notice dated  16th  February
    2015 the Appellant made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, which permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Pooler on 30th March 2015, on the basis of the  grounds  which
    were to the effect that the judge had approached the appeal as  if  the
    burden of proof was upon the Appellant whereas the burden of proof  was
    in fact upon the Respondent; indeed such  is  trite  law  but  see  for
    example: Mumu (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 00143(IAC).

 3. Although this is the Appellant's appeal I heard from Mr Wilding  first.
    He sought to persuade me that although at paragraph 14 of her Statement
    of Reasons the judge had expressed the burden of proof as being on  the
    Appellant, still there was no  material  error  because  the  offending
    document had been demonstrated not to be genuine by reason of an  email
    from the Punjab National Bank, which the judge had considered and  made
    reference to at paragraph 52 of the Statement of Reasons.

 4. The judge agreed that the email of 11th June 2014 did  not  answer  all
    the questions that had been raised by the Respondent nor  did  it  give
    details of the identity of the sender of that email but she said this:

         "I find that it did raise sufficient doubt (my emphasis)  over  the
         genuine nature of  the  documents  supplied  by  the  Appellant.  I
         further find that the Appellant did nothing to show the  Respondent
         that their findings were incorrect."

 5. In my judgement this Statement of  Reasons  simply  cannot  stand.  The
    burden of proof was plainly upon the Secretary of State and it was  for
    the Secretary of State not simply to raise a prima facie  case  but  to
    prove it  on  balance  of  probabilities.    Of  course  there  was  an
    evidential burden on the Appellant.  He  was  required  to  produce  or
    adduce sufficient evidence, if he  could,  to  meet  the  case  of  the
    Secretary of State but it is for the judge to be satisfied  on  balance
    of probabilities that the Secretary of State's case is made out.

 6. It is certainly not enough to say that the  judge  found  there  to  be
    "sufficient doubt"; that reflects not only a misunderstanding of  where
    the burden lay but also a lack of appreciation of the standard.

 7. In this case the entire balance of the Statement of  Reasons  is  wrong
    because the judge has approached the case, having put the  burden  upon
    the Appellant, by an analysis of what the Appellant had to say and  his
    evidence rather than by starting with an analysis of  the  Respondent's
    evidence.

 8. Given the nature of the error, I am  of  the  view  that  the  decision
    simply cannot stand. This is not a Decision that can be mended.  It  is
    beyond repair. In these circumstances the matter is to be  remitted  to
    Taylor House to be  heard  afresh  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Henderson.

 9. Insofar as it is necessary for me to do so, I grant  leave  however  to
    the Secretary of State to adduce such evidence as she feels appropriate
    to bring before the First-tier Tribunal in support of  the  allegation,
    which is a serious one.  It will of course be open, on the same  basis,
    for  the  Appellant  to  adduce  such  further  evidence  as  he  feels
    appropriate to counter the allegation yet to be proved by the Secretary
    of State in the remitted case.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside. The matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade afresh before a judge other than Judge Henderson.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

