
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26417/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2014                                 |On 27 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               mr Ishmael djan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 6 June 2013 refusing his application for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of Lisete Solipa Gil Martins De Sousa, a  Portuguese
    national.  The respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    contracted a valid proxy marriage  recognised  in  English  law  as  no
    evidence of the customary marriage's registration  had  been  provided.



2.   The judge determined the appeal on  the  papers  as  requested  by  the
    appellant.

3.   The judge made the following findings:

         "10. The appellant has failed to discharge  the  burden  upon  him.
             The appellant has failed  to  provide  reliable  documents  to
             corroborate his claim that he entered  into  a  legally  valid
             marriage with the sponsor.


         11.  The assembly letter carries a photocopied header and the  main
             body of the letter is out of line  from  the  header  and  the
             footer.  Remarkably similar handwriting and ink  type  appears
             on the assembly letter and judicial services letter  which  it
             is reasonable to expect should have been issued  by  different
             officers of their respective authorities.  The header  of  the
             judicial letter is also afflicted with contact  details  which
             fall out of line with the rest of the document.


         12.  It is unusual at best that the judicial  services  declaration
             is written on headed paper which  differs  from  the  judicial
             services letter.  Another  unusual  feature  of  the  judicial
             services declaration is that it  carries  an  unembossed  seal
             whereas the fathers' declaration has an embossed seal.  It  is
             unusual that a notary  public  would  have  an  embossed  seal
             whereas the official body would not.


         13.  The seal on judicial services declaration is also inconsistent
             with the seal on the judicial services letter which carries  a
             reflective sticker at the top left hand side of the  document.




         14.  The torn receipt is of no probative value as its  presentation
             prevents any reliable information from  being  discerned  from
             it.  The assembly receipt is unusual in the fact  that  it  is
             issued to I Djan which it is reasonable  to  conclude  is  the
             appellant who was in the UK at the time of its  issuance.   It
             is reasonable to conclude that the appellant's father  is  not
             the  recipient  of  the  assembly  receipt  as  he  would   be
             represented as S Djan.


         15.  It is also unusual at best  that  the  appellant  should  make
             comprehensive representations in the notice of  appeal  though
             fail to mention the registration certificate which existed  at
             the date of application and at the date of appeal according to
             the available evidence.  It is also an  unusual  feature  that
             this  omission  of  representations  should  occur  when   the
             respondent  made  express  reference  to  the  need  for   the
             registration certificate in her decision.


         16.  I have considered CB (Validity of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)
             Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 ("CB").  Paragraph 25 of  CB  states
             that a marriage is legally recognised in the country in  which
             it is  contracted  will  be  recognised  under  UK  law.   The
             evidence relied upon by the appellant  does  not  satisfy  the
             burden upon him.  Furthermore I am satisfied to a high  degree
             of  probability  that  the  appellant  has   submitted   false
             documents to the Tribunal to support his appeal.


         17.  For the reasons stated  above  the  appellant  has  failed  to
             demonstrate that he entered into a  valid  marriage  with  the
             sponsor.  Articles 8, 12 and 14 ECHR fall with the appeal  and
             therefore do not need  to  be  considered  in  any  meaningful
             detail."

4.   The appellant was granted permission as follows:

         "2.  The application for permission to appeal asserts that  the  F-
             tTJ overlooked the  respondent's  concession  that  the  proxy
             marriage would be valid if it satisfied the Ghanaian Customary
             and Divorce (Registration) Act 1985; overlooked the  statement
             of  where  the  couple  resided  at  the  time  of   marriage;
             overlooked the fact that the couple were entitled to  register
             the marriage for up  to  three  months;  overlooked  that  the
             relevant provision is Reg 7 not  Reg  26  of  the  Immigration
             (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006; overlooked the fact
             that proof of entry and right of residence prior  to  marriage
             are not required;  lacked  impartiality  for  criticising  the
             appellant for not providing a bundle but not  the  respondent;
             overlooked  the  appellant's  reference  to  the  registration
             certificate  meaning  marriage  certificate  in  his   witness
             statement, wrongly invoked the Reg  8  extended  family  rule;
             unwarranted peremptory dismissal  of  authenticated  documents
             from Ghana Judicial Services and Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly
             which operate in the most democratic and peaceful  country  in
             Africa.


         3.   It is arguable that the lex loci celebration principles of  CB
             (2008} UKAIT 80 have not taken full account  of  the  evidence
             referred to in the application."

5.   Counsel said he was relying  on  the  "perfected  grounds  of  appeal".
    These were the grounds upon which permission was granted.  He submitted
    that two months prior to the hearing the appellant served a  bundle  of
    documents on the First-tier Tribunal and the respondent on  8  November
    2013.  This was acknowledged by the judge at paragraph 8.

6.   Counsel submitted that at paragraphs 10 to  15  the  judge  dealt  with
    each document by way of a summary.  Counsel's main  argument  was  that
    the judge took issues of his own volition without giving the  appellant
    the opportunity to address them.  Counsel said he would not go  as  far
    as to say that the judge was biased.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision to take  these  points  without  reference  to  the  appellant
    vitiated his decision by reason of unfairness.

7.   I accept Mr Avery's submission that the grounds, whilst lengthy and  in
    my opinion amateurish, did not raise  the  argument  that  Counsel  was
    relying on.  The grounds did not make the point  that  the  judge  took
    issues of his own volition without giving the appellant the opportunity
    to address those issues.  I bear in mind that the appellant  chose  not
    to have an oral hearing.  Counsel sought to rely on Section 12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  by  submitting  that  once
    permission is granted, the Upper Tribunal may consider all the  grounds
    raised by the appellant, including the argument he was relying  on.   I
    found this to be a  complete  misunderstanding  of  Section  12,  which
    applies if the Upper Tribunal decides the First-tier  Judge's  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.

8.   I find that the judge was effectively saying  was  that  the  documents
    submitted by the appellant were unreliable for  the  reasons  given  by
    him.  The only relevant response made by the appellant is at  paragraph
    11 of the grounds in which he states that it is common practice for the
    issuing authorities  to  issue  the  receipt/invoices  in  one  of  the
    couple's names and in most cases it is the male's name that  should  be
    written on them and that is why I. Djan was stated on the  receipts  by
    the Ghanaian authorities.  Without any  supporting  evidence  from  the
    Ghanaian authorities who  issued  the  receipts,  I  do  not  find  his
    submission can be given any weight.

9.   The appellant also stated in his  grounds  that  the  judge's  comments
    about a "torn receipt" and manifestly showed that he was not interested
    in dealing with the issues raised in this appeal.   He  said  that  the
    receipt is mere paper which could be torn at any stage.   It  could  be
    torn during the handling of the application by the Home Office  or  the
    Tribunal and that the judge's  finding  at  paragraph  14  was  totally
    irrelevant.  I find that this ground totally misunderstands the judge's
    finding.  I have seen the receipt and it is the torn on the left  edge.
    It appears to have been torn from a receipt book  and  could  not  have
    been torn by the Home Office during the handling of the application.

10.  Counsel took me to page 3 of  7  of  the  respondent's  refusal  letter
    where the  respondent  cites  paragraph  3  of  the  PNDC  (Provisional
    National Defence Counsel)  Law  112,  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985.   Sub-paragraph  (b)  states  "the  places  of
    residence of the  parties  at  the  time  of  the  marriage".   Counsel
    submitted that the "UK" stated on  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
    statutory declaration complies with paragraph 31(b) of the PNDC law.  I
    do not find that the UK is a sufficient description  of  the  place  of
    residence.  It is vague.  It does not particularise the address of  the
    appellant and his spouse.

11.  The appellant stated in his grounds that he  and  his  wife  are  in  a
    genuine relationship. I note that the PNDC law Section  3(1)(c)  states
    "that the conditions essential to  the  validity  of  the  marriage  in
    accordance with the applicable customary law have been complied  with".
    There was no evidence in the papers as to what the applicable customary
    law is, the conditions essential to the validity of that  marriage  and
    whether these conditions were complied with.  The statutory declaration
    of the appellant's father and the sponsor's father merely  states  that
    "the couple got married in  accordance  with  the  customary  laws  and
    usage.  The marriage was contracted on 4 August 2012 in Accra and  that
    the requisite dowry and other customary  drinks  and  gifts  were  duly
    presented to the family of the bride and after the performance  of  the
    customary marriage rites, the  couple  were  declared  as  husband  and
    wife."  There was no explanation as  to  what  the  customary  marriage
    rites entail. Paragraph 6 of the statutory declaration states that  the
    couple have been living together as husband and wife in the UK to  date
    but there was no address for the couple and there was  no  evidence  to
    support the claim that the appellant and his wife  were  indeed  living
    together.   I do not find that the judge's findings on the  reliability
    of this document can be called into question.

12.  The grounds claim that the appellant applied for a  residence  card  as
    the spouse of his sponsor under Regulation 7 and not Regulation  26  as
    erroneously as stated by the judge in paragraph 1.  At paragraph 1  the
    judge states that the appellant appeals  under  Regulation  26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 or  alternatively
    Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    against the decision  of  the  respondent.   Again  the  appellant  has
    misunderstood what the judge was saying at paragraph 1.  It is  by  way
    of Regulation 26 that the appellant is able to appeal the Secretary  of
    State's decision.

13.  It is said at paragraph 9 of the grounds  that  the  appellant  applied
    under Regulation 7A (as the spouse of an EEA  national  and  not  as  a
    "relevant  EEA  national")  family  under  Regulation  8  of  the  2006
    Regulations as the respondent asserted.  I find  that  this  ground  is
    criticising the Secretary of  State's  decision  and  not  the  judge's
    decision.  Indeed Regulation 7(1)(a) is an  application  to  treat  the
    appellant as a family  member  of  another  EEA  national,  namely  his
    spouse.  The appellant's application was refused under Regulation  8(5)
    of the 2006 Regulations because if he  cannot  satisfy  the  respondent
    that he is a direct family member as a spouse of the EEA  national,  he
    can satisfy 8(5) if he is the partner of an EEA national and can  prove
    to the decision maker that he is in a durable relationship with the EEA
    national.  In other words if the customary marriage was found not to be
    a valid marriage, then the alternative is to consider  the  appellant's
    application under Regulation 8(5).

14.  The appellant made his application on the basis that he is  the  spouse
    of an EEA national and therefore comes under Regulation 7(a).   He  did
    not argue 8(5) in the alternative.

15.  I find that there is nothing in the grounds that  seriously  raises  an
    arguable error of law in the judge's decision.

16.  I find that the judge  made  findings  that  were  open  to  him.   His
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.




Signed                                  Date 21/05/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

