
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA266082014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2016                              |On 25th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 IMRAN KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Hashmi of Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Chambers of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 16th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born  4th  April  1979  who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom based upon his  human
    rights.  The Appellant claimed that his life  would  be  in  danger  if
    removed to Pakistan and therefore his removal would breach Article 3 of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), and
    he relied upon Article 8 in relation to his private life.

 3. The application was refused on 10th June 2014, and the appeal was heard
    on 9th October 2014.

 4. The Appellant applied for an adjournment of the  hearing  to  obtain  a
    psychologist's report.  This application was refused.   The  FTT  heard
    evidence from the Appellant and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    He relied upon two grounds which may be summarised as follows.

 6. The Appellant contended that the FTT had acted unfairly by refusing his
    application for an adjournment.  The Appellant had submitted to the FTT
    a letter from a psychologist confirming that the Appellant had been due
    to see her on 6th October 2014 for a psychological assessment  but  had
    been unable to attend.  A further appointment had been booked for  10th
    October the day after the hearing.  It was submitted that the  FTT  had
    erred by not allowing the Appellant the opportunity to provide  medical
    evidence as to his mental health difficulties.

 7. Secondly it was contended that the FTT had erred by not considering the
    Appellant's private life, as he had been in the  United  Kingdom  since
    May 2005.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Astle and I set out the grant
    of permission in part;

         "3.  The grounds of the application assert that an application  for
             an  adjournment  to  obtain  medical  evidence  was   unfairly
             refused.  The Appellant had been due to see a psychologist  on
             6th October 2014 but was arrested.   Another  appointment  was
             booked for the day after the hearing.  A letter was  submitted
             confirming these things.  Further it is argued that the  judge
             erred in failing to consider the Appellant's private life.

         4.   In  respect  of  the  last  point,  the  judge's  findings  at
             paragraphs 40 to 42, albeit brief, address  the  private  life
             issues.  However  it  is  arguable  that  at  paragraph  5  he
             misstated the overriding objective and in so  doing  erred  in
             his consideration of the adjournment application.   Permission
             is therefore granted."

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary, that the FTT had not erred  and  had  dealt
    with the adjournment request appropriately.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

11. I observed to Miss  Hashmi,  that  the  grant  of  permission  was  not
    entirely clear, as to whether permission was granted on  both  grounds,
    or only in relation to the adjournment issue.  Miss Hashmi stated  that
    her view was that  permission  to  appeal  had  only  been  granted  in
    relation to the refusal of the FTT to grant an adjournment, and she did
    not pursue the ground of appeal that related to the Appellant's private
    life.

12. I noted that the Tribunal had received from the Appellant's solicitors,
    on 12th May 2016, a psychologist's report dated 10th April 2016.   Miss
    Hashmi stated that reliance was not placed upon the report in  relation
    to the error of law hearing, but if the FTT decision was set aside  and
    needed to be re-made, then the Appellant would wish the  psychologist's
    report to be considered.

13. In relation to error of law, Miss Hashmi relied upon the written ground
    of appeal, submitting that the FTT had acted unfairly  in  refusing  to
    grant an adjournment so that the Appellant could obtain  and  submit  a
    psychologist's report.

14. Miss Hashmi accepted that mental health issues had not played any  part
    in the Appellant's application for leave to remain, and  had  not  been
    raised as a ground of appeal to the FTT.  This issue  had  been  raised
    for the first time at an FTT hearing on 26th  August  2014,  which  had
    been adjourned to enable the Appellant to supply medical evidence.

15. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response, and argued  that  the  FTT
    had considered the appropriate  issue  when  refusing  the  adjournment
    request and the appropriate issue was whether or not there would  be  a
    fair hearing.  I was asked to  find  that  the  FTT  decision  did  not
    disclose an error of law.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. As agreed by both representatives, the only issue before me related  to
    whether the FTT had erred in law by acting unfairly  and  refusing  the
    adjournment request.

18. I find no material error of law for the following reasons.

19. It is accepted on the Appellant's behalf that mental health issues were
    not raised in his application for leave to remain,  and  therefore  not
    considered in the reasons for refusal letter dated 10th June 2014.  The
    only medical issue raised by the Appellant and therefore considered  in
    the refusal, related to back pain.

20. The Appellant did not raise mental health issues in his appeal  to  the
    FTT.  As accepted by Miss Hashmi, the first time that  the  Appellant's
    mental health was raised as an issue was at  an  FFT  hearing  on  26th
    August 2014, which was adjourned for medical evidence to be produced.

21. The next FTT hearing took place on 9th October 2014 and  there  was  no
    medical evidence.

22. The FTT noted that there was no evidence from the  Appellant's  general
    practitioner to confirm that it had been thought necessary to refer the
    Appellant to a psychologist.

23. There was a letter from a psychologist produced to the FTT,  which  was
    dated 8th October 2014.  All that  this  letter  stated  was  that  the
    Appellant should have attended an appointment on 6th October 2014,  but
    he had failed to do so because he had  been  arrested,  and  a  further
    appointment had been arranged to take place on 10th October 2014.

24. The FTT observed in paragraph 5 that the application for an adjournment
    was an inconvenience to the Tribunal.  This  was  not  the  issue  that
    needs to be considered,  and  in  my  view  the  FTT  does  demonstrate
    thereafter, that the appropriate issue was considered when  considering
    the adjournment application.  The appropriate issue has been  clarified
    by the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC) in which it was stated in the headnote;

         "Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question to the  Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FTT acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's rights to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

25. Contrary to the view of the judge granting permission, I  do  not  find
    that the FTT misstated the overriding objective.   The  appeal  hearing
    took place prior to the introduction of  the  2014  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules, and therefore the FTT was dealing with the overriding  objective
    as set  out  in  the  2005  Procedure  Rules  which  is  to  deal  with
    proceedings as fairly, quickly and efficiently as possible.

26. The FTT also appropriately considered rule 21(2) of the 2005  Procedure
    Rules which states that the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing  of  an
    appeal unless satisfied that the  appeal  cannot  otherwise  be  justly
    determined.

27. The FTT stated in paragraph 5;

         "The  fundamental  issue  is  whether  the  appeal  can  be  justly
         determined without granting an adjournment.  I was  satisfied  that
         good reasons had not been demonstrated to secure an adjournment and
         that proceeding with the appeal would result in a fair hearing  and
         a fair disposal of the issues."

28. The above demonstrates that the Tribunal  had  in  mind  the  issue  of
    fairness, and whether  to  refuse  an  adjournment  would  deprive  the
    Appellant of a fair hearing.

29. In my view the refusal of the adjournment did not deprive the Appellant
    of a fair hearing.  The Appellant had had ample opportunity to  provide
    medical evidence following the  adjournment  of  the  hearing  on  26th
    August 2014.  It  was  appropriate  for  the  Tribunal  to  observe  in
    paragraph 5;

         "Although it was urged on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  he  had
         consulted a GP no evidence of that was presented.  It is not  shown
         that the Appellant has a psychological condition.  It is not  shown
         even if he has a psychological condition that the condition has any
         bearing on the issues in this appeal."

30. In my view the FTT  was  fully  entitled  to  take  the  view  that  no
    satisfactory medical evidence had  been  submitted  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from any mental  health  issues  that  had  any
    relevance to the appeal hearing.

31. Although Miss Hashmi stated that no reliance was placed upon the report
    that had been received by the Tribunal on 12th May 2016, in relation to
    the error of law hearing, she did in fact refer to it, and I note  that
    the report does conclude that the Appellant is currently depressed  and
    experiences high levels of anxiety.  I make no finding  as  to  whether
    that conclusion would have had any relevance at the hearing before  the
    FTT.  The point is that the FTT refused an adjournment,  because  there
    was no satisfactory evidence that the Appellant had any relevant mental
    health issues, and if, following the  production  of  the  report,  the
    Appellant believes this forms a basis for making  a  fresh  application
    then it is open to him to make such an application.

32. In my view, the FTT dealt entirely appropriately with  the  application
    for an adjournment, and the decision to refuse the application, did not
    deprive   the   Appellant   of   the   right   to   a   fair   hearing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal, and no anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date 18th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.





Signed                              Date 18th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
