

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/26689/2013
      IA/26697/2013
      IA/26707/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On:  12th June 2014                    |On: 4th August 2014      |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Dhvani Piyushbhai Jani
                         Bhoomikaben Vinubhai Patel
                                 Anuska Jani
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Barton, Sabz Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of India.  They  are  respectively  a
    husband, wife and their minor child. On  the  19th  November  2013  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heynes) allowed their linked appeals against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  to  vary  their  leave  to
    remain and to remove them from the United Kingdom pursuant  to  s47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The First Respondent Mr Jani had come to the UK on the 16th May 2004 as
    a student. The Secretary of State had thereafter varied  his  leave  to
    remain on several occasions, first as a student and latterly as a  Tier
    1 Migrant.   At all times since his arrival in this country Mr Jani has
    had valid leave and has complied with the terms of  that  leave.    The
    application that became the subject of this appeal was made on the 16th
    May 2013 and it was an application for further leave  to  remain,  this
    time as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.   The Second and Third  Respondents
    were dependents upon this application and appeal.

 3. The applications were refused because Mr  Jani  had  failed  to  supply
    specified evidence of his self-employment as required by Appendix A  of
    the Rules.  He had submitted accounts but they were not prepared by  an
    accountant registered with one of the approved supervisory  bodies  (ie
    ACCA etc).

 4. On appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mr  Jani  and  his  dependents
    submitted that they had not realized that the accounts from  this  firm
    were not acceptable. The Secretary of  State  had  previously  accepted
    accounts prepared by this firm.  When Mr Jani had  received  a  letter,
    prior to the refusal, alerting him to the problem he had  written  back
    to the Secretary of State offering to have his accounts signed off by a
    registered firm if this was necessary, but had  received  no  response.
    He subsequently had accounts prepared  by  registered  accountants  but
    these were not submitted with the  application  and  so  fell  foul  of
    section 19 of the Borders Act 2007 and could not be relied upon.  Judge
    Heynes dismissed the appeal under the Rules.

 5. The Respondents had further submitted that their  removal  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR. Judge Heynes noted that this family had  been
    in the UK for some nine and a half years and that there was  a  private
    life. Removal from the UK would result in  an  interference  with  that
    private life. In respect of proportionality Judge Heynes noted that  Mr
    Jani had made a blunder in not realizing that the original  accountants
    were not registered, but that he  had  subsequently  produced  accounts
    signed off by registered accounts which  would  have  resulted  in  him
    getting further leave to remain had they been  received  in  time.   He
    had, in essence, produced the right information in  the  wrong  format.
    Finding that there  could  be  no  reasonable  justification  for  this
    interference, he allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State now has permission to appeal on the grounds that
    Judge Heynes failed to take the decision in Nagre[1] into  account.  It
    is submitted  that  there  was  a  misdirection  in  law  in  that  the
    determination fails to take into account the weight to be  attached  to
    the Immigration Rules.  MF Nigeria[2] is relied  upon  to  support  the
    proposition that the Rules are a 'complete code' as far as Article 8 is
    concerned and that the appeal could only therefore have been allowed if
    the Tribunal had identified some 'exceptional circumstances'.

    Error of Law

 7. I am not persuaded that the grounds are made out.


 8. Nagre does not introduce a 'test' to the effect that  some  exceptional
    circumstances must be identified before a Judge can consider Article 8.
     The point that Sales J makes  is  this:    if  there  is  not  a  good
    arguable case to look at Article 8 then it is not necessary to  do  so.
    That  is  because  the  Rules  have  already  provided  for  Article  8
    considerations in most circumstances.   It  is  not  an  authority  for
    saying that the court cannot go on to look  at  Article  8  unless  the
    claimant has surmounted some  intermediate  hurdle  of  exceptionality.
    The "exceptionality test" has  been  comprehensively  rejected  by  the
    House of Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, by the Court of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and indeed by recent ministerial
    statements.   I note that in this case the Secretary of State  had  not
    considered the claims under any of the provisions of the Rules relating
    to human rights. Judge Heynes plainly considered that there  was  merit
    in the Article 8 claim, since he allowed it on that ground. It  follows
    that there was a good arguable case.


 9. In respect of the ground asserting that MF (Nigeria) finds the rules as
    a whole to be a complete code this is simply wrong.  MF  (Nigeria)  was
    concerned with those provisions relating to  deportation,  not  private
    life in general.  I do not consider there to be any error of law in the
    approach taken by Judge Heynes.


10. Even if I am wrong I note that at the date of the appeal before me  the
    First Respondent has had lawful leave to remain  in  this  country  for
    over ten years and now qualifies for indefinite leave to remain in  any
    event. As such any error that might be found in  the  determination  is
    irrelevant.



    Decisions

11. The determination does not contain errors of law such that it should be
    set aside.


12. I make no direction as to anonymity.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              20th July 2014













-----------------------
[1] R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 270
[2] MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA 1192

