
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26394/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 11 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                               SOUMAYA AKROUTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Bild, Camden Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant appealed against a decision of the Respondent  to  refuse
    her a right of permanent  residence  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   Her  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge
    Davidson sitting at Tailors House on 8 January 2015.  Both parties were
    represented.  In a decision of 14 February, promulgated on 19  February
    2015, Judge Davidson dismissed the appeal under the Regulations and  on
    Article 8 human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused on 22 April 2015 by Judge  Pooler  and
    granted on second application on 2 July 2015 by Judge  Canavan  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  to
             refuse to issue her with an EEA residence card on the  grounds
             that she had a retained right to  residence  she  applied  for
             permission  to  appeal  against  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
             Davidson's  decision  to  dismiss  the   appeal,   which   was
             promulgated  on 19 February 2015.

         2.   Although the Respondent queried whether the  Appellant  had  a
             right of appeal under Regulation  26  at  the  hearing  it  is
             apparent  from  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that   the
             Appellant was told that she a right of appeal.  Whether  there
             was technically a right of appeal is not  a  matter  for  this
             particular decision and is appropriate  to  be  considered  in
             more detail by the Upper Tribunal at a hearing.

         3.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law that would  have
             made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal.   The
             judge gave adequate reasons to explain why it  would  make  no
             difference to adjourn in order to make a  direction  for  HMRC
             evidence to be supplied  by  the  respondent  [15].   Although
             there is some authority in Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Crim 552 to
             suggest that a judge can make direction for HMRC  evidence  to
             be produced, it would have  no  material  difference  to  this
             appeal because it is not arguable  that  the  Appellant  could
             retain a right of residence under Regulation  10  of  the  EEA
             Regulations because such rights only accrue on termination  of
             a marriage and are not available to  extended  family  members
             who are in a durable relationship.

         4.   However, it is arguable that the decision discloses a Robinson
             obvious error of law  in so far  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             failed to consider whether  the Appellant nevertheless  had  a
             derived right of residence under Regulation 15A given that the
             judge appeared to accept that the Appellant's daughter was the
             child of a European national [21]. The decision also  suggests
             that her son may have been  in  the  process  of  applying  to
             register as British citizen [50].  As such it is also arguable
             that the First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to Article  8
             are unsustainable. The original application seems to have been
             made on a misconceived basis and it is arguable that the First-
             tier Tribunal erred in falling to cosier obvious grounds  that
             were relevant to the case.

         5.   Permission to appeal is granted."

3.   The Appellant, bringing with her her two small children,  attended  the
    error of law hearing, which took the form of submissions.  I have taken
    these into  account,  together  with  the  permission  application.   I
    reserved my decision.



Determination

4.   The submissions  indicated  a  possible  pragmatic  resolution  of  the
    matter to which both representatives assented and which I am content to
    adopt.

5.   The decision did not incorporate a removal  decision,  and  no  Section
    120 notice was served.  Accordingly, it was not open to  the  Appellant
    to bring a human rights challenge: Amirteymour and Others (EEA appeals;
    human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC).  This decision  did  not  emerge
    until August 2015, so that it was not law when Judge Davidson heard the
    appeal in January 2015.  Jurisprudentially, however, it is to be  taken
    to have represented the  law.   It  follows  that,  in  conscientiously
    considering Article 8 at paragraphs 42 to 53, Judge Davidson,  who  was
    not  endowed  with  the  power  of  prophecy,  erred  in   law.    Both
    representatives are content for me to set aside paragraphs 42 to 53  of
    his decision, which I accordingly do.

6.   This decision is pragmatic because the Appellant has  made  a  separate
    human rights application, which is due to be heard on 20 November, when
    the Tribunal will be able to consider human rights issues.

7.   Although there  are  challenges  to  the  remainder  of  the  decision,
    addressing the position under the Regulations, both representatives are
    content for me to uphold that part  of  it.   Since  this  avoids  some
    jurisprudential labour, I am content to do so.

Notice of Decision

8.   The original decision contained an error of law in  relation  to  human
    rights.  I accordingly set aside paragraphs 42 to 53 of  the  decision,
    which address human rights.

9.   The remainder of the decision is to stand.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

