
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/26810/2012
                                                               IA/26822/2012
                                                               IA/26828/2012
                                                               IA/26837/2012
                                                               IA/26842/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 July 2013                             |On 10 July 2013            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

Between
                                   MRS E V
                                    MR A
                                   MISS B
                                  MASTER C
                                   MISS D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Ms S Pinder of counsel
           instructed by Equalisers Limited
          For the Respondent: Mrs M Tanner a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who was born on  4
      January 1970. I will  refer  to  her  as  the  appellant.  The  second
      appellant (A) is her husband who was born in 1971. I will refer to him
      as the husband. The third, fourth and fifth appellants (B,  C  and  D)
      are their children born in 2001, 2004 and 2007. I will refer  to  them
      either by one of these initials or collectively as the  children.  The
      appellants have been given permission to appeal the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge R G  Walters  who  dismissed  their  appeals
      against the respondent's decisions of 6 November 2012 to  refuse  them
      further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as, in the case  of  the
      first appellant, a Tier 2 Migrant under the Points-based  System  and,
      in the case of the other appellants, as her husband or children and to
      make decisions to remove them from the UK by way of  directions  under
      section 47 of the Immigration and Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. One matter can be disposed of immediately. No doubt in line  with  the
      authorities culminating in Adamally and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal
      decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012]  UKUT  00414  (IAC)  the  judge
      found that the s 47 decisions were not in accordance with the law  and
      he allowed the appeals to that extent. It is common ground  that  that
      was the correct decision.


   3. The respondent's refusals were made on the basis  that  the  appellant
      was not entitled to the required points for sponsorship or appropriate
      salary. She was entitled to the required points for  English  language
      skills and maintenance (funds). The other appellants were  refused  in
      line with her. The respondent also  considered  the  Article  8  human
      rights grounds and the provisions of s 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
      and Immigration Act 2009.


   4. The appellants appealed and the judge heard the appeals  on  12  April
      2013. Both parties were represented. The judge heard evidence from the
      appellant, the husband  and  four  other  witnesses.  The  appellants'
      representative, Mr Turner, who is still acting for them and whose firm
      instructed counsel before me, appeared for the appellants. He made  an
      important concession which the judge recorded in paragraph  5  of  the
      determination in the following terms; "Mr  Turner  conceded  that  the
      appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of  further  leave
      to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant could  not  succeed.  He  also
      conceded that the appellant's Article 8 appeal could not succeed under
      the Immigration Rules version of Article 8. He said  that  the  appeal
      will be argued under the "Strasbourg and domestic  courts  Article  8"
      and Section 55 of the Borders Act."


   5. The judge went on to consider the appeals on Article  8  human  rights
      grounds before concluding that the removal of the appellants would  be
      a proportionate interference with their Article  8  human  rights.  He
      dismissed the appeals against the refusal of leave to remain as a Tier
      2 (General) Migrant and  on  human  rights  grounds  but  allowed  the
      appeals against the s 47 decisions.


   6. The appellants applied for and were granted permission to appeal by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The judge considered that there  was
      no real merit in the  substantive  grounds  attacking  the  Article  8
      reasoning and conclusions, although permission was given for  them  to
      be argued. However,  the  judge  thought  that  the  appeals  and  the
      respondent's decision-making process could "best  be  described  as  a
      mess", a sentiment with which I agree.


   7. In order to understand this I need to give  a  brief  summary  of  the
      appeals and decision-making  process.  Much  of  the  information  now
      available in a bundle  prepared  by  the  appellants'  solicitors  and
      submitted at the hearing before me was not available to the First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge.


   8. On 7 February 2011 the appellants made their in time applications  for
      variation of leave. On  8  March  2011  the  respondent  rejected  the
      applications as invalid. The appellant say that this was incorrect and
      she was not entitled to do so. The applications were resubmitted on 25
      March  2011  and,  on  15  July  2011,  the  respondent  refused   the
      applications with no right of appeal. On 25 July 2011  the  appellants
      lodged notice of appeal disputing the allegation  that  there  was  no
      right of appeal. The first hearing took place on 31  August  2011  but
      had to be adjourned because the respondent  did  not  attend.  It  was
      adjourned  again  on  18  October  2011  for  the  same  reason.   The
      appellants'  representatives   submitted   a   letter   with   further
      representations on 7 December 2011. On 14 November 2011  and  for  the
      third time the respondent  did  not  attend.  The  respondent  sent  a
      representative on 10 February 2012 but without a file. The appellants'
      representatives wrote to the respondent on 13 February  and  18  March
      2012  complaining  about  the  respondent's  failure  to  comply  with
      directions.


   9.  On  26  March  2012  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy  issued   a
      notice/decision that the respondent  had  not  served  an  immigration
      decision carrying a right of appeal. However she urged the  respondent
      to consider the appellants' representations and issue fresh decisions.
      She referred to the repeated failure by the respondent to comply  with
      directions issued by the Tribunal. On  18  July  2012  the  respondent
      issued a decision  refusing  the  appellants'  Article  8  claims  and
      serving them with notices  of  decisions  which  carried  a  right  of
      appeal. I have only seen the decision in  relation  to  the  appellant
      although it has  not  been  suggested  that  there  were  not  similar
      decisions in relation to the other appellants.


  10. On 10 September 2012 the appellants' appeals were heard by  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Turkington. In his determination he allowed the appeals
      to the extent that they were  referred  back  to  the  respondent  for
      decisions to be made on the relevant issues. These  were  whether  the
      respondent had made appropriate enquiries about the children,  whether
      the respondent had considered the claims that the  first  applications
      were unlawfully rejected and if so the consequences including  whether
      the appellants would have had continuing leave and the  weight  to  be
      attached to a potential claim by the appellants against  their  former
      representatives for negligence.


  11. The next step taken by the respondent was to issue the decisions of  6
      November 2012.

  12. As well as the new bundle from the appellant's representatives I  have
      written  submissions  prepared   by   Ms   Pinder.   I   invited   the
      representatives to address me on the preliminary issue of whether  the
      appellants should be permitted to go behind the concession recorded by
      the judge in paragraph 5 of the determination which  I  have  set  out
      above. On instructions Ms Pinder accepted that the concession was made
      and is correctly recorded. In her written submissions she argues  that
      the appellants' original applications were improperly rejected, remain
      outstanding and must be dealt with by the respondent. For this purpose
      she asked me to find that the respondent's latest decision was not  in
      accordance with the law and that I should allow  the  appeal  to  this
      extent so that the respondent could make a valid decision in  relation
      to the original applications. In support of this she argues  that  the
      latest decision refers to the application of 25 March 2011 rather than
      the application of 7 February 2011.


  13. Mrs Tanner argued that this should not be permitted. The point had not
      been raised until the hearing today and there was no  suggestion  that
      the concession had not been made or was incorrectly recorded.


  14. In the skeleton argument before  the  judge  it  is  argued  that  the
      respondent's decision is unlawful but only in relation  to  the  s  47
      directions. It is said that "the tribunal can  make  a  finding  under
      Article 8 without having to refer that back  to  the  respondent"  and
      "the tribunal is urged to allow these appeals under Article 8  and  to
      award costs". The only attempt have it both ways is in  the  sentence;
      "only if the tribunal is  against  the  family  under  Article  8  and
      section 55 should the matter be referred back to the respondent for  a
      lawful decision to be made". This appears to be a reference back to an
      alleged failure by the respondent to comply with directions of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Turkington.


  15.  I find that there has  not  been  any  application  to  withdraw  the
      concession made by the appellant's  representatives  recorded  by  the
      judge in paragraph 5. In my judgement this was  an  entirely  sensible
      and appropriate concession limiting the issues to those on  which  the
      appellants had some prospect of success. It  has  not  been  suggested
      that it was made without informed instructions. Whilst I note that the
      decisions of 6 November 2012 refer  to  the  appellants'  applications
      made on 25 March 2011 rather than what the appellants  claimed  to  be
      their original in time and valid applications made on 7 February 2011,
      I cannot see that this has made  any  difference  or  would  make  any
      difference  if  the  latest  decisions  were   reconsidered   by   the
      respondent. The respondent has not treated the applications  as  being
      out of time, has considered  them  on  their  merits  both  under  the
      Immigration Rules relating to Tier 2 (General) Migrants and on Article
      8 human rights grounds, has addressed  the  section  55  factors,  has
      accepted that there are rights of appeal and has not alleged that  the
      appellants remained in this country without leave.


  16. I find that the  judge  was  not  asked  to  find  that  the  original
      applications were outstanding or that the appeals should be allowed to
      the extent that the decision should be reconsidered by the respondent.
      There can be no failure to deal with a point which was not raised  and
      was not remotely obvious. In any event and whatever was  said  in  the
      grounds or  any  skeleton  the  concession  made  by  the  appellants'
      representative at the hearing properly limited the issues  before  the
      judge and excluded this line of argument. Furthermore,  there  was  no
      merit in the point which I find would not have succeeded  even  if  it
      had been raised. In this regard there is no error of law.


  17.  The  judge  who  granted  permission  to  appeal  thought  that   the
      substantive Article 8 grounds had no real merit. I find that they are,
      in substance, no more than  disagreements  with  conclusions  properly
      reached by the judge.  There  is  no  disagreement  with  the  judge's
      conclusion that as the family would remain together in this country or
      the Philippines there would be no interference with  their  rights  to
      family life. Their removal would be an interference with their private
      lives. The judge applied the  appropriate  step-by-step  Razgar  tests
      with the final assessment turning on proportionality.


  18. The judge's assessment and reasoning in  relation  to  the  Article  8
      grounds is set out between paragraphs 30 and 59 of the  determination.
      I find this to be a clear, careful and properly reasoned assessment. I
      can find no indication that the judge failed  to  follow  the  correct
      approach. It is clear that he treated the interests of the children as
      a primary consideration. In  paragraph  47  he  said;  "as  Mr  Turner
      correctly submits, under section 55 the best interests of the children
      must be a primary consideration." and in paragraph 53; "I  found  that
      it is in the best interests of the children that  their  education  in
      the  UK  not  to  be  disrupted.  I  treated   that   as   a   primary
      consideration." I find that the judge did take this  as  his  starting
      point. He was entitled to conclude that  "in  the  light  of  all  the
      evidence in  the  round"  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
      control was "another primary consideration"  which  prevailed  in  the
      assessment of proportionality.


  19. I accept that the judge does not refer to the appeal  process  history
      or any failures or delays by the respondent in the assessment  of  the
      Article 8 grounds. In paragraph 57 he does  address  the  question  of
      whether the appellants had been let down by  incompetent  lawyers  but
      finds that he cannot  reach  a  conclusion  about  this  for  lack  of
      documentary evidence or of any formal complaint made to the OISC.  The
      skeleton argument before him did refer to the claimed failure  by  the
      respondent to comply with directions but the position  at  that  stage
      was, as the judge who granted permission to appeal said, "a mess"  and
      I  find  that  the  appeal  and  decision  making  history   and   the
      responsibility for it was not as clear at  the  time  of  the  hearing
      before the judge as, hopefully, it is now in the light of the  further
      documentary evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant's  representatives
      which was not available to the judge. In any event the evidence before
      me including the evidence which was not  before  the  judge  does  not
      persuade me that the appellants have established that  their  original
      applications, rejected by the respondent in  the  letter  of  8  March
      2011, were improperly rejected. The  appellants  had  complained  that
      they were let down by incompetent representatives, including  at  this
      stage.


  20. If the appellants' original applications were  properly  rejected,  as
      they may have been, then their persistence and the pressure they  have
      applied has had one benefit at least, that of  making  the  respondent
      reach a fresh decision in relation to all  their  grounds  and  giving
      them a right of appeal which they might not otherwise have had. It  is
      difficult to assess how much sooner a full decision  could  have  been
      reached and the appellants appeals decided had there not  been  delays
      by the respondent. However, even if I had reached the conclusion  that
      the judge erred in law by failing to take delay into account,  I  find
      that it would not be a material  error.  It  would  not  have  made  a
      difference to the outcome of the Article 8 grounds.


  21. I have made an anonymity direction in order to protect  the  interests
      of the children.

  22. I  find  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.


      Direction regarding anonymity


      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 5 July
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

