
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26872/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th May 2014                                |On 13th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                           rao Mohammad adnam khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Bukhari Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 14th December 1989.
     The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 12th March 2011 when  he  was
    given leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 16th  December
    2012.  On 13th December 2012 he applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds having married a British citizen, Nicole Khan,  on  15th
    December 2012.  That application was refused for the reasons given in a
    Notice of Decision dated 11th June 2013.  The Appellant  appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blake  (the
    Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 13th January  2014.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules but to  allow  it  under
    Article 8 ECHR for the reasons given in his  Determination  dated  24th
    January 2014.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal the Article 8 ECHR
    decision, and such permission was granted on 4th April 2014.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the impugned decision of the Judge contained  an
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. According to what he wrote in his Determination, the Judge allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds because he found the Appellant and his
    wife to be honest and credible witnesses and accepted that they  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  Indeed, they were devoted to  one
    another.  The Judge considered the decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and found that  there
    were good grounds to grant leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    therefore to consider whether there were compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under those Rules.  One of the reasons for that
    decision was that there was evidence  that  the  Appellant's  wife  was
    being investigated for a lymphoma.  The Judge then assessed whether the
    decision of the Respondent was proportionate applying the format  given
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The Judge found  that  the  Appellant
    had a family life with his wife which would be interfered with  by  the
    Respondent's decision to such a degree of  gravity  as  to  engage  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights.  The Judge then carried out the balancing
    exercise necessary for any assessment of  proportionality  and  decided
    that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  proportionate.   In   this
    connection, the Judge found that it was unlikely that in the future the
    Appellant would  be  able  to  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in order to return to the UK, and that it was  unreasonable
    to expect the Appellant's wife  to  accompany  him  to  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant's wife suffered from a form of polycystic ovaries which had a
    debilitating effect upon her and for which it was  unlikely  she  would
    receive the appropriate medical treatment in Pakistan.  The Appellant's
    wife did not speak any of the languages spoken in Pakistan, and more to
    the point, she was a practising Christian.   The  Judge  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant and his wife would have problems in an Islamic State
    because the Appellant and his  wife  had  not  undergone  any  sort  of
    Islamic marriage ceremony, and they had married without any  conversion
    to Islam by the Appellant's wife.  The Judge  found  these  factors  to
    amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  return  to
    Pakistan.

 4. At the hearing, Ms Pal referred  to  the  grounds  of  application  and
    argued that in reaching his decision the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    reaching his decision that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's wife returning to Pakistan with him.  The Judge had set out
    the correct test at paragraph 92 of  the  Determination,  but  had  not
    applied it.  He had  made  no  findings  in  respect  of  compassionate
    circumstances.  The Judge had failed to consider  the  public  interest
    when assessing proportionality and had failed to take into account  the
    fact that the Immigration Rules amounted to a complete code.

 5. In response, Mr Khan submitted that there had been  no  error  of  law.
    The Judge had given a detailed judgment in which he had considered  all
    the relevant circumstances, and  had  properly  applied  the  law.   At
    paragraph 93 of  the  Determination,  the  Judge  had  found  practical
    difficulties amounting  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Sponsor
    living with the Appellant in Pakistan.  The Judge was entitled to  find
    upon the evidence that there were exceptional circumstances outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. I found that there was no error of law in the decision of the Judge  so
    that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for  that  decision  are  as
    follows. The Judge came to a conclusion open to him upon  the  evidence
    before him and which he fully explained.  The Judge was fully aware  of
    the fact that the Appellant could not satisfy the  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules, hence his decision to take as his starting point the
    decision  in  Gulshan.   It  follows  that  the  Judge   attached   the
    appropriate  weight  to  the  public  interest  when  later   assessing
    proportionality.

 7.  The  Judge  followed  Gulshan  in  finding  at  paragraph  92  of  the
    Determination that in this case there were arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  The Judge then
    considered whether there were any compassionate circumstances  in  this
    case not recognised  by  those  Rules.   He  made  such  a  finding  at
    paragraph 98 of the Determination  when  he  decided  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's wife  accompanying  him  to
    Pakistan.  The Judge's decision in this respect was fully  reasoned  in
    that  paragraph.   There  was  no  misdirection  in  law  as   to   the
    interpretation to be given to the term "insurmountable obstacles".  The
    Judge had referred to the law in this respect correctly at paragraph 93
    of the Determination, and it was open to him to find that the practical
    difficulties in the Sponsor relocating as described in paragraph 98  of
    the Determination amounted to insurmountable obstacles.

 8. To summarise, I find that there was no error of law in respect  of  the
    Judge's decision relating to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

 9. The making of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR did not involve  the  making
    of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside the decision.





Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to make one.







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
