
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 September 2016                 |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 waleed raja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolah of Counsel instructed by Adam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7 September  1989.   The
    respondent refused his application for leave to remain as a student  on
    15 July 2015.  The appellant had made his application on 21 March 2014.



2.   In her decision the respondent had referred  to  the  applicant  having
    submitted a TOEIC certificate  from  the  Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS) to both the respondent and his  sponsor  in  order  for  them  to
    provide the appellant with a Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    (CAS).  The appellant had obtained his TOEIC certificate as a result of
    a test that he had taken at Apex on 14 January  2014.   The  respondent
    noted that ETS had undertaken a check of the appellant's test  and  had
    found "that there  was  significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  your
    certificate was fraudulently obtained  by  the  use  of  a  proxy  test
    taker".  The appellant's test was accordingly declared invalid.

3.   The appellant's application was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of  the
    Rules as a false document  had  been  submitted.   The  respondent  was
    satisfied that the appellant had used deception with  consequences  for
    any future applications for entry clearance.  The appellant had claimed
    that he had a valid CAS assigned by Bradford Regional College but  when
    the respondent checked the register on 15 July 2015 the college was not
    listed on that date and accordingly  the  appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirements to be awarded 30 points under Appendix A of the Rules.

4.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 8 January 2016.  The judge heard oral evidence  from  the
    appellant who denied using deception and he had never  heard  of  Apex.
    He gave evidence in perfect and fluent English and the judge  found  it
    obvious that he had no need to arrange someone to take the test for him
    as his English  was  excellent  and  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had made out her case that  he  did  not  attend  the  test.
    Accordingly that aspect of the decision fell away.

5.   The judge concluded his determination as follows:

         "9.  I am satisfied that Mr Raja does not  have  a  CAS.   That  is
             because Bradford Regional College is not authorised  to  issue
             one.  The Appellant had 9 months to vary his application  from
             finding out in October 2014 about the loss of the licence  and
             July 2015 when the application was refused  and  a  further  6
             months since then to find another college.  Patel refers to  a
             discretionary power by use of the word 'may'.   I  decline  to
             exercise  my  discretion  as  he  has  already  had   a   fair
             opportunity to vary his application.

         10.  I do not see any 'gap' within  the  rules  to  consider  human
             rights as they are comprehensive.

         11.  Even if I am wrong in that, had I been  required  to  consider
             whether there are compelling circumstances, or consequences of
             gravity that may exist by removal, I would have relied on  the
             following findings which I make and also dismissed the appeal.

         12.  Mr Raja came here as an adult for a short period to study with
             the expectation he would return to Pakistan after  that  short
             period.   He  can  study  in  Pakistan  or  through   distance
             learning.  He can apply  to  come  back.   He  has  failed  to
             establish  it  is  reasonably  likely  he  would  be  rendered
             homeless or destitute in Pakistan as he can work.

         13.  There is no cogent evidence that he has a  family  or  private
             life that would be engaged.  Even if he  has  a  private  life
             through studies and friends, it is of limited  value  and  was
             built up whilst  leave  was  precarious.   He  has  failed  to
             establish he is not an economic burden on the  taxpayer  given
             the lack of evidence of contributions through tax to the  cost
             of public services such as emergency  services  and  transport
             infrastructure.  His ability to speak  English  is  a  neutral
             factor.  No one attended to give evidence regarding  his  life
             here.  In all those circumstances, had Article 8 been reached,
             which it had not, I would have  found  that  his  removal  was
             proportionate  to  the  lawful  and  legitimate  aim  of  only
             allowing those who  fulfilled  the  immigration  rules  to  be
             here."

6.   There was an application for permission  to  appeal  in  which  it  was
    pointed out that there had been a delay of over a year  in  making  the
    decision and during that period the sponsoring institution had had  its
    sponsorship licence revoked by the Home Office.  Normally 60 days would
    be given to allow an applicant to find  a  new  sponsor.   However  the
    respondent had stated in the decision that this would  not  be  allowed
    "as you have used deception in this application".   However  the  judge
    had found  that  there  had  been  no  deception  and  accordingly  the
    respondent should have given the appellant 60 days'  notice  to  enable
    him to find a new educational institution and a new CAS.  Reliance  was
    placed on Home Office guidance helpfully attached  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

7.   A point was also taken in relation to Article 8.  It  was  pointed  out
    that the appellant could not  have  obtained  a  further  CAS  or  made
    another application for an extension of leave.  It was said:

         "A CAS cannot be issued by a sponsor without an  individual  having
         lawful  leave  and   appropriate   identity   documentation.    The
         applicant's passport was with the Home Office and  switching  leave
         from extant leave under Section 3C (of the  1971  Act)  would  have
         resulted in the further application in any event being made  by  an
         individual that no longer has lawful leave."

7.   Reliance was also placed on the  respondent's  delay  in  deciding  the
    application.  The appellant's proposed college had  had  a  sponsorship
    licence as at the date of application and for several months thereafter
    and it was only in the following year after about seven to eight months
    that the licence had been revoked by the respondent.  The  respondent's
    allegation about deception had been shown to have been ill-founded  and
    the appellant's position had been compromised.

8.   Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 8 July  2016.   It
    was arguable that the judge had failed to take into account the matters
    advanced in the grounds.  The appellant would not  be  able  to  obtain
    another CAS without his passport or a certified  copy  and  would  also
    have difficulty because given  the  requirements  placed  on  sponsors,
    colleges would be concerned about whether the  appellant  did  in  fact
    have extant leave to remain: the judge referred to Patel (revocation of
    sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).

9.   At the hearing Counsel relied on the grounds of appeal  and  the  grant
    of permission.  It was submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  apply
    Patel correctly: as was said in paragraph 8 of Patel an applicant would
    face difficulties in making a fresh application.  The Home  Office  had
    made it quite clear in the decision that "as you have used deception in
    this application you were not allowed 60 days to obtain a  new  sponsor
    and CAS".  It was unfair to refuse the application without  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to vary it.  After  the  decision  itself  the
    appellant would have had  no  leave  to  vary  -  Counsel  referred  to
    paragraphs 20 to 22  of  Patel.   The  deception  point  needed  to  be
    adjudicated  upon  and  it  would   have   contaminated   any   further
    applications.  She had not settled the grounds and it was accepted that
    the case could not be brought under the Immigration  Rules  themselves.
    However discretion should have been  exercised  in  the  light  of  the
    guidance and the fairness issue.  Article 8  could  be  raised  in  the
    light of what was said in Patel at paragraph 17.

10.  Mr Norton submitted that there was no valid CAS at the date of  hearing
    and the appellant had had nine months in which to vary his application.
     Once he had known that  the  licence  had  been  revoked  he  had  the
    opportunity to vary the  application.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
    application would be fruitless because no application  had  been  made.
    It was accepted that as at the date of decision the appellant could not
    make an application and the judge had erred on that point.  It did  not
    appear that Article 8 had  been  argued  before  the  First-tier  Judge
    although it was accepted that  the  judge  had  dealt  with  Article  8
    issues.

11.  In reply Counsel submitted that there were  practical  difficulties  in
    finding sponsors as was highlighted  in  paragraph  8  of  Patel.   The
    decision breached the requirement of  fairness.   Article  8  had  been
    considered by the First-tier judge.

12.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

13.  The first point to note is that there was a considerable delay  between
    the application and  the  decision.   The  second  point  is  that  the
    decision raised serious allegations against  the  appellant,  no  doubt
    with serious consequences for the future if the  allegation  were  made
    out.

14.  Mr Norton made the point that it was open to the appellant  to  find  a
    new sponsor during  the  decision-making  process,  a  point  that  had
    commended itself to the First-tier Judge.  However the difficulty  with
    this argument is that it does not appear to be the  way  in  which  the
    respondent put the matter in the  decision.   Counsel  highlighted  the
    following sentence on page 3 of the decision:

         "As you have used  deception  in  this  application  you  were  not
         allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS."

    The respondent's position was quite unequivocal.

15.  The requirement to act fairly will always depend upon the  context  and
    the specific facts of the case as was made clear in Patel at  paragraph
    13.  It is also pointed out that there are difficulties in obtaining  a
    fresh CAS.

16.  In relation to the period after refusal  Mr  Norton  accepts  that  the
    judge erred in taking into account that period.

17.  It is difficult to see why a person who  has  had  an  allegation  made
    against him which turns out to be unfounded should not be  put  in  the
    position that he would have been had the allegation not  been  made  in
    the first place. In such circumstances it is incumbent on the decision-
    maker to re-visit the refusal to allow the appellant the usual 60  days
    to obtain a new sponsor and CAS.   Were  it  otherwise  the  respondent
    would be both judge and jury and any favourable findings in the  appeal
    would not assist him.  The appellant should be put as far  as  possible
    in the position he would have been had the allegation not been made.

18.  In relation to Article 8 it is quite clear that  the  judge  considered
    the matter whether or not there was reference to Article  8  issues  at
    the hearing.  Article 8 was  in  fact  raised  albeit  briefly  in  the
    grounds before the First-tier Judge and so he was correct to deal  with
    it.

19.  I have already referred to Mr Norton's concession that the judge  erred
    in referring to the postdecision period from July 2015.  It does appear
    to me that the approach to Article 8 needs to be seen in the context of
    this case where the appellant had had an allegation made against him of
    a serious kind which would potentially blight his career and  prospects
    which turned out to be without foundation.  The judge indeed  found  it
    "blindingly obvious" that the appellant had no need  of  a  proxy  test
    taker as his English was excellent.  As is  pointed  out  in  Patel  at
    paragraph 16, bona fide students may build  up  a  private  life  which
    should not be arbitrarily interfered with.

20.  In relation to the fairness issue Mr Norton accepts  that  the  judge's
    approach was  in  part  flawed.   I  am  satisfied  that  he  erred  in
    considering that the appellant had had a fair opportunity to  vary  the
    application in all the circumstances.

21.   I re-make the decision. The appeal is allowed on  the  fairness  issue
    and under Article 8. It is for the respondent to exercise discretion to
    grant the appellant 60 days to find a new  CAS  in  the  light  of  the
    positive findings made by the First-tier Judge.



Notice of Decision

22.  The appeal is allowed.

Anonymity Direction

23.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

Fee Award

26.  Any fee paid by the appellant should be returned to him.


Signed                                  Date 28 September 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
