
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26660/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 October 2017                     |On 26 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 md Shahalam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gaffar, Counsel instructed by J S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State refusing him further leave to remain as a student.

2. Permission was granted on one ground and it was conceded  by  Mr  Wilding
that the appeal on that ground had to  succeed.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
neglected to determine the appeal brought  on  human  rights  grounds  with
relation to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  even
though it was clearly the appellant's case that he was entitled  to  remain
on that basis.

3. Mr Gaffar invited me to find an error of law and remit the  case  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.  However, the appellant had not served any  additional
evidence and the evidence before me seemed brief  and  uncontroversial.   I
saw no point in a further hearing and I  directed  that  Mr  Gaffar  should
proceed to argue his case.  Mr Gaffar did not  call  any  evidence.   There
would have been no point in calling evidence.  The disclosed  evidence  was
uncontroversial.

4. However, it is right to say that the appellant  did  not  say  very  much
about his human rights claim.

5. I have considered  his  statement  dated  17  November  2016.   There  he
explains that he applied for further leave to remain on 8 August 2014 as  a
Tier 4 (General) Student under the points-based system and the  application
was refused on 7 July 2015.  The application was refused  because,  in  the
opinion of the Secretary of State, the appellant had supported  an  earlier
application with a  certificate  of  competence  in  the  English  language
obtained improperly.

6.  Although  this  is  not  reflected  in  the  appellant's  statement  the
application was also refused because  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a
necessary Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) in  support  of  the
application that was refused.  In ground 4 of the grounds of appeal to  the
First-tier Tribunal the appellant contends that

  "there were exceptional circumstances for which he was unable to  provide
  a CAS.  The Appellant applied to different  sponsors  but  sponsors  have
  refused to issue a CAS."

7. The appellant's representatives had made it  clear  as  long  ago  as  27
August 2014 in a letter from Apex Law Associates to the Secretary of  State
that, after receiving a curtailment notice curtailing his leave on 9 August
2014, the appellant had applied to different sponsors but they had  refused
to issue a CAS.

8. I have also seen the First-tier Tribunal's Record of Proceedings  and  it
is plain that little or nothing was said to the judge in evidence about his
Article 8 claim.

9. Putting these things together  and  doing  the  best  I  can  I  find  it
reasonably likely that the appellant was not able to obtain a  CAS  because
he could not produce a language certificate because  his  result  had  been
cancelled. However it has now been shown that the respondent was unable  to
show that the appellant was a cheat, as she alleged.

10. The difficulty I have is factoring this  into  an  Article  8  balancing
exercise.  I remind myself of the five tests  in  Razgar.   I  accept  that
there is a "private and family life" established  in  the  United  Kingdom,
although the only relevant factors are part of  "private  life".   Removing
the appellant will interfere but the interference is lawful.  I have to ask
myself if it is proportionate  given  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  the
appellant not being able to satisfy the Rules lay  in  his  existing  leave
being curtailed because of the understandable but mistaken belief  that  he
had obtained a test result fraudulently.  I do not know if  it  would  have
made any difference if the Secretary of State had acted in bad  faith,  but
that was not suggested and would be impossible to sustain here.

11. The appellant wishes to continue studying in the United Kingdom  and  he
says he has passed nine of his necessary fourteen examinations  to  achieve
his ACCA.  He has not explained why  he  cannot  carry  forward  his  exams
already passed  and  continue  his  studies  outside  the  United  Kingdom,
although it is perfectly clear that is not his wish.   In  short  he  would
like to remain in the United Kingdom and the reason he cannot remain in the
United Kingdom stems from his losing his leave.  This does not make refusal
to  renew  leave  disproportionate.   The  Rules  require  him  to  have  a
certificate of acceptance and he does not.  The  decision  to  curtail  the
leave has not been challenged.  The appellant has not explained what  would
be disproportionate in leaving the United Kingdom  and  then  returning  to
continue his studies having made a proper application.  I do not accept, in
the absence of specific evidence, that the costs involved in  returning  to
Bangladesh and from there back to the United Kingdom are inordinate.

12. I do not accept that the decision complained of  is  a  disproportionate
interference with his right to a private and  family  life  in  the  United
Kingdom.  Rather than being  disproportionate  it  seems  to  me  a  wholly
predictable consequence.  The appellant may have  been  unlucky,  but  that
does not give him a human right to remain outside the Rules.

Notice of Decision

13. In  short,  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  not
considering a ground of appeal, it is an error I can correct by considering
the facts and submissions before  me  and  for  the  reasons  given  above,
although I allow the appeal to  the  extent  that  something  needs  to  be
corrected, my final decision is to dismiss the appeal against the Secretary
of State's decision.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |







