
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26097/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th August 2017                   |On 5th October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS GYANI SHOVA GURUNG
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is  Mrs  Gurung  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.  The  appellant
    is a national of Nepal who entered the United Kingdom in September 2010
    and was granted subsequent extensions of  leave  until  21st  September
    2015.  On 30th September 2014 she made an application for further leave
    as a married spouse.  She had married on 4th August 2014.  On 3rd  July
    2015 her application was refused under Appendix FM, R-LTRP.1.1  of  the
    Immigration Rules and she brought an appeal  which  was  listed  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.

 2. The judge set out the following:

         "2.      The respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the  appellant's
             application are set out in a refusal letter dated 3 July 2015.
              The application was  considered  under  Paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1
             (d)(i) but was found by the Secretary of State not to  satisfy
             the requirement with regards to suitability.  Her reasons  for
             that position is given in Paragraph 12 of refusal letter which
             states that  during  an  administrative  review  process,  ETS
             confirmed that her test score was obtained through  deception.
             Because  the  validity  of  the  test  results  could  not  be
             authenticated, the scores from the test  taken  on  22  August
             2012  have  been  cancelled.   The  appellant  therefore   was
             considered a person who had sought  leave  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom by deception following information provided  to
             the Secretary of State by Education Testing Service (ETS) that
             an anomaly with her speaking test indicated the presence of  a
             proxy test taken.

         3. Notwithstanding the fact that the appellant has failed  to  meet
             the suitability criteria, it was accepted  that  she  met  the
             eligibility requirements in paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii)".

 3. The judge allowed the appeal, noting at paragraph 13 that:

         "13.     The suitability provision that is said to  apply  in  this
             case  is  to  be  found  in  S-LTR.2.2  which  provides   that
             application will be refused whether or not to the  applicant's
             knowledge:

                  'a)  False information, representations or documents  have
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application); or

                  b)   There has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                      in relation to the application'.

         14.      As I  observed  at  the  hearing,  the  language  of  sub-
             paragraph a) of Section L-LTR.2.2 is clear, in that, the false
             information  must  be   submitted   in   relation   to   'the'
             application, meaning the application under consideration.   In
             this  case,  according  to  paragraph   12,   the   allegation
             concerning the submission of a proxy-taken certificate relates
             to tests taken on 22 August 2012.  Remarkably, the  allegation
             does not specify  whether  the  certificate  of  the  test  in
             question was submitted to support the application.  The answer
             to that question must be in the negative because according  to
             page 43 of the appellant's application form,  the  certificate
             she  relied  on  is  from  IELTS.   The  respondent  has   not
             challenged that decision.   I  conclude  therefore,  that  the
             appellant has not submitted any evidence  in  connection  with
             her current application  that  is  caught  by  sub-section  S-
             LTR2.2(a).  In any event, the respondent has  not  provided  a
             shred  of  evidence  to  support  the  allegation   that   the
             appellant's English language test with ETS  involved  a  proxy
             test taken".

    The judge allowed the appeal finding that the  appellant's  application
    was made under the five year route and that she satisfied  all  of  the
    eligibility requirements.  It can be seen that the judge concluded that
    the suitability provision was said to apply to be found in S-LTR2.2.

 4. The Secretary of State made an application  for  permission  to  appeal
    on:

    Ground (i)

    The First-tier Tribunal assumed that the  respondent  had  refused  the
    appellant's application under the suitability  requirement  2.2  rather
    than 1.6 as the S-LTR2.2 referred to false information  being  provided
    in the current application and the judge stated that  no  evidence  had
    been submitted in  relation  to  the  current  spouse  application  and
    therefore  the  appellant  met  the  suitability   requirements.    The
    application for permission noted that "the refusal letter  states  that
    the appellant does not meet the suitability criteria but is  unspecific
    as to upon which grounds.  Reliance is placed on ground S-LTR1.6".

    The  respondent  maintained  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet   the
    suitability criteria and was required to consider whether it was on the
    five or ten year route.

    Ground (ii)

    In finding the appellant to be suitable the First-tier Tribunal wrongly
    stated that there was no evidence that the appellant used a  proxy  for
    their ETS English language testing.  It was submitted that at Annex  M1
    and M2 of the respondent's bundle the ETS source  data  clearly  showed
    that the appellant's test result had been deemed invalid.  In the light
    of this evidence the respondent concluded that the appellant  had  used
    deception.

 5. At the hearing Mr Bramble confirmed  that  this  was  an  appeal  which
    attracted the full range of old appeal rights as  the  application  was
    made on 30th September 2014 (prior to  6th  April  2015).   Mr  Bramble
    accepted that the decision did not stipulate  which  paragraph  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to suitability was indicated,  but  noted
    that the judge had referred to there being  no  shred  of  evidence  to
    support the allegation that the appellant's English language test  with
    ETS involved a proxy test taken  but  that  the  evidence  was  clearly
    provided as could be seen from M1 and M2 of  the  annexed  respondent's
    bundle before the judge.  That had stated that the  test  was  invalid.
    The judge had erred in focusing on S-LTR.2.2 and the onus  was  on  the
    judge to confirm that all the Immigration Rules had been complied with.

 6. In response Mr Richardson submitted that the entirety of  the  evidence
    was the look-up tool and it was worth emphasising that  there  were  no
    witness statements from the Secretary of State placed before the judge.
     I queried this on the basis that those  statements  were  now  in  the
    public domain but it was submitted that the evidence was so  incomplete
    as to be virtually  meaningless.   Mr  Richardson  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State was not absolved by relying on other reported cases.
     If I was not with him on that point,  whatever  the  errors  regarding
    suitability, there were proper  findings  of  fact.   I  read  out  the
    judge's reference on file which indicated that the  Presenting  Officer
    agreed with the view of the judge that S-LTR2.2 formed the basis of the
    refusal letter from the Secretary of State.   Mr  Richardson  indicated
    that  the  appellant  did  not  rely  on  the  previous  grant  in  her
    application because she had made  an  application  as  a  spouse  which
    should be considered under the five year route.   The  decision  letter
    was open to interpretation that  was  supplied  by  the  judge  and  if
    required, the solution was to send the matter back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for findings of fact to be made.  It is clear from  paragraphs
    12 and 13 that the judge had considered that S-LTR.2.2 applied.

Conclusions

 7. In conclusion, the applicant, when making a spousal  application  under
    the Immigration Rules must not fall foul of the suitability  provisions
    which I  set out as follows


         S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain on
    grounds of
         suitability if ...

         S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
    to the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not fall
         within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations,  or
    other
         reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.

         and

         S-LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of
    suitability if ....

         S-LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -
         (a) false  information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
    submitted in
         relation to the application (including false information  submitted
    to any person
            to obtain a document used in support of the application); or
         (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation
    to the
         application.

 8.  A decision taken under S-LTR 1.6 is a mandatory  refusal  and  if  the
    Secretary of State makes a decision under  this  provision  unless  the
    fact on which the decision is taken is challenged it is not a matter of
    discretion to be reviewed by the judge.  A decision taken  under  S-LTR
    2.2 is not a mandatory refusal and the exercise is a matter  which  the
    judge may consider.   Thus the importance of identifying  and  applying
    the correct provision is clear.

 9. In the refusal decision the Secretary of State  cited  the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to suitability S-LTR 1.1 to 3.1 and merely stated

           'You are specifically considered a person who has  sought  leave
           to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by   deception   following
           information provided to us by Educational Testing Service (ETS),
           that an anomaly with your speaking test indicated  the  presence
           of a proxy test taker.

           Therefore it is considered that you do not meet the  Suitability
           requirements for consideration of limited leave to remain in the
           United Kingdom as a partner under  E-LTRP  and  /or  the  parent
           under E-LTRPT and /or on  the  grounds  of  private  life  under
           Paragraph 276ADE'.

10.  That  the  Secretary  of  State  referred  in  the  decision  to   the
    documentation in relation to  a  previous  application  would  indicate
    that, in fact, the Secretary of State relied on S-LTR1.6 but nowhere in
    the decision is that specifically identified.  There is no reference to
    the particular suitability provision relied  on  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.   It is not clear on the basis of the decision letter
    as to which particular part of the suitability Rule, which is the basis
    for refusing the  application,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  placing
    reliance.

11. Although I do note that  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  the
    paragraph under consideration  was  S-LTR  2.2  and  which  applies  to
    documents being submitted in relation to "the application", it  is  not
    clear from the face of the refusal letter and nor is it clear from  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 13 that the suitability provision found to
    apply was indeed S-LTR.2.2.  The judge merely refers to the provision S-
    LTR.2.2 is 'said to apply in this case'.

12. It is clear that S-LTR2.2 (a)  applies to factors in  relation  to  the
    current application.  I explored the notion that "documents  have  been
    submitted in relation to the  application"  may  include  documents  in
    relation to previous leave but Mr Richardson was quite clear  that  the
    application was based on a spousal application and not in  relation  to
    her previous Tier 4 applications and I accept that.

13. I do, however, find that it is equally possible that "there has been  a
    failure to disclose material facts in  relation  to  the  application",
    that is S-LTR.2.2(b) may refer to a relevant fact and material fact  as
    to whether prior deception has taken place.  That was  a  question  not
    addressed by the judge because of his dismissal of the evidence.

14. In relation to ground (ii) of importance is that there was evidence  in
    relation to previous deception said  to  have  been  practised  by  the
    appellant regarding an application submitted on 20th September 2012  in
    which the appellant submitted a TOEIC certificate.  It was incumbent on
    the judge to address  that  documentation  even  if  S-LTR2.2  applied.
    There are widely reported decisions which  have  attached  the  witness
    statements of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to  the  deception
    practised regarding ETS and at section M of the respondent's bundle the
    ETS TOEIC test certificate was classified as invalid and "matched to T4
    application dated 20th September 2012.  Notes of 12th May 2013 on  that
    case confirm date of test and speaking score".

15. The refusal letter from the Secretary of State states:

         "ETS have confirmed that  your  test  score  was  obtained  through
         deception.  Because the validity of your test results could not  be
         authenticated your scores from the tests taken on 22nd August  2012
         have been cancelled.  You are specifically considered a person  who
         has sought leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  deception
         following information provided to us by Educational Testing Service
         (ETS), that an  anomaly  with  your  speaking  test  indicated  the
         presence of a proxy test taker".

    The refusal letter continues at paragraph 13 and I repeat:

         "Therefore, it is considered that you do not meet  the  suitability
         requirements for consideration of leave to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a partner  under  E-LTRP  and/or  parent  under  E-LTRPT
         and/or on the grounds of private life under paragraph 276ADE".

16. As pointed out by the Secretary of State the appellant  needs  to  meet
    the suitability requirements whether she is considered under  the  five
    or ten year route and I disagree with Mr Richardson that  the  evidence
    supplied by the Secretary of State cannot without more found a  finding
    of deception.  That said, the judge did not turn his  mind  or  address
    his mind to that because he proceeded on the basis that it was S-LTR2.2
    which applied and in the manner described above and only on  the  basis
    of the documentation presented with the  current  application.   In  my
    view even if  SLTR 2.2 did apply it was beholden of him to consider the
    documentation which was presented and whether the appellant had  failed
    to disclose material facts, that is whether she had practised deception
    or not previously.  It was not the case that there was not a  shred  of
    evidence regarding deception and the judge simply did not  address  the
    documentation in the respondent's bundle at M.

17. As such, I find that there is  an  error  of  law  and  set  aside  the
    decision.  I was  invited  to  remit  this  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but I also find that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    defective in that it does not specify which particular paragraph of the
    suitability requirements are relied upon and to that extent,  I  remake
    the decision and do allow the appeal to the extent that  it  should  be
    remitted to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.  Remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal will merely  present  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with the same dilemma.

18. I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain
    and allow the appeal but only to the extent that the matter is remitted
    to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.



Decision

The appeal of Ms Gurung  is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  matter  is
remitted to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 4th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
in the light of the complexities of the matter.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 4th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

