
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26606/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 18th January 2017                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     EOI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As the subject matter of this  appeal  involves  children  I  make  the
    anonymity direction which appears at the end of this decision.

Background

 2. In a renewed application, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins gave  permission
    to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Row who dismissed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent taken on 9th July 2015 to refuse
    leave to remain on the basis of private and family life under Article 8
    of the 1950 Human Rights Convention and  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  24th  September  1986.   She
    came to the United Kingdom on 2nd November 2009 as  a  visitor  with  a
    visa valid until 24th February 2010.  She then overstayed.

 3. Although Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins gave permission on  all  grounds,
    he noted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  appeared  to  be
    based on the premise that it was reasonable to expect a child who is  a
    British citizen to leave the United Kingdom.  He  thought  it  arguable
    that it was not reasonable for such a child to  leave  her  country  of
    nationality.

 4. The grounds contend that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    made in "full awareness" of family proceedings concerning the  daughter
    of the appellant's partner born on 15th  July  2012.   The  appellant's
    partner's child is claimed to have attained British nationality through
    her mother, a Lithuanian national who is a naturalised British citizen.
    The grounds also state that there is a final child  arrangements  order
    of "15th November", although the year of that order is  not  given  nor
    has a copy been provided.

 5. The grounds argue that the judge  did  not  make  findings  as  to  the
    respondent's discharge of her duty under Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 or give adequate consideration  to
    the best interests of the two  children  involved  in  the  appellant's
    partnership by following the  guidance  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.   The  judge  also  failed  to  consider  the
    consequences of the British  citizen  mother  of  the  partner's  child
    losing contact with her child.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Notice of the hearing had been sent  to  her  at  her  last
    recorded address and to representatives, 1st Call Immigration Services.
     The notice was sent on 9th November 2016 and had not been returned  in
    the post from either destination.  I was satisfied that it was  in  the
    interests  of  justice  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  applying   the
    provisions of paragraph 38 of the 2008 Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

 7. Mr Bates helpfully  handed  to  me  a  copy  of  his  typed  notes  for
    submission.  In these he points out that it was conceded at the  First-
    tier hearing that the Immigration Rules could not avail  the  appellant
    in the circumstances of the appeal.  The judge had therefore considered
    Article 8 issues outside the  Rules  applying,  amongst  other  things,
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).  The judge had correctly identified the issue as that arising
    under Section 117B(6)(b) as to whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the partner's child to leave the United Kingdom.  The child's father, a
    Nigerian national, was not settled in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    commented on the evidence concerning the existence of  a  Family  Court
    order in relation to the partner's child (paragraph 23) but no evidence
    was adduced to show that any court order existed and no adjournment was
    requested by representatives in order  to  adduce  such  evidence.   At
    paragraph 24 the judge  identified  three  potential  outcomes  to  the
    appeal before reaching conclusions and noting (paragraphs  37  and  39)
    the inadequacy in evidence and the absence of anything to suggest  that
    the partner's child's mother was  still  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    findings were therefore open to the judge on the evidence and  for  the
    cogent reasons given.  Further, no reliance was placed by the appellant
    at the hearing on the "cultural/racial identity" of the  child  as  the
    grounds suggest would have been appropriate.

Conclusions

 8. The appellant was represented by Counsel at the First-tier hearing.  As
    the First-tier judge comments,  there  was  an  absence  of  supporting
    evidence in relation to any Family Court arrangements for the partner's
    child, there being no more  than  assertions  about  the  existence  of
    unsupervised contact arrangements.  Representatives could have produced
    such evidence but chose  not  to.   The  judge  cannot,  therefore,  be
    criticised for basing a decision on the evidence adduced at the hearing
    and Counsel's unsupported submissions.

 9. Despite the absence of such  evidence  the  judge,  nevertheless,  gave
    comprehensive consideration to the  best  interests  of  both  children
    involved in the relationship, acknowledging that the appellant and  her
    partner had been living as a family with the two children since  August
    2013.  Of some significance was the information which the  judge  takes
    into consideration from paragraph 12 onwards of the decision,  relating
    to the history of the partner's relationship with  the  mother  of  his
    child and her serious physical abuse of that child which is  documented
    in a Core Assessment Report by Nottingham  City  Council.  That  report
    only suggested that there could be supervised  contact  between  mother
    and child.  The judge carefully evaluates the options  for  all  family
    members in paragraph 24 noting that neither the partner nor  his  child
    could be required to leave the United Kingdom.  The best  interests  of
    both children are considered against the background  of  all  available
    evidence, the judge reaching the conclusion, open to him, that the best
    interests of the children would be served by remaining in  the  current
    family unit whether the family was in the United Kingdom or in  Nigeria
    from where both appellant and partner originate.  The judge  emphasises
    that -

         "Few would seriously suggest that [the partner's child]  should  be
         removed from her present family and placed with [her mother].   She
         had to be separated from her to avoid significant harm."

     The judge then devotes five paragraphs to consideration of  whether  or
    not it would be reasonable to expect the partner's child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom applying the provisions of  Section  117B(6)(b)  of  the
    2002 Act  before  reaching  the  conclusion,  based  on  all  available
    evidence, that it would be reasonable.

10. Whilst there  is  no  specific  reference,  in  the  decision,  to  the
    respondent's obligations under Section 55, examination of all  relevant
    issues relating to the welfare of both  children  is  implicit  in  the
    careful analysis of the best interests of the children.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008):



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

