
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2016                  |On 8th December 2016                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                GURMUKH SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzan of City Law Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 25th July  1974.   The
    Appellant first entered the UK illegally on 8th February 1999.  He then
    applied for asylum but absconded.  His asylum application  was  refused
    in November 2001, but the Appellant was not heard of again until he was
    discovered working illegally in April 2011.  The Appellant applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of long residence on 6th July 2012.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    letter of 5th June 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish  (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Stoke on Trent on 11th June 2015.  The Judge  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons  given  in  his  Decision  of  that  date.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  21st  September
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal against the refusal of leave  to  remain
    on long residence grounds as he found that the Appellant had  not  been
    resident in the UK for the sufficient period of time as  a  consequence
    of the service upon him of removal directions in  January  2006.   That
    decision was not challenged in this appeal.  As regards Article 8 ECHR,
    the Judge found that the Appellant did not qualify for relief under the
    Immigration Rules, and outside of those Rules, the Judge  decided  that
    the decision of the Respondent was proportionate.   The  Judge  applied
    the format given in the decision of R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27,
    and  took  account  of  the  factors  referred  to  in   Section   117B
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. At the hearing,  Mr  Mohzan  referred  to  his  Skeleton  Argument  and
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  coming  to  these
    conclusions.  The Judge had misapplied the provisions of  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act when he wrote that he could attach no  significance  to
    the Appellant's private life in the UK.  Further,  the  Judge  had  not
    carried out the balancing exercise necessary for any proper  assessment
    of proportionality as required by Razgar, and he had failed to consider
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to her Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such errors of law.  The  Judge  had  considered  the
    Appellant's  private  life  rights  fully.   He  had  not  referred  to
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395, but that was not a material  error  because
    the  Appellant  would  fall  foul  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)   as   a
    consequence  of  his  history  of  absconding.   There  had   been   no
    misapplication of Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.  The Judge had  been
    correct to attach little weight to the Appellant's private  life  which
    had  been  established  when  the  Appellant  was  present  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.   The  Judge  had  been  right  therefore  to  consider  it
    insignificant.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  Although the Judge did not specifically consider the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395, he did, at paragraphs 27  and
    28 of the Decision deal with all aspects  of  the  Appellant's  private
    life.  He did so correctly in the context of the provisions of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  In the light of Section 117B(iv) he was right to
    attach little weight to  it,  or  as  he  put  it  to  give  it  little
    significance.  That being the case, the Judge carried out a  sufficient
    consideration  of  all  the  circumstances   for   an   assessment   of
    proportionality.  The only error of law of the Judge  was  to  consider
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules as he made no finding that
    there were compelling circumstances not already considered allowing him
    to do so, but in the context of this appeal that does not amount  to  a
    material error of law.

 7. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.


I do not set aside that decision.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.   I  do  not  make  an
order for anonymity.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

