
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/26533/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 August 2015                     |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                            zahara abdallah tocha
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Colin Yeo, Counsel, instructed by Wesley Gryk
Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Doyle) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 23 June 2014  to refuse to grant a residence permit under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Comoros born on  21  December  1976.  The
    appellant states that she  entered  the  UK  in  1999  and  married  Mr
    Youssouf  Hamadi,  a  citizen  of  France  on  29  November  2006.  The
    relationship began in 2004 and the parties had an Islamic  marriage  in
    France in December 2005. They have a child together, Adam, born  on  29
    June 2007. The parties separated around August 2008 and  their  divorce
    was finalised on 3 May 2011. Mr Hamadi left the UK at  some  point  and
    returned to France. Prior to that he was working cash in  hand  in  the
    UK.

 4. The appellant made an application for a residence  card  and  permanent
    residence under the Regulations on 2 November 2011.  The  Secretary  of
    State refused the application on 23 June 2014 on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had failed to show  that  Mr  Hamadi  was  exercising  treaty
    rights at the time of divorce. The appellant had failed  to  show  that
    she meets the requirements of regulation 10(5).

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Richmond on 19 November 2014. She was represented by Mr Yeo.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had lived  in  the  UK
    for a long time and that her son is a French  national.  The  appellant
    had been a victim of domestic violence. The appellant was divorced from
    a French national. The only reason why the appeal could not succeed was
    because Mr Hamadi was not a qualified person in terms of  regulation  6
    of the 2006 Regulations.

 6. The judge found that Mr Hamadi worked cash in hand  but  chose  not  to
    declare his income to HMRC or to pay income tax or  national  insurance
    contributions. He was not a qualified  person,  having  regard  to  the
    guidance in Begum (EEA - worker - jobseeker) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275
    (IAC).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. The  judge  failed
    to address the Zambrano ground of appeal which was clearly  pleaded  in
    the grounds and was central to the appeal. The facts  were  uncontested
    and the appeal fell to be allowed. The judge also erred  in  concluding
    that Mr Hamadi was not a qualified person. The appellant's unchallenged
    evidence was that Mr Hamadi worked cash in hand and the judge needed to
    give reasons  for  finding  otherwise.  Considerable  evidence  of  the
    appellant's finances was included in the evidence and the  judge  erred
    in finding that he had insufficient evidence regarding Adam's financial
    position. The judge further erred in law in finding that there  was  no
    breach of Article 8 because there was no imminent removal.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 31
    May 2015. The grounds of appeal were arguable.

 9. In a Rule 24 response dated 23 June 2014, the respondent indicated that
    the appeal was not opposed and invited the Upper Tribunal to  determine
    the appeal with a fresh oral hearing.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Mr Yeo submitted that the appeal should have been allowed  on  domestic
    violence grounds  (regulation  10(5)(d)(iv)  of  the  Regulations),  on
    Baumbast grounds because Adam is the child of  an  EU  citizen  who  is
    enrolled at an education  establishment  for  the  purpose  of  studies
    (regulations 10(3), 10(4) and 15A  of  the  Regulations),  on  Zambrano
    grounds because there is no other family member in the UK to  care  for
    Adam (regulation 15A of the Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

12. Mr Yeo further submitted  that  the  appellant  did  have  a  right  of
    residence as the spouse of a qualified person. At some point, Mr Hamadi
    did cease to be a qualified person but the appellant cannot say exactly
    when that was because she  was  a  victim  of  domestic  violence.  The
    domestic  violence  provision  cannot  reasonably  be  interpreted   as
    requiring that the EEA national spouse remains a  qualified  person  at
    the precise moment of formal legal termination of the marriage  because
    that would rob the protection of any real meaning.  The  appellant  was
    previously granted a residence card on the basis that Mr Hamadi  was  a
    qualified person. It was not open to the judge to find that  Mr  Hamadi
    was never a qualified person.

13. Mr Yeo relied upon paragraphs 72-77 of Kuldip Singh. The fact that some
    part of the  resources  available  to  the  EEA  citizen  derives  from
    resources obtained by a spouse who is a third-country national does not
    preclude the condition regarding sufficiency of  resources  from  being
    regarded as satisfied.

14. Ms Savage sought to withdraw the concession in the Rule 24 response and
    submitted that the error of law was not material. The appellant  cannot
    succeed on Zambrano grounds because there is no evidence that Adam will
    be deprived of his rights as an EU citizen - he can reside  in  France.
    It was properly open to the judge to find that  Mr  Hamadi  was  not  a
    worker as at the time of the marriage and divorce.  The  appellant  has
    not established any retained right  of  residence.  Illegal  employment
    cannot create self-sufficiency. The appellant  has  no  right  to  work
    independently of the child and it is circular to say that the appellant
    can derive a right to work from the child in order to  give  the  child
    self-sufficiency. There is no evidence that Mr Hamadi  was  working  in
    the UK when Adam was in the UK.

15. Both sides made submissions and cited authority in relation to  Article
    8. That matter has  since  been  resolved  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Amirteymour & others (EEA appeals - human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466. No
    removal directions have been issued in this case nor has a  "one  stop"
    notice been served. This appeal cannot succeed on human rights grounds.

16. However, the judge has failed to properly address and make findings  in
    relation to the remaining issues set out at paragraph 11 above and that
    is a material error of law. The issues arising in this appeal could not
    simply be resolved by finding  that  Mr  Hamadi  was  not  a  qualified
    person. In any event, in making that finding the judge failed  to  have
    regard to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  previously  granted  a
    residence card under the Regulations on the basis that Mr Hamadi was  a
    qualified person. That is a further material error of law. The disputed
    issues can only be resolved through hearing evidence  and  findings  of
    fact that cover all of the issues raised by both parties.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the 2006 Regulations involved the making of  an  error  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

18. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 30 August 2015


Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
