
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26206/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd May 2014                                |On 01 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WILSON



                                   Between

                   SAMEERA HESHAN JAYALATH GODE WITHARANGE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jaisiri
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Youngerwood who, whilst rejecting the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules, allowed the appeal under human rights Article  8
    on  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  private  life.   The   general
    background to this matter is most unfortunate there is no dispute  that
    the Appellant prior to his commencement of studies at the University of
    Sunderland had a very severe road accident outside the  United  Kingdom
    as a result of  which  he  could  not  commence  his  studies  at  this
    specified time.  Leave was given in the 1st Tier to the  Respondent  to
    appeal the decision. I  have  continued  the  usage  of  Appellant  and
    Respondent as in the 1st Tier but  of  course  it  is  the  Respondents
    appeal. After hearing submissions from both  advocates  I  reached  the
    following decision which I announced in court to the parties.

 2. The evidence before the judge as to that is set out in paragraph 5, the
    Appellant had gone to Sri Lanka on 22nd April 2013 to visit his  father
    who had been unwell but he then  himself  suffered  an  accident  which
    prevented him coming back to the UK at the scheduled time and prevented
    him attending his first day of induction at Sunderland University.  The
    Judge goes on to say that the Appellant informed Sunderland  University
    and that they told him that they could join the next semester.  However
    decided not to wait the Appellant came to the UK on 18th May 2013.   By
    that time of course Sunderland University had contacted the UKBA he had
    not enrolled and hence the curtailment happened.

 3. The judge in his analysis at paragraph 19 after effectively summarising
    the above says

         "In  these circumstances I take  the  view  that  cumulatively  his
         rights under Article 8 are engaged. I therefore proceed to consider
         in accordance with the well-known  principles of Razgar whether the
         decision is in the event necessary for the purposes of  immigration
         control and is lawful and proportionate to that aim."

 4. No other reasons are set out and of course no one  is  attributing  any
    moral or factual blame to the  Appellant,  it  is  just  one  of  those
    difficulties that has occurred. Essentially the  argument  between  the
    Appellant and Sunderland University was frustrated by  reasons  outside
    the control of either party to the contract.

 5. The Respondent has filed a Notice of Appeal which  makes  reference  to
    Gulshan and other matters.  Whilst that in itself  possibly  would  not
    give rise to an error  of  law,  I  am  satisfied  the  judge  has  not
    adequately set out what the public  interest  is,  what  issues  he  is
    balancing out and what is necessary and proportionate in  a  democratic
    society.

 6. The only way really of reading this determination is the  judge,  quite
    understandably, one has natural sympathy for the Appellant,  is  simply
    giving the Appellant another chance.  But what is the chance?  What  is
    difficult here is there is a system  of  immigration  control  and  the
    Appellant cannot meet it.  He should have simply stayed  in  Sri  Lanka
    and entered into correspondence with Sunderland University. They  would
    no doubt have  lodged  him  another  CAS.  He  would  have  lodged  the
    application with the Respondent who would have granted  permission  for
    the next semester which would have been  September, not May.   That  is
    simply the normal system of immigration control and the Judge  has  not
    set out what is disproportionate about that.

 7. I am satisfied the judge has not gone into  those  arguments.   Overall
    bearing in mind that he has not then reflected back on the  purpose  of
    the Immigration Rules, the judge  has  not  set  out  any  analysis  as
    required by Gulshan or Nagre that I am persuaded that the  Respondent's
    request is justified. There is a material error of  law.   I  therefore
    invited submissions from both advocates as to the merits given the lack
    of any factual issues.  After receiving those submissions  I  made  the
    following decision.

 8. I am not going to allow the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision. The decision is  really  quite  a  simple  one.   The
    Respondent made an immigration decision back in June 2013, noting  that
    the appellant had not been able to commence his  course  and  therefore
    stating that his studies as a Tier 4 Student would  be  terminated  and
    that he should leave the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  challenged
    that. As was accepted before the First-tier  Judge  and  has  not  been
    reargued before me, he cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

 9. What has happened here quite simply is that  as  I  said  earlier,  the
    agreement between the Appellant and the University  of  Sunderland  was
    frustrated due to events occurring in Sri Lanka.   Therefore you  could
    not start his course as required.  The Home Office essentially are only
    reacting to events that have occurred. I am not persuaded that  despite
    his good history in the United Kingdom and  the  Appellant  is  clearly
    progressing well in his studies, that that in  itself  creates  such  a
    bundle  of  rights  and  expectations  that  this  should  require  the
    Respondent to grant him a period of leave in order for the appellant to
    somehow renegotiate your position.

10. I am satisfied that there is nothing to prevent the Appellant lodging a
    fresh application from outside the United Kingdom.  I note that if  you
    do not voluntarily return clearly there could  be  prejudicial  matters
    that would then be taken into  account  in  relation  to  your  further
    applications to come back to the United Kingdom.

11. I am satisfied however, and I would record it  in  this  determination,
    that given the unfortunate accident and the commencement of dates as to
    your return and notification to UKBA that it was  not unreasonable  for
    you to come back to the United Kingdom to challenge the  decision.   No
    adverse immigration point should be taken  in  any  future  application
    because of that.

12. But that aside I cannot see  that  it  is  against  the  normal  public
    interest to require you to go back to Sri  Lanka  and  make  a  further
    application.  There is an  interruption is to your education. That  has
    already occurred due to the accident in Sri Lanka.  It  is  unfortunate
    that it has occurred to the length that it  has.   Arguably  you  could
    have succeeded with a fresh application to have  started  last  autumn.
    That however is well in the past  now.   I  am  determining  it  as  of
    today's date  and  of  today's  date  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  a
    proportionate decision bearing in mind that you came here as a student.
    You are progressing well as a student but your status  in  the  UK  was
    always that of a student, that the decision of  the  Respondent  was  a
    reasonable one.

13. I therefore dismiss your appeal.

Summary of decisions;

The 1st Tier Judge having made an error of law on a full review  the  appeal
is dismissed.

No anonymity order.

No costs order is appropriate.



Andrew Wilson                                   30th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson




