
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26755/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 6th October 2015                  |On 13th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            KENNETH NDIVE MONONO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Bradshaw (the judge) promulgated on 8th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born 1st April 1981 who, on 15th
    May 2014, applied for a residence card on the basis that he  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national, Jacqueline Enoru, a  Belgian
    citizen.

 3. The application was refused on  18th  June  2014,  and  the  Respondent
    issued a Notice of Immigration Decision of that  date  indicating  that
    the application had been refused with reference to regulation  8(5)  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    regulations).  In addition, the Respondent issued a reasons for refusal
    letter dated 18th June 2014, explaining why it was  not  accepted  that
    the Appellant was in a durable relationship with his partner, to whom I
    shall refer as the Sponsor.

 4. The Appellant appealed, and requested that his appeal be decided on the
    papers without an oral hearing.

 5. The appeal was considered by the judge on the papers as requested.  The
    judge considered an application made by the Appellant on  17th  October
    2013, which was an application for a residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of his brother, Jushua Monono, although the  judge  noted
    that the Grounds of Appeal submitted by the Appellant made reference to
    a durable relationship.  The judge noted that there appeared to  be  an
    inconsistency between the Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  basis  of  the
    application, but found that  the  issues  raised  in  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal  letter  dated  6th  February  2014  had  not  been
    addressed, and therefore the Appellant had not proved he  was  entitled
    to a residence card  either  as  the  extended  family  member  of  his
    brother, or because he was in a durable relationship with the  Sponsor.
    The appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary, it was contended that the  judge  had  erred  by  making  a
    material misdirection of law,  and/or  making  perverse  or  irrational
    findings, and/or making a mistake as to a material fact.

 7. It was explained that  the  Appellant  had  previously  applied  for  a
    residence card as an extended  family  member  of  his  brother,  which
    application had been refused, and the Appellant entered an  appeal  but
    withdrew this.  He thereafter made a further application on  the  basis
    of his durable relationship with the Sponsor.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had  referred  to  documents  contained
    within the Respondent's bundle, but  these  documents  related  to  the
    previous application for a residence card, and had no bearing upon  the
    appeal against the decision that the Appellant was  not  in  a  durable
    relationship with the Sponsor.  It was contended that the judge had not
    considered the Appellant's bundle of documents which had been  sent  to
    the Tribunal on 7th August 2014, and which contained evidence about his
    relationship with the Sponsor.

 9. It was submitted that the judge had dismissed the appeal on  the  basis
    of the Appellant's  relationship  with  his  brother  rather  than  his
    partner.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on 26th November  2014  by  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy.

11. Thereafter the Respondent lodged a response dated  12th  December  2014
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained
    no material error of law.  It was however accepted that the  author  of
    the response  did  not  have  access  to  the  Respondent's  file,  and
    therefore was only making submissions based upon the  contents  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

12. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. The Appellant's representatives had written to the Tribunal in  advance
    of the hearing advising that they would not be attending but  that  the
    Appellant would be attending in person.

14. The Appellant attended the hearing.  He confirmed  that  there  was  no
    need for an interpreter.  The Appellant  confirmed  that  he  would  be
    representing himself, and did not seek an adjournment to  obtain  legal
    representation.

15. I explained to the Appellant the procedure that would be  adopted,  and
    that I had to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had made a mistake
    of law such that the decision had  to  be  set  aside.   The  Appellant
    confirmed that he had seen the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal,
    and the grant of permission.  I  made  the  Appellant  aware  that  the
    Respondent had issued a written response opposing the application.

16. Mr Smart then confirmed that he would not be relying upon the  rule  24
    response, having noted that the author of the grounds did not have  the
    file when that response was prepared.

17. Mr Smart accepted that the judge had considered the wrong  reasons  for
    refusal letter, and had made no reference  to  the  evidence  contained
    within the Appellant's bundle.  It was conceded that this  amounted  to
    an error of law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. Mr Smart was correct to concede that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
    in law.  The judge was not assisted by the fact that  the  Respondent's
    bundle before him, did not include the reasons for refusal letter dated
    18th June 2014.  There were two reasons for  refusal  letters  in  that
    bundle, one dated 23rd April 2013, and the  other  dated  6th  February
    2014, both of which related to applications made by the Appellant for a
    residence card on the basis  of  his  relationship  with  his  brother.
    There was however reference to a durable relationship, in the Notice of
    Immigration Decision, which was before the judge, and in the Grounds of
    Appeal.

19. I am satisfied that the Appellant's bundle had  been  received  by  the
    Tribunal prior to the judge considering the appeal  on  11th  September
    2014.  The Appellant's bundle was received at the Hatton Cross  Hearing
    Centre on 11th August 2014.

20. It may be that the bundle was not linked to  the  file,  as  the  judge
    makes no reference to the bundle  of  evidence,  and  this  bundle  did
    contain evidence in relation to a durable relationship,  and  contained
    the reasons for refusal letter dated 18th June 2014 which  was  missing
    from the Respondent's bundle.

21. If the Appellant's bundle had not been linked to the file, I find  that
    this was a defect or impropriety of a procedural nature  which  amounts
    to a material error of law.  In making this finding I have  taken  into
    account MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).

22. In conclusion, I find that the  judge  erred  by  not  considering  the
    appeal which was before him, which was the appeal against the  decision
    dated 18th June 2014, to refuse a residence card as it was not accepted
    that the Appellant was in a durable relationship with the Sponsor.  The
    judge has erred by considering an earlier application that  related  to
    the Appellant's brother which should not have been  before  him.   This
    has resulted in unfairness to the Appellant.

23. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   There
    are no preserved findings.

24. I decided that it was appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal having taken into  account  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement 7.2 which states;

         '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'

25. In my view the requirements of paragraph  7.2  are  met,  in  that  the
    Appellant's case has not been considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    and judicial fact-finding is required.

26. Unless the Appellant applies for an oral hearing and pays the requisite
    fee, the appeal will be  determined  on  the  papers  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Judge Bradshaw.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

There was no order for anonymity made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
has been no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal,  and  no  anonymity
order is made.


Signed   Date 6th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The fee award will need  to  be
considered again when the First-tier Tribunal has heard this appeal.


Signed   Date 6th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



DIRECTIONS

The  Appellant's  bundle  of  documents  has  not  been  received   by   the
Respondent.  The Appellant is directed to  serve  any  documentation  to  be
relied upon on the Respondent, no later than 28  days  after  this  decision
has been sent out.

If either party seeks to rely upon any documentary  evidence  that  has  not
already been served, such evidence must be served upon the Tribunal and  the
other party no later than 28 days from the date that  these  directions  are
sent out.


Signed   Date 6th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

