
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/26509/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 June 2015                      |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                              MR SIKANDER ZAMAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Khalaf, solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr D Clerk, Senior Office presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
         The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25 September  1988.
         However, for the sake of convenience I shall continue refer  to  Mr
         Zaman as "the  appellant"  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
         respondent" which are the designations they had at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      2. The appellant's appeal was against the decision of the  respondent,
         refusing to issue him with a residence card as a dependant extended
         family member of an EEA national pursuant to regulation  8  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (the  '2006
         Regulations').

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio allowed the appellant's appeal in  a
         determination promulgated on 12 December 2014. Permission to appeal
         was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 29  January  2015,
         stating that it is arguable that there is a material error  of  law
         in the determination.

      4. The appeal came before me on 17 March 2015 and I found in my  error
         of law decision dated 20 March 2015 that there was an error of  law
         in the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio.  I  found
         that the Judge made a material error of law in her determination in
         her assessment as to whether the appellant  was  dependent  on  his
         uncle while living in Pakistan as well as  his  dependency  on  his
         uncle in the United Kingdom or that  his  uncle  was  the  head  of
         household in which the appellant lived.

      5. On 17 March 2015, the appellant's then representative,  Miss  Ahmed
         agreed that the appeal be heard in the Upper Tribunal.  However  at
         the  hearing  before  me  on  11   June   2015,   the   appellant's
         representative, Ms Khalaf made an application for the appeal to  be
         sent back to the First-tier Tribunal.

      6. Mr Clerk submitted that there was no reason why  I  should  not  be
         able to hear the appeal in the Upper Tribunal. He said that in  the
         event I did send it back to the First-tier Tribunal,  the  evidence
         before the first-tier Tribunal Judge Aido can be referred to at the
         re-hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Khalaf accepted  that
         evidence recorded in the determination of first-tier Tribunal Judge
         Aido can be referred to because there are no discrepancies  in  the
         evidence anyway.

      7. The other reason why the appeal could not  continue  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal was because there was no appellant's bundle available. The
         appellant's bundle in the possession of  Miss  Khalaf  had  remarks
         written on it and therefore  could  not  be  utilised.  The  appeal
         therefore could not proceed on the day in any event.

      8. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal be placed before any
         First-tier Tribunal Judge with the exception of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Aido.

      9. I further direct that the evidence produced before Judge  Aido  and
         recorded in her determination can be referred  to  at  the  hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal for all purposes.

                                                 This  11th day of June 2015
Signed by

..........................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
