
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26992/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2016                            |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HAMZA Hamayun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Hamza Hamayun, was born on  19  August  1989
    and is a citizen of Pakistan.  He first entered the United Kingdom as a
    student in 2011.  The appellant claims that he is the first  cousin  of
    one Wasim Abdul Qudduz, a citizen of the Netherlands.  He sought an EEA
    residence card as a non-EEA national extended  family  member  and  his
    application was refused by a decision of the respondent dated  17  July
    2015.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) in a decision promulgated
    on 8 March 2016, allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. A fundamental issue is now of relevance in this appeal as a  result  of
    developments in the jurisprudence.  In Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  there  was  no
    statutory right of appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State not to grant a residence card to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member (EFM).  I raised this matter  with  Mr  Hussain,
    who appeared for the appellant, before the Upper Tribunal.   He  sought
    to persuade me that the Upper Tribunal in  Sala  had  failed  fully  to
    address the provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC  (29  April  2004).   He
    referred in particular to Articles 6 and 7 of the  Directive  in  which
    reference is made to "family members in possession of a valid  passport
    who are not nationals of a member state  ..."  He  submitted  that  the
    rights of the appellant in the  present  case  were  derived  from  the
    Directive not from the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 3. I disagree with those submissions.  The  distinction  made  in  EU  law
    between "family members" and "extended family members" is subject to  a
    discussion by the UT in Sala at [21]-[26]:

         21.               We  have  set  out  the  relevant  domestic  law,
         contained in  the  EEA  Regulations  2006,  rather  than  Directive
         2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive") which is primarily  concerned
         with the free movement and residence of  EEA  nationals  and  their
         "family members" as defined in Art 2.2 of that Directive. So far as
         "other family members" including those in a "durable relationship",
         are concerned Art 3.2 of the Citizens  Directive  provides  that  a
         Member State should "in accordance with its  national  legislation,
         facilitate entry and residence" of "the partner with whom the Union
         Citizen has a durable relationship, duly  attested".  Further,  the
         Citizens Directive (mirrored in reg 17(5) of  the  EEA  Regulations
         2006) provides in Art 3.2 that:

         "The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people."

         22.               It is not necessary to make further reference  to
         the detailed provisions of the  Citizens  Directive.  It  has  been
         accepted by the CJEU that the rights of free movement and residence
         conferred upon EEA nationals and their  "family  members"  are  not
         directly replicated in the case of EFMs (see,  SSHD  v  Rahman  and
         others  (Case  C-83/11)  [2013]  Imm  AR  73).  A  Member   State's
         obligations are limited, only requiring it  to  "facilitate"  entry
         and residence in accordance with national legislation founded on an
         extensive examination of an individual's personal circumstances.

         23.               It was not suggested before us that our  domestic
         law in the EEA Regulations 2006 is, in any way,  inconsistent  with
         the provisions of the Citizens Directive. Further, if no  right  of
         appeal exists, then judicial review will  lie  as  the  appropriate
         remedy. In Rahman the court made clear  that  a  full  merits-based
         appeal was not required by the Citizens Directive; only a  judicial
         review to ensure that the decision-maker has "remained  within  the
         limits of the discretion set by [the] Directive"(see [25]).

         24.                Once  a  residence  card  is  issued,  the   EEA
         Regulations 2006  place  EFMs  in  the  same  position  as  "family
         members" ("treated as family members") provided that they  continue
         to satisfy the conditions in reg 8 which resulted  in  their  being
         EFMs and  their  documentation  remains  valid  and  has  not  been
         revoked. Regulation 7 lists those who are to be treated  as  family
         members for the purposes of the Regulations, including in reg 7(3):

         "(3) ... a person who is an extended family  member  and  has  been
         issued with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a
         residence card shall be treated as a family member of the  relevant
         EEA national for as long as he continues to satisfy the  conditions
         in regulation 8(2), (3),  (4)  or  (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA
         national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased  to  be
         valid or been revoked."

         25.                Thereafter,  the  EFM  has  the  same  right  to
         admission and residence under the EEA Regulations 2006  as  does  a
         "family member".

         26.               It will be clear from this analysis that for EFMs
         recognition  of  their  rights  of  admission  and   residence   is
         conditional upon the  relevant  document,  whether  family  permit,
         registration certificate or residence card, being issued under  the
         EEA Regulations 2006 (see, Aladeselu and others v SSHD [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 144 at [52]). This, of course, contrasts with the  position  of
         "family members" who derive their rights of admission and residence
         directly from EU law  and  the  relevant  documentation  is  merely
         evidence of that right. This is important. The EEA Regulations 2006
         see the rights of family members and EFMs in  different  ways.  The
         rights of family members derive from the Citizens Directive,  those
         of EFMs from national law apart from the procedural right  to  have
         their applications determined following  extensive  examination  of
         their  personal   circumstances.   Family   members   have   rights
         independent of being issued with a residence card. EFMs' rights, if
         any,  derive  from  the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of   State's
         discretion to issue (and allow them  to  keep)  a  residence  card;
         their substantive rights arise only after the card is issued

 4. As the Tribunal observed, member states' obligations as regard extended
    family members are limited to  "facilitating  entry  and  residence  in
    accordance  with  national  legislation   founded   on   an   extensive
    examination of an individual's personal  circumstances."   The  alleged
    different treatment  of  EFMs  in  United  Kingdom  law  had  not  been
    challenged as being inconsistent with the provisions of  the  Directive
    as the Upper Tribunal in Sala  as  noted  at  [23].   Further,  as  the
    Tribunal observed,  an  EFM's  recognition  of  his  or  her  right  of
    admission and residence in the United Kingdom depends upon  a  relevant
    document whether it be a family  permit,  registration  certificate  or
    residence card.  Those documents are issued under the 2006 Regulations.
     Family members, by contrast, enjoy rights independent of being  issued
    with a residence card; an EFM's rights derive solely from the  exercise
    of the Secretary of State's discretion  to  issue  such  a  card.   The
    substantive rights (bringing EFMs  into  line  with  "family  members")
    arise only after the card itself has been issued.

 5. Mr Hussain did not engage with those propositions of law as set out  in
    Sala.  However, I consider that they are clear  enough  to  defeat  his
    submission to the effect that the present appellant has an EFM  may  in
    some way enjoy a right  of  appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations.   Mr
    Hussain did not suggest that the decision of the Tribunal in  Sala  had
    been wrongly decided; it follows that, if the appellant as an EFM  does
    not have any other discrete avenue of appeal of a  kind  which  escaped
    the attention of the Tribunal in Sala, then it  must  follow,  for  the
    reasons given in that appeal, that he has no right of appeal under  the
    2006 Regulations to the First-tier Tribunal.  That I consider to be the
    correct position.  Given that Mr Hussain has not challenged  the  ratio
    of Sala as regards the absence of a right of appeal, I do  not  propose
    to quote further from that authority.  It follows that the appellant in
    the instant appeal had no right  of  appeal  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated
on 8 March 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  hear  the
appeal.  I substitute a decision that there is no valid  appeal  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

