
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 08 January 2018                        |On 13 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             Mr Sazzadur Rahman
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, instructed by E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant and proceedings

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1982 who appealed  the
    respondent's decision of 14 July 2015 refusing him leave to  remain  in
    the UK as an entrepreneur because he had relied on  a  false  Cambridge
    College of learning certificate in an earlier application and  a  false
    Janata bank statement in this application. The  appellant  applied  via
    his representatives the day before for the matter to be disposed of  on
    the papers on the basis that he had been served with  the  respondent's
    bundle. That application was not dealt with before the hearing. Neither
    the appellant nor the representative appeared.  Judge  Onoufriou  noted
    that the respondent's bundle had been  served  on  05  January  to  the
    correct e-mail  address,  he  heard  the  appeal,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 January 2017 dismissed it.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Robertson), granted on 16th August 2017. In summary the  grounds
    are:

      a) Respondent's bundle: The judge was in error to  take  into  account
         the respondent's bundle when the  appellant's  representatives  had
         made it clear that they had not been served with  the  respondent's
         bundle and were asking  for  the  judge  to  determine  the  appeal
         without oral representations from the respondent's  representative,
         and on the basis of the appellant's bundle only.

      b) Forged Janata bank statement: The judge failed to apply the correct
         standard of proof in  the  context  of  the  allegation  of  forged
         documents. The judge should not have placed any reliance on the DVR
         because the appellant had not received the bundle, and so  had  not
         had the opportunity of providing his explanation. The assertion  in
         the refusal letter is that the respondent contacted  the  bank  who
         informed them that the account had  been  closed.  Given  that  the
         application was made in March 2012 evidence that  the  account  had
         subsequently  been  closed  is  insufficient   to   establish   the
         submission of a false document. The DVR did not meet  the  standard
         in respect of the allegation of forged bank statements.

      c) In respect of  the  false  postgraduate  diploma  certificate  from
         Cambridge  College  of  Learning  the  appellant  has  denied   any
         involvement in the fraud and asserts that any wrongdoing was at the
         college.

      d) The judge failed to adequately reason the article 8 dismissal.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Karim  concentrated  on  the  challenge  of
    procedural fairness arguing that it was simply unfair for the judge  to
    proceed given that the appellant nor his representative had been served
    with  the  respondent's  bundle.   It   transpired   from   the   email
    correspondence provided by the respondent to the judge that the  bundle
    had  initially  been  wrongly  served  on  the   appellant's   previous
    representative. The email correspondence also showed  that  the  bundle
    had subsequently been  correctly  served  on  the  appellant's  current
    representatives on 5 January 2017 and so in good time in the context of
    the standard tribunal directions that such bundles should be served  by
    the parties no later than 5 working days  prior  to  the  hearing.  The
    hearing in this case had been set down for 24 January  2017.  Mr  Karim
    categoric response was that email service was not permitted  under  the
    procedural rules. I'm grateful to Mr Wilding  for  taking  him  to  the
    relevant procedure rule authorising such  service.  Mr  Karim  conceded
    that the Home Office has served the correct email address  as  revealed
    on the solicitor's correspondence. The point fell away.

 4. Mr Karim complained that the judge should have looked beyond the  issue
    of service because in requesting a  paper  disposal  of  the  case  the
    solicitors had reiterated that they had not received the  bundle  which
    would indicate, as the letter was written after 5  January  2017,  that
    something had gone awry. The judge could have investigated further  and
    entertained the possibility  that  the  email  had  not  in  fact  been
    received, as emails did sometimes go astray, or the  judge  could  have
    considered whether it had been mislaid by the firm. I find there is  no
    merit in this gloss. The judge was entitled to find on the evidence  of
    the respondent's email that the bundle had been served. The speculative
    position put forward  by  Mr  Karim  reveals  no  error  of  procedural
    unfairness in the judge's approach.  The  appellant's  solicitors  were
    advised by the tribunal in correspondence dated 30 November  2016  that
    there was a respondent's bundle. Knowing this bundle was  in  existence
    any competent immigration representative would not  have  made  a  late
    application the day before the matter was listed for  an  oral  hearing
    that had been  notified  many  weeks  previously.  The  application  to
    proceed on papers, seeking  to  deprive  the  respondent  of  the  oral
    submissions of her representative could have little prospect of success
    at that late stage, and nothing short of fanciful to  submit  that  the
    judge  should  have  proceeded  without  considering  the  respondent's
    bundle. There was no basis upon which the representatives could  expect
    a simple assertion of lack of service would be  determinative.  It  was
    apparent  the  bundle  would  be  available  at   the   hearing.    The
    representatives could have applied for an adjournment  had  they  found
    anything in the bundle which warranted more preparation time.  For  the
    appellant and his representative to fail  to  appear  was  at  best  an
    incompetent misjudgement. For reasons only known to  himself  Mr  Karim
    persisted before me in refusing to view the  bundle.  In  circumstances
    where the directions made clear that in the event that of finding there
    was an error it was anticipated that I would be in a position to remake
    the decision,  and  with  the  appellant  being  present,  so  that  an
    application to provide oral evidence could  have  been  forthcoming,  I
    could make no sense of his stance.

 5. Any difficulty with the judge's formulation of the standard and  burden
    of  proof  in  respect  of  the  respondent's  reliance  on  fraudulent
    documentation cannot succeed in the context  of  the  jurisprudence  on
    Cambridge College of Law (NA and others (Cambridge College of Learning)
    Pakistan  [2009]  UKAIT  00031  which  established  that   a   business
    management certificate from that college is false. As such  the  burden
    on the respondent was plainly met when the appellant failed to  provide
    any credible explanation. That was sufficient to ensure  the  appellant
    lost his appeal. However, in this case the evidence did not stop there,
    there was a 2nd  allegation  of  dishonesty  in  respect  of  the  bank
    documentation submitted in support of the application made.  The  judge
    was entitled to conclude on the basis of the DVR  that  respondent  had
    provided evidence specific to the  documentation  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant sufficient to show substantial grounds for finding  that  the
    document was false, and it was  for  the  appellant  to  bring  forward
    evidence to support his contention that the document was not false.  He
    singularly failed to do so.

 6. The grounds also asserted that the judge should  have  dealt  with  the
    appellant's article 8 claim, however the bare assertion of the  witness
    statement  that  having  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  12  years
    "following the law of the land", asserting a loss  of  connection  with
    Bangladesh so that the appellant has no option of being able to  return
    there, and complaining that he had invested a lot of money in time  for
    his studies and business here, is an entirely unmeritorious  article  8
    claim which requires no additional reasoning beyond  that  provided  by
    the FtT set out it [19] and [20] explaining that those  assertions  are
    insufficient to show that there are any significant  obstacles  to  him
    and his wife returning to Bangladesh or any  exceptional  circumstances
    otherwise warranting leave to remain under article 8 of ECHR.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  on  all
    grounds reveals no material error of law and stands.









Signed                                  Date 03 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

