

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26592/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |                     Decision and       |
|                                       |Reasons Promulgated                     |
|On 6 January 2016                      |                     On 12 January 2016 |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               ASFANDYAR KHAN
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
permission, against a decision of the  First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on
2 October 2014, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of
3 June 2014 refusing to grant him further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier 4
(General) Student Migrant and deciding to remove him from the UK by  way  of
directions under section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality
Act 2006.

2.    The appellant, who was  born  on  22 July 1986,  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.  He entered the UK on  22 January 2012,  as  a  student,  having
obtained entry clearance, abroad on 13 January 2012.  He pursued a  course
of study which commenced on 13 February 2012 and ended on 17 January 2014.
He did not return to Pakistan at the end of that course, his having  applied
on 16 May 2014, one month prior to his previous grant of leave being due to
expire, for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
in order that he might pursue a different course of  study  which  had  been
due to commence on 2 June 2014 and had been due to end on  26 June 2015.
Both the previous course and the  proposed  new  course  were  below  degree
level.

3.    The respondent had  taken  the  above  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
remain, and to  remove  the  appellant,  because  she  thought  that  if  he
received the leave he was seeking that would mean he  had  spent  more  than
three years in the UK  as  a  Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  studying
courses which did not consist of degree level  study  and  that  such  would
mean his falling foul of the requirements of  paragraph 245 ZX(h)  of  the
Immigration Rules.

4.    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal contending, in  his
grounds of appeal, that according to Home Office guidance, interruptions in
studies should not be taken into account when  calculating  the  three  year
period and that he had been granted study leave by his Tier 4 sponsor,  for
a period of 13 Days, during his first course, due  to  a  serious  illness.
His contention at that stage was that when the  13 days  were  deducted  it
brought him within the three year limit.

5.    The appeal was listed for an oral  hearing.   The  appellant  did  not
attend  the  hearing  and  was  not  represented.   It  was  noted  in   the
determination that it was apparent from the  case  file  that  a  notice  of
hearing had been sent to him at the address given in his notice  of  appeal,
that that was his last known address and that the notice had  been  returned
marked "addressee gone away".  The First-tier Tribunal decided to  go  ahead
and hear the appeal, in the absence of the appellant, on the basis that  the
notice had been properly sent.   The  respondent  was  represented,  at  the
hearing, by Counsel.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal  concluding,
in relation to the claimed period of illness,  that  some  medical  evidence
the  appellant  had  provided  did  not  show  that  his  illness   was   so
debilitating that he had been unable to undertake his studies during the  13
day period referred  to  above.   He  noted  that  the  guidance  which  the
appellant had referred to  had  said  that  only  interruptions  to  studies
resulting  from  "compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances"  would   be
deducted when calculating the  relevant  three  year  period.   Judge North
thought that that requirement  had  not  been  met.   Having  reached  those
findings, and in closing, he said this:

      "     9.   The appellant's previous study below degree level had  been
      for a period of 1 year and 11 months.  In his application,  he  said
      that he proposed to continue to study  until  26/06/2015  starting  on
      02/06/2015.  Taken together the  appellant  proposed  to  study  below
      degree level for more than the 3 years allowed as a Tier 4 (general)
      student.   He   did   not   therefore   meet   the   requirements   of
      paragraph 245 ZX(h) of the Immigration Rules.

            10.  The appeal was brought on no other grounds."

7.     The  appellant   applied,   with   the   assistance   of   his   then
representatives, for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal.   The
grounds advanced, asserted that  the  First-tier Tribunal  had  incorrectly
calculated the three  year  period  and  quoted  from  the  "Tier 4  Policy
Guidance version 08/2014 page 16 of 79" in support of that proposition.  It
was argued that, in fact, the total period of study  if  the  appellant  had
pursued the course he had intended to would have led  to  his  having  spent
two years, 11 months and 24 days studying courses below degree level.   It
was also contended, in effect, that there  had  been  procedural  unfairness
resulting from the First-tier Tribunal proceeding to hear the appeal in the
appellant's absence because the appellant had changed  his  address  and  in
consequence had not known about the hearing.  It was accepted, though,  that
he had not informed the First-tier Tribunal of the change of address.

8.     Permission  was  initially  refused  by  a  judge   of   the   First-
tier Tribunal.  The application was then  renewed  to  the  Upper Tribunal
although the grounds then advanced only relied upon the point regarding  the
calculation of the three year period.  It seems to me that it was  realistic
not to seek to pursue, any further, the other  ground  regarding  procedural
unfairness.

9.       On 12 March 2015 a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission
to appeal and said this:

      "     There is only one ground of appeal  before  the  Upper Tribunal
      and that is based upon paragraph 9 of the determination.   The  judge
      stated that the appellant's previous study below degree level had been
      for a period of 1 year and 11 months.  The proposed new  course  ran
      from 2 June 2014 to 26 June 2015.  The ground of appeal asserts that a
      period of 1 year and 11 months plus another period  of  1 year  and
      24 days add up to less than 3 years in total.  I find that as a matter
      of simple addition, there is an arguable point of law because the time
      period stated in the  determination  do  not  support  the  conclusion
      stated in paragraph 9 that, taken together, the appellant proposed to
      study for more than 3 years.

            Permission to appeal is therefore granted  on  the  sole  ground
      that is before the Upper Tribunal."

10.   There was then a hearing before the  Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  to
consider whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ought  to  be  set
aside on the basis of legal error and, if so, how  the  decision  should  be
remade.

11.    At  the  hearing   the   appellant,   who   no   longer   had   legal
representatives, attended  and  represented  himself.   The  respondent  was
represented by Mrs R Petterson.

12.     After some discussion Mrs Pettersen accepted that the appellant  had
actually been studying, in the UK, below degree level, for a period  of  two
years, 11 months and 28 days.  She accepted, having considered the  wording
of paragraph 245 ZX(h) of the Immigration Rules that the three year period
related to time spent actually studying on  a  course  as  opposed  to  time
spent in the UK with leave.  The latter is always likely  to  be  more  than
the former.  She accepted that the  First-tier Tribunal,  seemingly  having
been entirely understandably distracted by the illness point, had failed  to
make the appropriate calculations.

12.   In light of the above and Mrs Petterson's very  fair  concessions,  I
have  concluded  that  I  must  set  aside  the  decision  of   the   First-
tier Tribunal on the basis that it did not have regard to material  matters
relating to the precise dates the appellant had actually  spent  in  the  UK
studying.  Accordingly, I set its decision aside.

13.     Given Mrs Petterson's acceptance of the above calculations and  her
view as to the law, which seem to me to be correct  following  the  slightly
unclear wording of the relevant Immigration Rule, I go  on  to  remake  the
decision and  to  allow  the  appeal.   Given  that  the  course  which  the
appellant had intended to pursue has now come to an end I am not sure  where
that leaves him.  However, his appeal to the Upper Tribunal does succeed.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision and, in so doing, I allow the appellant's appeal.



Signed                            Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT:
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal I make no fee award  because  I  was  not
invited to do so.


Signed                            Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

