
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/27435/2015

                                                  IA/27437/2015

                                                  IA/27439/2015

                                                  IA/27440/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7th September 2017                    |   On 4th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mrs Rushna begum
                               Mr Rahat Ahmed
                               Mr Ruhin Ahmed
                             MASTER Rifat AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Gill QC instructed by Edward Alam & Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants, nationals of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 10th July 2015
    refusing their applications for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of their private and family life.  In a decision  promulgated  on  23rd
    December 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge C Greasley allowed the appeals
    and the Secretary of State now appeals to this Tribunal with permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 10th July 2017.

 3. The issue is whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law
    in deciding that the decisions of the Secretary of State  were  not  in
    accordance with the law because the applications were made in  February
    2008 but considered in July 2015 under the post July  2012  Immigration
    Rules. The judge's decision to return the cases  to  the  Secretary  of
    State was made on the basis that the July 2012  Immigration  Rules  did
    not apply to applications made before those Rules came into  force  and
    was based in part on a concession to that effect on  the  part  of  the
    Presenting Officer.

 4. It appears from the history set out in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    decision that the first Appellant first entered the UK  in  April  2007
    with entry clearance  as  a  visitor  along  with  her  children.   Her
    application for indefinite leave to remain was refused on 15th  October
    2007 and the Appellant applied again  for  leave  to  remain  and  that
    application was refused on 26th March 2008 with no right of appeal.  As
    a result of an application for judicial review the Secretary  of  State
    undertook to reconsider the Appellant's case within a period  of  three
    months.  That reconsideration resulted in the decision  to  refuse  the
    application dated 10th July 2015.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision records at paragraph 12  that,
    prior to hearing evidence, the Presenting Officer was asked to indicate
    the date on which the applications were made and he  advised  that  all
    four Appellants made their application  on  29th  February  2008.   The
    Appellants' representative submitted that all  four  refusal  decisions
    were not in accordance with the law because the Respondent had  applied
    the provisions of Appendix FM applicable at the date of  the  decision,
    however those provisions had not  come  into  effect  until  July  2012
    therefore the decisions were  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   It
    appears from paragraph 12 of the decision that the  Presenting  Officer
    and  the  Appellants'  representative  were  in  agreement  with   this
    approach.  Although the judge went on to hear oral  evidence  this  was
    not pertinent to the decision. The judge concluded at paragraph 27;

         "In light of the fact that [the Presenting Officer] indicated  that
         the date of application of all  four  appellants  was  29  February
         2008, [the appellant's  representative]  submitted  that  all  four
         refusal decisions were not in accordance with immigration law.  The
         wrong law had been applied. [The Presenting Officer] did  not  seek
         to argue to the contrary. I indicated to  all  of  the  appellants,
         with the agreement of the representatives, that the respondent had,
         in effect, wrongly applied the provisions of  Appendix  FM  to  the
         United Kingdom immigration Rules which did not come into  existence
         until July 2012. All four decisions of the respondent were made  in
         2015"

The Grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. In her Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an  error  of  law
    because of the changes in the Immigration Rules  and  the  decision  in
    Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 which overturned the case of Edgehill & Anor v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 v SSHD.  Reliance is placed on paragraph 56 of
    the decision in Singh which states as follows;
         "56. The foregoing analysis has regrettably been somewhat dense,
         but I can summarise my conclusion, and the reasons for it, as
         follows:
              (1) When HC 194 first came into force on 9 July 2012, the
              Secretary of State was not entitled to take into account the
              provisions of the new Rules (either directly or by treating
              them as a statement of her current policy) when making
              decisions on private or family life applications made prior
              to that date but not yet decided. That is because, as decided
              in Edgehill, "the implementation provision" set out at para.
              7 above displaces the usual Odelola principle.
              (2) But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by
              the introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with effect
              from 6 September 2012. As from that date the Secretary of
              State was entitled to take into account the provisions of
              Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH in deciding private
              or family life applications even if they were made prior to 9
              July 2012. The result is that the law as it was held to be in
              Edgehill only obtained as regards decisions taken in the two-
              month window between 9 July and 6 September 2012."

 7. That decision highlights the fact that the position was altered  by  HC
    565 which introduced the new  paragraph  A277C  with  effect  from  6th
    September 2012 and as  from  that  date  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to take  into  account  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraphs 276ADE in deciding private or family life applications  even
    if they were made prior to 9th July 2012.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on the basis that the grounds draw attention to the judge's failure  to
    take into account the decision of the Court of Appeal in  the  decision
    in Singh.

 9. In advance of the hearing Mr Gill submitted outlined  submissions.  The
    thrust  of  those  submissions  are  that  the  Secretary  of   State's
    representative made a specific concession at the hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal. He submitted that the Secretary of State was entitled to
    take that position, that she is entitled to apply Rules which are  more
    favourable to a claimant than the ones that should strictly speaking be
    applied.  It is submitted that the Secretary of State  is  entitled  to
    apply a more favourable policy or practice that may  exist  outside  of
    the Rules under which the claimant's  application  would  otherwise  be
    able to be  considered.   It  is  submitted  that  the  Appellants  are
    entitled in law to hold the Secretary of State to that position.  Given
    that the parties  agreed  the  basis  on  which  the  appeal  would  be
    determined,  in  Mr  Gill's  submission,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    determine the appeal on that basis.  It is submitted that the judge was
    entitled rely on the concession made at the hearing on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that the Secretary of State had failed to act in  accordance
    with the Rules which should have been applied  in  this  case.   It  is
    submitted that there is a binding judicial decision made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the principles of  finality  of  litigation  must  be
    respected (see paragraph 32 of TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ  977).   In
    any event it is submitted that the Secretary of State  must  submit  an
    application to the Upper Tribunal to withdraw a concession and that any
    such application should be refused.

10. In his submissions Mr Gill relied on the decision in  IBM  UK  Holdings
    Ltd v Dalgleish [2017] CA Civ 1212 paragraphs 448 to 453 to support the
    argument that the Tribunal may exercise its discretion exceptionally to
    allow a new point of pure law to be taken provided  certain  conditions
    are met.  It is submitted that here, the Secretary of  State  would  be
    seeking permission to take a point which was considered  and  expressly
    conceded previously.  If the Secretary of State is allowed to take this
    point it is submitted that further findings of fact  will  have  to  be
    made to dispose of the appeal and this  will  add  to  the  Appellants'
    expense and inevitably cause them prejudice and probable further delay.



11. Mr Gill submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  should  adopt  an  approach
    similar to that taken by the Court of Appeal in  AK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 999 where the Court of Appeal held that the  Upper
    Tribunal had erred in allowing the Secretary of  State  to  withdraw  a
    concession made before a First-tier Tribunal that a foreign  criminal's
    deportation was not in the public interest  because  he  satisfied  the
    exception under  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    Section 117C(4).  In the view of the Court of  Appeal  that  concession
    had in substance effectively conceded the appeal.  It is submitted that
    an application to withdraw the concession in  the  present  case  by  a
    party that is a public authority and regularly appears in the Tribunals
    in all appeals would encourage bad practice.  It is contended that  the
    Secretary of State cannot be permitted in such a case to be so cavalier
    with the Procedural  Rules  and  to  so  dramatically  undermine  their
    overriding objective by making a clear and express concession and  then
    seeking on appeal to abandon the previously conceded position.

12. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy relied on the Grounds of Appeal.   He
    submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  in  law  in
    remitting the appeal to the Secretary of State because  the  Appellants
    in this appeal did not come within the so called 'Edgehill  window'  of
    9th July to 6th September 2012.  In the  absence  of  evidence  to  the
    contrary he accepted that a concession had been made in the  First-tier
    Tribunal. However he submitted that a concession that is wrong  in  law
    is not a concession and that the judge  was  wrong  to  accept  such  a
    concession. He contended that, in submitting  Grounds  of  Appeal,  the
    Secretary of State effectively withdrew the  concession  and  therefore
    there was no prejudice to the Appellants.

13. Mr Gill submitted that paragraph 27 of the decision  records  that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer  did  not  seek  to  argue  against  the
    approach to be taken by the judge. He said that the Presenting  Officer
    had conceded that the decision in this case should have been made under
    the previous Rules.  In his submission, the basis  of  that  concession
    may have involved some mistake but the Rules are not law.  He contended
    that the Secretary of State was saying in this  case  that  she  should
    have decided this case under a different set of Rules and that is not a
    concession of law but a concession that a more favourable set of  Rules
    should apply.  In his submission the Secretary of State was entitled to
    take this approach and the Appellants are entitled to hold her to  that
    position.  There is a legitimate expectation created that the Secretary
    of State will maintain her position.  He accepted there may  have  been
    confusion in the minds of the representatives but submitted  that  that
    does not matter.   This  is  not  a  pure  concession  of  law  in  his
    submission  because  a  pure  concession  of  law  not  involving   any
    interaction with the facts would lead to no prejudice.  However in this
    case remaking requires further findings of fact if the case is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal and this would  lead  to  more  expense  and
    delay in the circumstances of this case.

14. Mr Gill reiterated that there has been no application to  withdraw  the
    concession and submitted that the Grounds of Appeal to the Tribunal  do
    not amount to the withdrawal of concession.  He relied on the  case  of
    TB (Jamaica) in relation to the need for finality  of  litigation.   He
    relied on the case of AK (Sierra Leone) in particular paragraphs 32 and
    49 which says that it is unjust that the Secretary of State  should  be
    entitled to resurrect her case and withdraw a concession which had been
    made.  In this case he submitted that in considering  the  applications
    the Secretary of State will have to apply paragraphs 395C and D of  the
    previous Immigration Rules and to undertake a  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment.  He submitted that this concession was  justified  in  this
    case as a result of the huge delay in  dealing  with  this  application
    which was only considered in 2015 as a result of judicial review.   The
    delay here was significant and explains why the Secretary of State  has
    clearly decided to apply the position at an earlier point in time.

15. In response Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  potential  application  of
    paragraphs 395 in the old Rules was not very different to the situation
    to be assessed under 276ADE.  He submitted that 276ADE (1)(iv) is  more
    generous than the previous positions therefore there is no prejudice to
    the Appellants.  He submitted that a further hearing may arise from any
    decision of the Secretary of State and that that would lead to  further
    expense in any event.

Discussion and Conclusions

16. It was not in dispute before me that, as the decision  in  Singh  makes
    clear, the transitional provisions apply  in  these  appeals  so  that,
    although  the  applications  were  made  before  the  change   to   the
    Immigration Rules on 9 July 2012, when making her decisions on 10  July
    2015, the Secretary of State was obliged to  consider  the  application
    under the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  introduced  on  9  July
    2012.

17. Accordingly, the Appellants' representative was mistaken as to the  law
    when, as noted at paragraph 12 of the decision, he submitted  that  the
    wrong law had been applied by the Secretary  of  State  in  considering
    these applications. The judge made a mistake as to the law at paragraph
    12 in finding that the respondent had wrongly applied the provisions of
    Appendix FM and in his conclusion that he should allow the  appeals  as
    the decisions were not in accordance with the law. Had  there  been  no
    Presenting Officer at the hearing or if the Presenting Officer had  not
    agreed with that analysis this  would  be  a  straightforward  material
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. The only issue here is whether the fact  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    agreed with this analysis [12, 27] means that the Secretary of State is
    now prevented from seeking to  have  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal set aside.

19. Mr Gill relied on a number of cases to support his contention that  the
    Secretary of State is unable to seek to have the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal overturned.

20. The case of TB (Jamaica) does not, in my view,  assist  the  Appellants
    because that case involved the Secretary of State seeking to bypass the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal by making a further decision.  That
    is a very different scenario to that in the instant case. The appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal in this case is still part of the current appeal and
    not a part of an attempt by the Secretary of State  to  circumvent  the
    appeals process.

21. Mr Gill also relied on the decision in IBM Ltd v  Dalgleish  where  the
    Court of Appeal considered whether it was appropriate for  a  party  to
    raise a new point on appeal. The Court said at paragraph 450;

          "It is a matter of discretion for the court whether  to  allow  a
         party to raise on appeal a point not relied on below.  If it  is  a
         pure point of law arising entirely  on  facts  which  were  already
         before the court, then the court may allow it to  be  taken  if  no
         possible prejudice would be caused to the other  party  as  regards
         the conduct of the trial, as in Pittalis v Grant [1989]  QB  605.
         However, in a case in which, if the point had been taken below, the
         evidence adduced or  the  course  of  the  trial  might  have  been
         different in some material respect, then the new point will not  be
         allowed to be raised..."

22. The instant case is closer to the first scenario described in paragraph
    450 being a point of law arising on the facts already before the First-
    tier Tribunal. I do not agree with Mr Gill's submission that  this  was
    not a concession as to the law but a concession that a more  favourable
    set of Immigration  Rules  apply.  The  decision  does  not  frame  the
    concession in the way suggested by Mr Gill. It is  clear  from  reading
    the decision that the concession was based on a misapprehension  as  to
    the law  on  the  part  of  the  Presenting  Officer,  the  Appellants'
    representative and the judge.

23. In the case of AK (Sierra Leone)  Jackson  LJ  reviewed  the  case  law
    relating to the making and withdrawal of concessions as follows:
      "31. Having regard to the way that the grounds of appeal have been
      framed and the way that the appeal has been argued today, I shall
      begin by reviewing the law concerning the making and withdrawal of
      concessions.
      32. Carcabuk, appeal number 00/TH/01426 dated 18 July 2000 was a
      decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal comprising Collins J and
      Mr Ockelton dealing with two cases where issues arose concerning
      concessions made by the Secretary of State. The concessions concerned
      the credibility of the Claimants in two cases at hearings before the
      adjudicator. In paragraph 11 of his judgment, Collins J, delivering
      the judgment of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, held that concessions
      of fact made by a Home Office Presenting Officer may be queried by a
      adjudicator, but if the Home Office Presenting Officer maintained the
      concessions, they bound the adjudicator. Nevertheless, the Secretary
      of State may be able to withdraw the concessions on appeal.
      33. In Opacic, appeal number 01/TH/00850 dated 15 May 2001, the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal reviewed the application of the principles
      stated in Carcabuk to different circumstances. The Immigration Appeal
      Tribunal noted that in Carcabuk the concessions under consideration
      related to credibility, whereas in the matters before the Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal, the concessions were in a different context. At
      paragraph 22, the tribunal said:
         "Where an appeal has been conceded in its entirety, as in these
         cases, we do not consider that such a concession can be withdrawn
         and we see nothing in Carcabuk and Bla that leads us to any
         contrary view."


      34. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v
      Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 an issue arose about a concession
      made by the Secretary of State. Kennedy LJ, with whom Clarke LJ and
      Jacob LJ agreed, said that the Immigration Appeal Tribunal had power
      to allow withdrawal of a concession. The tribunal would exercise that
      power in order to do justice in the circumstances of the case.


      35. In NR (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2009] EWCA Civ 856 the Home Office Presenting Officer made
      two different concessions at separate hearings. The first concession
      was that if the appellant was a lesbian, she would be at real risk on
      return. The second concession made at a separate hearing was that the
      appellant was indeed a lesbian and in a relationship with a woman
      called Ms S in 2006 and 2007. The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
      allowed the Secretary of State to withdraw both the concessions. The
      Court of Appeal upheld that decision. Goldring LJ, with whom Lloyd LJ
      and Mummery LJ agreed, stated at paragraph 12:


         "As Kennedy LJ makes clear, the Tribunal may in its discretion
         permit a concession to be withdrawn if in its view there is good
         reason in all the circumstances for that course to be taken. Its
         discretion is wide. Its exercise will depend on the particular
         circumstances of the case before it. Prejudice to the applicant is
         a significant feature. So is its absence. Its absence does not
         however mean that an application to withdraw a concession will
         invariably be granted..."
    36. The Court of Appeal applied those principles in CD (Jamaica) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 768, but
    that judgment does not call for any further discussion.
    37. Similar issues arose in a case in this court last week,
    namely Koori v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
    Civ 552. The appellants in that case contended that they could benefit
    from rule 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules. That rule provided that
    the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
    grounds of private life in the UK were that the applicant was under the
    age of 18 years and had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven
    years, discounting any period of imprisonment, and that it would not be
    reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK.
    38. Mr Malik on behalf of the appellants contended that the Secretary
    of State had conceded that the seven year rule was satisfied. Mr Malik
    failed in that submission on the facts. In relation to the issue of
    principle, however, Elias LJ, with whom Underhill LJ and Peter Jackson
    J agreed, said this at paragraph 31:
      "I would accept that if there had been a considered and lawful
      decision to deem the seven year rule to be satisfied, the Secretary of
      State should not be allowed to resile from that decision. An
      administrative body cannot keep revisiting decisions which affect
      individual rights: there must be finality, at least unless there is a
      powerful public interest to the contrary."
    39. Bearing in mind that guidance from the authorities, I turn to the
    Upper Tribunal decision in the present case. The Upper Tribunal Judge
    deals with withdrawal of the concession in paragraph 39. I have read
    that paragraph out in part 3 of this judgment. He simply says that he
    follows NR and considers that the Secretary of State is entitled to
    withdraw her concession. There is no analysis of the circumstances of
    the case. There is no consideration of prejudice. There is no
    consideration of the interests of justice. The Upper Tribunal Judge did
    not have to make any finding about the extent of the concessions
    because the argument was presented on the simple basis that they had
    been withdrawn."

24. Having determined the correct approach in that appeal, he  went  on  at
    paragraph 49 to say;
    "49. I do not need to go so far as to say that in such circumstances
    the Secretary of State could never appeal to the Upper Tribunal, but on
    the facts of this particular appeal, it seems to me quite unjust that
    the Secretary of State, having conceded on all points, should be
    entitled to resurrect her case and withdraw the concessions which she
    had made. As Mr Fortt rightly concedes, the Upper Tribunal gave no good
    reason for allowing the Secretary of State to take that course."

25. Looking at the cases reviewed in  AK  I  note  the  guidance  given  by
    Kennedy LJ in the Court of Appeal in Davoodipanah at paragraph 22;
    "It is clear from the authorities that where a concession has been made
    before an adjudicator by either party the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    can allow the concession to be withdrawn if it considers that there is
    good reason in all the circumstances to take that course. (See, for
    example, Ivanauskieine v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department 2001 EWCACiv 1271, and Carrabuk v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department, a decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal presided
    over by Mr Justice Collins on 18 May 2000. Obviously if there will be
    prejudice to one of the parties if the withdrawal is allowed that will
    be relevant and matters such as the nature of the concession and the
    timing may also be relevant, but it is not essential to demonstrate
    prejudice before an application to withdraw a concession can be
    refused. What the tribunal must do is to try to obtain a fair and just
    result. In the absence of prejudice, if a Presenting Officer has made a
    concession which appears in retrospect to be a concession which he or
    she should not have made, then probably justice will require that the
    Secretary of State be allowed to withdraw that concession before the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal. But, as I have said, everything depends on
    the circumstances, and each case must be considered on its own merits."

26. I would firstly say that  I  accept  Mr  Duffy's  submission  that  the
    application for permission to appeal was in effect  an  application  to
    withdraw  the  concession.  This  is  clear  from  the  terms  of   the
    application; alternatively it  is  implied  from  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and the basis of that application.

27. It is clear from the authorities above that in considering whether  the
    Secretary of State can now withdraw  her  concession  I  must  look  at
    whether there is good reason to allow the concession to be withdrawn. I
    must consider all of the circumstances of the case,  including  looking
    at whether there has been any prejudice to one of the parties. I should
    also consider the nature of the concession and  the  timing.  I  should
    also bear in mind the aim of obtaining a fair and just result.

28. It is necessary to look at all of the circumstances in this  case.  The
    concession was one of law not fact. As set out above I do not accept Mr
    Gill's submission that the concession was a decision on the part of the
    Secretary of State to apply a more favourable set  of  Rules  to  these
    Appellants. The  concession  here  was  made  in  the  context  of  the
    Appellants' representative's submissions which were based on a  mistake
    as to the law. The judge agreed with those  submissions  and  it  seems
    that it was at that stage that the Presenting Officer agreed  that  the
    respondent had wrongly applied the post-July  2012  Immigration  Rules.
    Therefore the Presenting Officer made the concession, not on a decision
    to treat the Appellants more favourably than others,  but  based  on  a
    mistaken interpretation of  the  law  on  his  part  and  that  of  the
    Appellants' representative and the First-tier Tribunal Judge. A wrongly
    made concession on the law is different from a  concession  as  to  the
    facts which can be made where the Secretary of State is satisfied  that
    the evidence presented reaches a certain threshold.

29. Apart from delay, there is no clear  prejudice  to  the  Appellants  in
    allowing the withdrawal of the concession. The  erroneous  approach  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge put the Appellants in a position  whereby
    their cases were to be considered by the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
    basis of pre-July 2012 Immigration  Rules.  I  agree  with  Mr  Duffy's
    submission that it is not apparent that the previous Immigration  Rules
    would necessarily be more favourable to the Appellants. Further, if the
    Secretary of State refused the applications again the Appellants  would
    be faced with a further appeal to the First-tier Tribunal based on  the
    erroneous decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  this  occasion  thus
    potentially leading to confusion and further exacerbating the error. On
    the other hand, should the  decision  be  set  aside  and  the  appeals
    remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the   Appellants   have   the
    opportunity to present their cases according to  the  applicable  legal
    provisions and are more likely to  obtain  a  legally  sound  decision.
    Therefore there can be little prejudice to  the  parties  to  have  the
    appeals remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

30. Fundamentally the issue here is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made
    a material error of law in his disposal of this appeal. In all  of  the
    circumstances of  this  case,  this  error  cannot  be  corrected  with
    reference to a wrongly made concession by the Presenting Officer.

31. The parties agreed that, should I set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the remaking of the decision requires fresh findings  of
    fact. Therefore, in line with paragraph  7  of  the  Tribunal  Practice
    statement, in light if the nature  and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact
    finding required in order to re-make the decision, having regard to the
    overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing
    . The hearing is to be held  at  Hatton  Cross,  not  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Greasley
    . A Bengali Sylheti interpreter is required
    . The estimated hearing time is two hours.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 2nd October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes









