
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27952/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2014                              |On 14 April 2014             |
|Determination given orally on 31 March 2014   |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                                 TANVI ARORA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr Z Nasim
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scott who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  5
    February 2014 following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 December  2013,
    allowed an appeal by Ms Arora against a decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State on the basis that this decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law.  For ease of reference I shall throughout this determination refer
    to Ms Arora, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant"  and  to
    the Secretary of State, who was the original the  respondent,  as  "the
    Secretary of State".

 2. The  background to this appeal can be summarised  quite  briefly.   The
    claimant, who was born on 15 August 1989, is a  citizen  of  India  who
    came to the United Kingdom on 28 June 2008 as a  student  and  she  was
    granted further leave under the  points-based  system  valid  until  25
    October 2012.   On 18 October 2012 she applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student.

 3. I should state at the outset that it is not suggested on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, and indeed it is quite clear from the papers before
    me that this would not have been  the  case  in  any  event,  that  the
    claimant was anything other than a genuine student.  It is also not now
    suggested that in real terms she did not have adequate funds with which
    she could be maintained.  Her family is apparently sufficiently wealthy
    that sufficient funds would always have been  available  for   her  and
    indeed in the circumstances which transpired such funds were available.
     However, and this is also common ground between the  parties,  because
    she misunderstood the Rules, the claimant did not maintain a sufficient
    balance in her bank account throughout the relevant 28 day period prior
    to her application and for  this  reason  alone  did  not  satisfy  the
    maintenance requirement under the Rules.

 4. Her application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  6  February
    2013 for two reasons.  First, she was not awarded the necessary  points
    claimed under Appendix C Maintenance (Funds) because she had not  shown
    possession of the requisite funds through the relevant  28  day  period
    prior to her application.  As I have already noted, it is accepted that
    although she could have shown possession of these  funds,  because  she
    misunderstood the Rules she did not  in  fact  do  so.   Secondly,  the
    application was rejected because it  was  believed  that  she  was  not
    entitled to the points claimed under Appendix A  (Attributes)  for  her
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) in respect of the  English
    language requirement.

 5. The claimant appealed against this decision; the appeal hearing was set
    down for 13 June 2013 and on that  date  the  Presenting  Officer  took
    instructions and the decision was withdrawn. There is some debate as to
    what exactly happened on that occasion, but it is common ground that it
    was accepted that the objection founded on the basis that  the  English
    language requirement was not satisfied was not maintained on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  It is the claimant's case that the  Presenting
    Officer had agreed to withdraw opposition  to  the  appeal  in  general
    although the Secretary of State does not accept either  that  this  was
    the case or that a Presenting Officer would have been  able to do so in
    any event.

 6. It seems to be the  case  that  the  representatives  of  the  claimant
    understood that it was the Secretary of  State's  intention,  certainly
    the indication given on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  by  the
    Presenting Officer, that the application  would  be  allowed.   In  any
    event, five days later the Secretary of State issued a further decision
    in respect of the application and  that  decision  remained  the  same.
    Although the claimant was awarded the points claimed under  Appendix  A
    in respect of the English language  requirement,  the  application  was
    again refused under Appendix C for the same reasons,  namely  that  the
    maintenance requirements under the Rules had not been  satisfied.

 7. The claimant appealed again against this decision and  her  appeal  was
    then heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 18 December  2013  and,  as  previously   noted  above,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 5 February 2014, Judge Scott  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal to the extent that he found that  the  decision   had
    not been  in accordance with the law.  It is perhaps relevant  to  note
    that at paragraph 8  of  his  determination  Judge  Scott  records  the
    claimant's position as being that:

         "in relation to the financial requirements which the appellant  had
         to  met  under  Appendix  C,  her  position  was  that  she  simply
         misunderstood the  Rules. She thought that she  had  to  submit  28
         days' worth of bank statements and that a certain balance had to be
         shown within, rather than throughout, that period."

 8. It is accordingly accepted on behalf of the claimant, and this has  not
    been challenged before me, that in  technical  terms  the  requirements
    under the Rules had not in fact been satisfied.   It  follows  that  an
    appeal under the Rules could not have  succeeded  and  indeed  had  the
    issue been argued at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  13
    June 2013 that appeal could not have then succeeded under the Rules.

 9. The challenge now made by the  Secretary  of  State  to  Judge  Scott's
    decision is set  out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  follows.   That
    decision, it is said, contained a material error  of  law  because  the
    Presenting  Officer  did  not   make   any   express   concessions   or
    representations concerning the withdrawal. The judge  should  not  have
    relied on the negative  inference  from  information  contained  within
    Counsel's note which was before him in  the  absence  of  any  positive
    representations by the Secretary of State "to support the  notion  that
    the whole appeal was being conceded" (at paragraph 5 of  the  grounds).
    Further, at paragraph 6 it is stated correctly that "the respondent  is
    permitted to withdraw an appeal without giving reasons under  17(2)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005" and "It  is
    respectfully  submitted  that  there  is  no  such  authority  that   a
    withdrawal by the respondent amounts to a concession".

10. In judicial review proceedings which had been issued before the hearing
    of this appeal in which the claimant  had  sought  the  return  of  her
    passport, the Secretary of State had  said  this  in  response  to  the
    claimant's challenge to the decision, at paragraph 9 of her response to
    the application:

         "9.  Furthermore,  in  respect  of  the  claimant's  challenge  the
             defendant submits  that  her  decision  of  18  June  2013  is
             entirely lawful for the following reasons:

             (i)  the claimant's application of 18 October 2012 for further
                  leave to  remain  in  accordance  with  Tier  4  (General)
                  Student category was refused on 6 February  2013  for  two
                  reasons, namely:

         (a)   the  claimant  had  failed  to  meet  the  English   language
             requirement in accordance with  paragraph  245ZX  (a)  of  the
             Immigration Rules; and,

         (b)  the claimant had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  has  the
             requisite funds in compliance with maintenance requirement  at
             paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.

             (ii)     At the claimant's  First-tier  Tribunal  on  13  June
                  2013, the defendant agreed to  reconsider  the  claimant's
                  application of  18  October  2012  as  the  claimant   had
                  provided an email from Pearson.com that they  had  omitted
                  to inform the defendant that the claimant had  passed  her
                  English language ....

             (iii)     The  claimant's  decision   was   reconsidered   and
                  correctly refused as the claimant had refused  to  satisfy
                  the  maintenance  requirement.   The   defendant   rightly
                  provided the claimant with an in-country right  of  appeal
                  which the claimant has exercised and is currently  waiting
                  for the matter to be listed in the First-tier Tribunal."

11. This is relevant because it has been argued before me by  Mr  Nasim  on
    behalf of the claimant that because the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented before Judge Scott there had been no challenge to Counsel's
    recollection.  This does not in fact appear to be the case because  the
    claimant's representatives were obviously aware  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's position with regard to this appeal as this had been   set  out
    in the response to the application for judicial review.

12. On behalf of the claimant Mr Nasim  sought  to  persuade  me  that  the
    decision of Judge Scott should  be  upheld  because  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative having given an indication that the appeal would
    be allowed, the exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion outside
    the Rules, or rather the failure to exercise her  discretion  to  allow
    the application under the Rules, could not have been made in accordance
    with the law because it was unfair.  It is  in  effect  said  that  the
    Secretary of State in fairness ought not  to  go  behind  a  concession
    which has been  made once that concession has been  made.

Discussion

13. The issue I have to determine is a very narrow one  because  the  facts
    are in general agreed save as to what occurred at  the  hearing  on  13
    June 2013.  The facts which are not contested can be briefly summarised
    as follows.  The claimant did not satisfy the maintenance  requirements
    under the Rules because having misunderstood what the Rules  said,  she
    had not ensured that she had sufficient sums in her  bank  account  for
    the requisite 28 day period prior to the application.   However  it  is
    not challenged either that had she understood  the  requirements  under
    the Rules she would have been in a position to ensure that she did have
    these funds because at all times, although the  technical  requirements
    under the Rules were not satisfied, she did have available to  her  the
    requisite funds necessary for her  maintenance.  Unfortunately  as  has
    been accepted on her behalf, there is an abundance of authority now  to
    the effect that an appeal cannot now  be  allowed  merely  because  the
    failure to meet a requirement under the Rules is a technical one and is
    a "near miss".

14. The fact is that this appeal had it been  proceeded  with  on  13  June
    2013 would have been  bound to fail under the Rules. It is right that I
    record that had the appeal  proceeded  on  that  day  it  is  at  least
    arguable that there might have been  a case that the appeal should then
    have been allowed under Article  8  under  what  might  be  called  CDS
    principles, although in light of recent authority in particular Shahzad
    (Article 8 : legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085, it is perhaps  unlikely
    that the appeal could  have succeeded on this basis either.

15. However, the fact is that there was  no consideration by the First-tier
    Tribunal at the hearing on 13 June 2013 as to the merits of the appeal.
     What happened quite simply is that the decision  was  withdrawn.   Had
    the  Tribunal  on  that  occasion  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    opposition to the  appeal  was  withdrawn,  rather  than  the  decision
    itself, which in substance is what is now said  to  have  happened,  it
    would not have been open to the Tribunal at that hearing to accept this
    without some examination of the issues.  It is well established in this
    jurisdiction that a Tribunal cannot  merely  allow  an  appeal  because
    there has been no challenge to it; it is not the case  that  because  a
    representative chooses not to contest a point, that  point  has  to  be
    accepted without more.

16. This is particularly relevant in this case where  it  is,  as  I   have
    noted, common ground that the claimant's case  simply  could  not  have
    succeeded under the Rules.  In my judgement what seems to have happened
    is that the Presenting Officer accepted at the hearing on 13 June  2013
    that in order to exercise her discretion properly  outside  the  Rules,
    the Secretary of State ought to take  into  account  that  one  of  the
    reasons which had been given for  the  rejection  of  the  application,
    namely the failure to satisfy the English language requirement, was not
    fairly taken because in  fact  the  English  language  requirement  was
    satisfied.

17.  Accordingly the decision had to  be  remade  but  without  giving  any
    weight to that failure which as the Secretary  of  State  acknowledged,
    had not been the fault of this claimant.

18. It seems to me that that is what  the  Secretary  of  State  then  did.
    She, or rather a caseworker acting on her behalf,  decided  whether  or
    not to exercise discretion outside the Rules  in  order  to  allow  the
    application.  It may be that a different caseworker would have come  to
    a different decision because as I have already noted also,  it  is  not
    disputed that this claimant is and has at  all  times  been  a  genuine
    student. oHoseH  However,  it  has  long  been  established  that  this
    Tribunal does not have a discretion to interfere with  the  refusal  of
    the Secretary of State to  exercise  a  discretion  outside  the  Rules
    (where that discretion has been exercised properly) and so I cannot  do
    so.

19. The decision of the Secretary of State was in my judgement  a  decision
    which was open to her.  The effect of the Procedure Rules is  that  the
    decision to withdraw is one which is open to the Secretary of State and
    is also one which  is not  open  to  challenge  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The effect of the withdrawal of the  decision  is  that  the
    Secretary of State must make a fresh decision, which is  what  she  has
    done.  Whatever impression the claimant's  representatives  might  have
    had as to what the likely outcome of a fresh decision  would  be,  they
    had no right or legitimate expectation to  assume  that  that  decision
    would be favourable to her.  The fact is that any discretion would have
    had to been exercised outside the Rules because the strict requirements
    of the Rules were  not met and there can  be  no  legitimate  grievance
    against a decision by the Secretary of State not to exercise discretion
    outside the Rules because that is a matter entirely for  the  Secretary
    of State.

20. It follows that Judge Scott's determination  does  contain  a  material
    error of law in that there was no basis upon which  he  could  properly
    find that the Secretary of  State's  subsequent  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  I therefore have to remake his decision  both
    under the Rules and under Article 8.

21. I can deal with the decision under the Rules briefly.   As  noted  many
    times already there is no challenge to the finding  made  or  any  rate
    acknowledged within Judge Scott's determination  that  the  application
    was not in  accordance  with  the  Rules.   As  Judge  Scott  noted  at
    paragraph 8, the claimant misunderstood the Rules and that is  why  the
    requirements were not met.

22. With regard to Article 8, it is the claimant's position  now  that  she
    wants to regularise her position  because  she  has  now  finished  her
    studies and wants her passport back so she can go home.  I am  told  by
    Mr Jack on behalf of the Secretary of State that  there  should  be  no
    difficulty in this claimant now making arrangements with the  Secretary
    of State to have her passport returned to her at port  once  she  tells
    them when she wants to  go  home  and  from  which  port  she  will  be
    departing.  I trust that this is the position.

23. It is regrettable that, as I was told by Mr  Nasim  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant, the Secretary of State does not appear to have complied  with
    directions concerning this appeal which had previously been  given  and
    it would perhaps have assisted in this  appeal  had  the  Secretary  of
    State been represented before Judge Scott.   However  that  may  be,  I
    trust that the Secretary of State, having been told in terms  now  that
    this claimant wishes to go home and would like to be given her passport
    back in  order  that  she  may  do  so,  and  in  light  of  Mr  Jack's
    understanding, as this Tribunal was told, that she should  be  able  to
    have her passport returned to her at port, will now  arrange  that  the
    claimant's passport will indeed be returned to her  to  enable  her  to
    leave this country without further delay.

24. I was told by Mr Nasim on behalf of the claimant and I have  no  reason
    to doubt that this was the  case,  that  the  claimant  has  previously
    attempted to obtain her passport  in order to return home but this  has
    not been possible.  It may be  that  there  was  some  misunderstanding
    between the parties with regard to how the passport should be returned,
    but in any event if she now informs  the  Secretary  of  State  of  her
    travel plans, her passport should be returned to her at  port  so  that
    she can leave this country.

25.  I  make  one  further  observation.  Although  the  claimant's  appeal
    ultimately has to be dismissed, it should be noted with regard  to  any
    future applications that she may make that the reason that this  appeal
    has to be dismissed is entirely technical.  It has not  been  suggested
    that she has at any time overstayed and indeed  her  presence  in  this
    country has always been in accordance with the law and under Section 3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971 she was entitled to remain in this  country
    pending the outcome of this appeal. The only reason that her appeal had
    to fail ultimately is, as I have noted, technical, and given  that  the
    jurisprudence on this area of the  law  has  been  developing,  it  was
    entirely reasonable  for  her  to  maintain  this  appeal  before  this
    Tribunal.  The arguments that were put before me on  her  behalf  while
    ultimately unsuccessful were by no means  frivolous  and  the  claimant
    cannot be faulted in any way for maintaining her position.

26. Although  on any future application she may  wish  to  make  for  entry
    clearance, she would have to  say  that  she  had  previously  made  an
    application  which had not been  granted, it should be borne in mind in
    respect of such a future application that this was not because  of  any
    wrong doing on her part in any way. However, for  the  reasons  I  have
    given, her appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

I set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott  as
containing a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Date: 9 April 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


