
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27333/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2016                   |On 20 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 MERITA [S}
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Layne, Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  17  July  2015
    to refuse a human rights claim on the basis of her relationship with  a
    British citizen. The respondent considered whether  the  appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM  but  was  satisfied
    that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" to the couple being  able
    to continue their relationship in the Philippines. The application  was
    refused under paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM. In the alternative, the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant met  the  private  life
    requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules  or
    that there were exceptional circumstances to justify granting leave  to
    remain outside the immigration rules.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 23  March  2016.  The  judge  accepted  an
    apparent concession on behalf of the appellant that "she cannot succeed
    under the rules" [3]. He went  on  to  consider  whether  the  decision
    engaged the operation of  Article  8  rights  outside  the  immigration
    rules. The judge noted that there was no dispute that  the  appellant's
    relationship with the sponsor is genuine [10]. He went on to  make  the
    following finding [13]:

            "In terms of the  family  relocating  to  the  Philippines,  the
           evidence was that the sponsor was well-established and had  been
           running his business for 35 years, that  the  children  were  in
           full-time education and were settled  following  an  acrimonious
           divorce and to remove them from the United Kingdom  to  live  in
           the Philippines would require further  court  proceedings  which
           would cause them  to  relive  the  trauma  of  previous  custody
           hearings.  In  the  circumstances,  bearing  in  mind  the  best
           interests of the children, I was  satisfied  that  it  would  be
           disproportionate to expect the sponsor and his children to  give
           up everything in the United Kingdom to move to  the  Philippines
           where they would not be able to speak the  language,  where  the
           sponsor  would  have  to  start  over  again   whether   through
           employment or self-employment and the children would be deprived
           of the stability that they had finally managed to achieve in the
           United Kingdom surrounded by their extended family."

3.    Having found that it would not be proportionate to expect the  sponsor
    and his children to continue their family life with  the  appellant  in
    the Philippines the judge went on  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect her to return to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance. He took into account the fact that the appellant  still  had
    family connections in the Philippines, and evidence to  show  that  the
    application process would be relatively short, before  concluding  that
    it would be proportionate to expect the  appellant  to  return  to  the
    Philippines to apply for entry clearance [14-18].

4.    The appellant's grounds of appeal asserted that the judge  "failed  to
    apply the immigration rules to the appellant's case appropriately or at
    all" and argued that the judge's finding that it would be proportionate
    to expect the appellant to return to  apply  for  entry  clearance  was
    contrary to the decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

5.    The grounds of appeal drafted on behalf of the appellant  were  poorly
    pleaded. The grounds asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    immigration rules but failed  to  particularise  an  error  of  law  by
    reference to a particular rule. Reliance was placed on the decision  in
    AB (Jamaica)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1302,  which  emphasised  the
    importance of giving anxious scrutiny to the  situation  of  a  British
    citizen in assessing whether it is reasonable and proportionate for him
    to continue his family life abroad. The point  was  not  developed  any
    further although the grounds reiterated that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision was "not in accordance with  relevant  immigration  rules  and
    procedure".

6.    The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal in the  following
broad terms:

           "The judge made findings at [10] to [16]  of  the  decision  but
           failed to consider  such  findings  in  relation  to  the  legal
           context. There were no findings to explain why the appeal should
           be considered with reference to Article 8 following the decision
           in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  nor  findings  with
           reference to case law under article 8 and in  particular  the  5
           step approach in Razgar. No regard was given, as  was  necessary
           to s.117 of the 2002 Act, as amended."

Decision and reasons

7.    At the beginning of the hearing I raised with the parties whether  the
    judge may have been wrong not to make any findings in relation  to  the
    immigration rules notwithstanding the apparent concession made  by  the
    appellant's representative. The judge made  a  clear  and  unchallenged
    finding that it would be disproportionate to expect the sponsor and his
    children to leave the UK. On the face of it this finding  was  relevant
    to the question of whether there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the
    couple continuing their family life outside the UK for the  purpose  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.

8.    Ms Fijiwala accepted that the respondent had  considered  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM in  the
    decision letter and acknowledged that the  judge  was  likely  to  have
    fallen into  error  in  failing  to  consider  the  immigration  rules.
    However, she argued that the point  was  not  properly  argued  in  the
    grounds and did not form part of the grant of permission. Very  fairly,
    she accepted that the findings  at  paragraph  13  were  likely  to  be
    sufficient to show that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph
    EX.1.

9.    It is unclear why the appellant's  representative  before  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  might  have  conceded  that  she  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the immigration rules in  circumstances  where  it  was
    argued that it would be disproportionate to expect the UK  sponsor  and
    his children to continue their family life with the  appellant  in  the
    Philippines. The respondent did not refuse the  application  under  the
    'Suitability' or the 'Eligibility' criteria contained in  Appendix  FM.
    The only reason given for concluding that the appellant  did  not  meet
    the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  was  that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to  show  that  there  would  be  "insurmountable
    obstacles"  to  the  couple  continuing  their  relationship   in   the
    Philippines for the purpose of paragraph EX.1.

10.   It is clear from the judge's findings at paragraph  13  that  he  took
    into account the particular circumstances of the case.  These  included
    the nationality of the  sponsor  and  his  children,  their  length  of
    residence and  their  significant  ties  to  the  UK  as  well  as  the
    compassionate  circumstances  surrounding  the  sponsor's   acrimonious
    divorce and the best interests of the children. Having  considered  the
    circumstances as a whole the judge came to  a  clear,  unambiguous  and
    unchallenged finding that it would be disproportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant's partner and his children to continue their family life with
    her in the Philippines. The only reason why he went on to  dismiss  the
    appeal with reference to Article  8  outside  the  rules  was  that  he
    considered it reasonable to expect  the  appellant  to  return  to  the
    Philippines to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  under  the
    immigration rules.

11.    The  relevant  test  under  paragraph  EX.1  is  whether  there   are
    "insurmountable obstacles" preventing the couple from continuing  their
    relationship in the Philippines. Having made  clear  findings  that  it
    would be disproportionate to expect the sponsor  and  his  children  to
    continue their family life with the appellant in  the  Philippines  the
    terms of paragraph EX.1 should have come to the  fore  of  the  judge's
    mind notwithstanding any concession that the appellant's representative
    might have made.

12.   In R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162 the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered whether the Tribunal was under a duty  to  consider  obvious
    errors in a Special Adjudicator's decision. In that  case  the  Special
    Adjudicator had failed to consider an essential element when  assessing
    a claim under the Refugee Convention. The Court of Appeal  pointed  out
    that the central issue in such appeals was whether the UK would  be  in
    breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention. The Court  went
    on to state [37]:

            "It follows from what we have said that it is the  duty  of  the
           appellate authorities to apply  their  knowledge  of  Convention
           jurisprudence to the facts as  established  by  them  when  they
           determine whether it would be a  breach  of  the  Convention  to
           refuse an asylum-seeker leave to enter as a  refugee,  and  that
           they are not limited in their consideration of the facts by  the
           arguments  actually  advanced  by  the  asylum  seeker  or   his
           representative."

13.   The Court of Appeal went on to identify the circumstances in which  it
    might be appropriate for the Tribunal to  grant  permission  to  appeal
    based on  an  argument  that  had  not  been  put  before  the  Special
    Adjudicator or was not outlined in the grounds  of  appeal.  The  Court
    concluded that it would only be permissible if a point is  sufficiently
    "obvious" [39]:

           "The appellate authorities should of course focus  primarily  on
           the arguments adduced before them, whether these are to be found
           in the oral argument before the special adjudicator or,  so  far
           as the Tribunal is concerned, in the written grounds  of  appeal
           on which leave to appeal is sought.  They are  not  required  to
           engage in  a  search  for  new  points.   If  there  is  readily
           discernible an obvious point of Convention law which favours the
           applicant although  he  has  not  taken  it,  then  the  special
           adjudicator should apply it in his favour, but  he  should  feel
           under no obligation to prolong the hearing by asking the parties
           for submissions on points which they have not  taken  but  which
           could be properly categorised as merely "arguable" as opposed to
           "obvious".  Similarly, if when the Tribunal  reads  the  Special
           Adjudicator's decision there is an obvious point  of  Convention
           law favourable to the asylum-seeker which does not appear in the
           decision, it should grant leave to appeal.  If it  does  not  do
           so, there will be a danger that this country will be  in  breach
           of its obligations under the Convention.  When we  refer  to  an
           obvious point we mean a point which has  a  strong  prospect  of
           success if it is argued.  Nothing less will do.  It follows that
           leave to apply for judicial review of a refusal by the  Tribunal
           to grant leave to appeal should be granted if the  judge  is  of
           the opinion that it is properly arguable that a point not raised
           in the Grounds of Appeal to the Tribunal had a  strong  prospect
           of success if leave to appeal were to be granted."

14.   Robinson was decided before the commencement of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The obligations set out in the European Convention  are  no  less
    important  than  those  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  Both   recognise
    fundamental minimum standards of rights and obligations. Section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998 provides that it is  unlawful  for  a  public
    authority to act in a way  which  is  incompatible  with  a  Convention
    right. A "public authority" includes a court or tribunal as well  as  a
    person whose functions are of a public nature.  The  Tribunal  and  the
    Secretary of State are both under a duty not to act in a  way  that  is
    incompatible with Convention rights. It seems clear that the principles
    outlined in Robinson should also  apply  to  the  assessment  of  human
    rights claims.

15.   I raised concerns about the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  failure  to
    consider whether the appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  EX.1
    in light of the findings he made in paragraph 13  of  the  decision.  I
    acknowledge that the grounds only raise a challenge to the  immigration
    rules in an oblique way.  Quite rightly, Ms Fijiwala pointed  out  that
    the error was not properly articulated in the grounds of appeal or  the
    grant of permission. However, it seemed clear that she had  anticipated
    the point. As such I was satisfied that it was a  sufficiently  obvious
    point given the First-tier Tribunal's findings.

16.   The application for leave to remain on human rights grounds  was  made
    on 21 May 2015 and was refused in a decision dated 17  July  2015.  The
    appeal  fell  to  be  considered  under  the  new  appeals   provisions
    introduced by way of amendments to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). The appeal was brought under the amended
    section 82 of the NIAA 2002 against the  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim. The only ground of appeal could be that removal from  the
    UK was unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  ("HRA
    1998").

17.   The respondent's policy on "Rights  of  Appeal"  (Version  3.0)  makes
    clear that a number of applications made under  the  immigration  rules
    will be deemed as human rights applications giving rise to a  right  of
    appeal, including applications  made  under  Appendix  FM  (except  for
    provisions relating to bereavement and  domestic  violence).  It  seems
    clear from the respondent's  policy  that  it  was  intended  that  the
    immigration rules would still be central to the assessment of  a  human
    rights claim.

18.   The fact that the Tribunal no  longer  has  power  to  decide  that  a
    decision is not in accordance with the immigration rules does not  mean
    that the immigration rules are  not  a  relevant  consideration.  If  a
    person meets the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  relating  to
    private or family life it is likely, in the  majority  of  cases,  that
    this will be sufficient to show that removal is unlawful under  section
    6 of the HRA 1998. The  immigration  rules  are  said  to  reflect  the
    respondent's position as to where a balance will be struck between  the
    right to respect for  private  and  family  life  and  relevant  public
    interest considerations such as the maintenance of an effective  system
    of immigration  control  (paragraph  GEN.1.1,  Appendix  FM).  In  such
    circumstances it would be difficult for the respondent  to  argue  that
    removal would be lawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998 if an appellant
    is  found  to  meet  any  of  the  relevant  private  or  family   life
    requirements of the immigration rules.

19.   I acknowledge that there may be some qualitative  differences  between
    the fairly  stringent  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  contained  in
    paragraph EX.1  and  the  wider  proportionality  assessment  conducted
    outside the immigration rules. The sole focus  of  the  "insurmountable
    obstacles" test is on whether it is reasonable to expect  a  couple  to
    continue their family life outside the UK. In R (on the application  of
    Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) [2015] UKUT 189 the Tribunal recognised that  Appendix
    FM does not include consideration of the question of whether  it  would
    be proportionate  to  expect  a  person  to  return  home  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance.

20.   The proportionality assessment conducted under Article 8  outside  the
    rules is a much wider assessment. It can take into account a number  of
    other factors. These might  include  the  question  of  whether  it  is
    proportionate to expect a person to return to their country  of  origin
    to apply for entry clearance if they do not meet  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules. Other factors that might need to be  taken  into
    account as part of a broad assessment outside  the  rules  include  the
    public interest considerations  contained  in  section  117B-C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

21.   Ms Fijiwala acknowledged that the judge's finding that  it  would  not
    be proportionate to expect the UK sponsor and his children to  continue
    their family life with the appellant in the Philippines was  likely  to
    be sufficient to meet the "insurmountable obstacles" test on the  facts
    of this particular case,  even  if  there  might  be  some  qualitative
    differences between the two assessments. The "insurmountable obstacles"
    test is stringent but I am satisfied that the judge took into account a
    number of compelling factors relating to the sponsor and  his  children
    before concluding that it would be disproportionate to expect  them  to
    continue their family life in the Philippines.  The  same  factors  are
    capable of amounting to insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  being
    able to continue their family life outside the UK.

22.   The grounds of appeal  relating  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    principles in Chikwamba amount to little more than  disagreements  with
    the decision. The judge  gave  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  the
    appellant's family connections and the relatively short period of  time
    it might take to apply for entry clearance rendered it proportionate to
    expect her to return to apply for entry clearance. However, if  he  had
    considered whether the terms of the  family  life  rules  contained  in
    paragraph EX.1 were met it is apparent that his findings  in  paragraph
    13 were likely to have yielded a positive result.

23.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the human rights issues  engaged
    in this appeal are sufficiently important to render the judge's failure
    to  consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of   the
    immigration rules an  obvious  error  on  a  point  that,  on  his  own
    findings, had a strong prospect of success.

24.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. It follows from the  reasoning  set  out
    above that in remaking  the  decision  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    because the judge's findings were sufficient to show that the appellant
    met the family life requirements contained in  paragraph  EX.1  of  the
    immigration rules. For the purpose of assessing whether  removal  would
    be unlawful under section 6 the rules reflect the respondent's position
    on where a fair balance will be struck. In such circumstances it is not
    necessary to go on to make a wider assessment of the case under Article
    8 outside the rules.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








