
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27442/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 August 2017                      |On 8 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        Abdool Raheem Khan Kheerdali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius.  He  appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  13  July  2015
    refusing his application for a derivative residence card as the primary
    carer of his wife Saleema Ali, a British citizen.

2.   The judge  noted  the  relevant  test  which  is  in  effect  that  the
    appellant's wife would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or  in
    another EEA state if he were required to leave.

3.   The judge noted the relevant medical evidence.  Mrs  Ali  is  72  years
    old and suffers from multiple health problems.  Her  GP  supported  her
    assertion that this affected her ability to function  on  a  day-to-day
    basis and that she  consequently  needed  help  from  her  husband  for
    activities, such as cooking and washing and also housekeeping.  It  was
    credible  that  given  her  mobility  limitations  her  husband   would
    undertake the majority of the shopping and  the  household  chores  and
    take her to appointments.  He  helped  her  bath  and  dress.   It  was
    credible that he occasionally had to remind her to take her medication.
     The judge was satisfied that the appellant is his wife's primary carer
    and that there are not any relatives to whom she could turn for day-to-
    day support.

4.   The judge went on to say that although she accepted the  help  provided
    by  the  appellant  she  was  not  persuaded  that  Mrs  Ali   was   so
    significantly physically or mentally disabled that she could not remain
    in the United  Kingdom  without  him.   Nor  did  she  accept  that  no
    alternative care arrangements could be made.

5.   The judge went on to say that in reaching this  conclusion  she  placed
    significant weight on the fact that the appellant did not  provide  any
    documentary evidence  or  enquiries  made  regarding  alternative  care
    options or evidence as to why such options  would  not  be  reasonable.
    She said that for example, Mrs Ali  had  not  applied  for  a  personal
    independence payment or disability living allowance which could provide
    her with another  source  of  income  for  which  she  could  fund  the
    employment, or a cleaner or use it to pay for  taxis  to  take  her  to
    appointments.

6.   The judge also said that she placed  significant  weight  on  the  fact
    that Mrs Ali's GP had not made any  arrangements  for  an  occupational
    therapist to visit her house, to suggest any aids or  adaptations  that
    could assist her in day-to-day living and that other than  her  walking
    stick she did not have such.  The judge found it was probable  that  by
    using aids such as a bath rail Mrs Ali's ability to get in and  out  of
    her bath would be improved and consequently she would become more  able
    to care for herself and there was no evidence before the judge that Mrs
    Ali's local authority would be unwilling or unable to provide her  with
    care if so required.  The  judge  accepted  that  Mrs  Ali  wanted  her
    husband to be able to remain with her in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    they have a genuine, loving and supportive relationship.  She  accepted
    that Mrs Ali would be very sad if he  were  unable  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge was not however satisfied that Mrs  Ali  was
    or would become so disabled that she could not care for  herself  on  a
    day-to-day basis to such an extent that she would be unable  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without the appellant and was satisfied that  any
    help she did require could be provided by another agency.   The  appeal
    was therefore dismissed.

7.   The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  this  decision  and  was
    granted permission limited to ground 2, in which it was argued that the
    appellant's wife had made it clear in evidence that she did not receive
    disability living  allowance  or  personal  independence  payments  and
    indeed the fact was that she was  not  eligible  for  either  of  these
    benefits as they were only available to people under 65 and she is  72.
    It was argued as a consequence that the judge had erred in taking  into
    account irrelevant information and the conclusions were unsafe.

8.   In her submissions Ms Jones noted that there had been no  challenge  at
    the hearing to the medical or oral evidence.   The  appellant  was  his
    wife's primary carer and there were no relatives to turn to for day-to-
    day support.  The  judge  had  pointed  out  at  paragraph  11  of  her
    determination that there had been no enquiries about  alternatives  and
    no benefits applications.  It was clear  that  the  benefits  were  not
    available and significant weight had been placed on this.  It could not
    be said that the conclusion was inevitable albeit  that  other  matters
    were taken into account, and this amounted to a material error of  law.



9.   In his submissions Mr Clarke argued that the test was a high one  since
    it had to be shown that the British citizen in question would be unable
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  She would  in  effect  be  forced  to
    leave.  It was the case, as Ms Jones had argued, that positive findings
    were made at paragraph 9 of the judge's decision, but it was clear from
    paragraph 10 that the judge was not persuaded that no alternative  care
    arrangements could be made and there was no evidence of enquiries as to
    alternative care options being pursued by the appellant.  In  light  of
    that it was hard to see how the appellant could succeed whether or  not
    the erroneous matters had been taken into account.  Attention should be
    paid to paragraph 10 also and the  finding  that  no  arrangements  for
    occupational therapists had been made  by  the  GP.   On  the  lack  of
    evidence of alternatives for the appellant's wife he could not succeed.



10.  By way of reply Ms Jones argued that the judge had said that there  was
    significant weight to be attached and that was an error and it was hard
    to see how the finding could stand.

11.  I reserved my determination.

12.  It is common ground that the judge erred in considering  that  Mrs  Ali
    could apply for a personal independence payment  or  disability  living
    allowance, which could provide her with another source of  income  from
    which she could fund the employment of a cleaner or use it to  pay  for
    taxis to take her to appointments.  The general matter upon  which  the
    judge placed significant weight at paragraph 11 was the fact  that  the
    appellant had not provided any documentary evidence of  enquiries  made
    regarding alternative care options or evidence as to why  such  options
    would not be reasonable, and gave the lack of an  application  for  the
    two benefits as an example of this.  I think that they have to be  seen
    in that light only.  The essential concern of the judge  was  with  the
    failure to make enquiries into alternative care  options  and  also  at
    paragraph 12 to place significant weight on the fact that  the  GP  had
    not made any arrangements for an occupational therapist  to  visit  the
    house, to suggest any aids or adaptations that could assist Mrs Ali  in
    her day-to-day living.  Nor was there any  evidence  before  the  judge
    that Mrs Ali's local authority would be unwilling or unable to  provide
    her with care if so required.

13.  Although the judge erred therefore with regard to the failure to  apply
    for payments for which Mrs Ali was not eligible, I consider that it  is
    necessary to take the findings as a whole, in particular at  paragraphs
    11 and 12, but also bearing in mind the context of paragraph 9 and  the
    findings at paragraph 10 which lead me to conclude that the  judge  did
    not err in law.  In light  of  the  failure  to  make  enquiries  about
    alternative care options or evidence as to why such options  would  not
    be reasonable or that the local authority would be unwilling or  unable
    to provide Mrs Ali with care if so required, I consider it was properly
    open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c) had not been made out, and as a consequence that the  appeal
    fell to be dismissed.  I find no error of law in the  judge's  decision
    and accordingly the decision dismissing the appeal is maintained.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 7 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


