
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/27617/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th October 2017                       |On 8th November 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Zafar Iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O. R. Williams, promulgated on 22nd February  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Manchester "On the Papers" on 23rd  January  2017.   In  the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon
    the Respondent Secretary of State, subsequently applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  20th
    January 1972.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 20th July 2015 refusing the Appellant leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the general  grounds
    paragraph 322(1A) and paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.   The
    Respondent held that the Appellant had used deception in  submitting  a
    TOEIC certificate in that the Appellant had used a proxy text taker  to
    obtain examination results through deception.  It is a feature of  this
    case that the Appellant also did not have a valid CAS.

The Judge's Decision

 3.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Williams  on  23rd  January  2017  in
    Manchester, the Appellant was not in attendance,  and  the  appeal  was
    heard on request without a oral hearing.  The judge applied the case of
    SM and Qadir [2016] UKIAT (IAC) and noted how the  Secretary  of  State
    discharged the evidential burden of proving that the TOEIC certificates
    had been procured by dishonesty with  respect  to  which  only  generic
    evidence  had  been  submitted.   Accordingly,  the  judge  made  three
    specific findings.  First, that there was  insufficient  evidence  that
    there was a proxy taker who took  the  Appellant's  test  at  BIET  TEC
    College.

 4. Second that the document "ETS SELT the Source Data" stood in isolation.
     Although it stated that the Appellant's score was "invalid".   It  had
    not been annexed to a statement.  Accordingly, the judge could not know
    who produced the data.

 5. Third, the case had been considered on the papers, but  was  originally
    listed for an oral hearing.  No request was made  for  an  interpreter.
    The Appellant's statement was written in English.  The judge held  that
    "the declaration for his signature makes no mention of  it  being  read
    back to him so that he understood it."

 6. Accordingly, these "factors fortify my finding that the Appellant has a
    good understanding of English and would not need to act in a  dishonest
    manner regarding his speaking test".

 7. The judge then went on to consider Article 8 of the 1950 Convention and
    concluded that the Appellant had fallen  into  the  category  of  those
    colleges who had lost sponsorship status through no fault of their own.
     It was not proportionate to allow the  Appellant  the  opportunity  to
    find a substitute college and to complete his  course.   The  Appellant
    has to date not been able  to  have  the  opportunity  to  re-enrol  at
    another institution.  This is, "because he does not have valid leave to
    remain and so cannot be issued with a CAS" (paragraph 27).

 8. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge erred because there had
    been a third party  withdrawal  of  the  Appellant's  certificate,  and
    accordingly the  appeal  should  have  been  dismissed  in  any  event.
    Furthermore, in allowing the appeal, the judge erred in allowing it  on
    the basis of private life under Article 8.

10. There was no Rule 24 response from the Appellant.

Submissions

11. Ms Aboni, appearing on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  as  Senior  HOPO,
    submitted that the Appellant could not  have  succeeded  in  any  event
    because, as the judge  found  (at  paragraph  14)  the  Appellant  "has
    conceded" could not satisfy the CAS requirements.  When his application
    was made on 2nd August 2012, the Sponsor institution in Birmingham, the
    Institute of Education Training and Technology, went  on  to  lose  its
    sponsorship status.  Therefore, the Appellant could not have  succeeded
    on this basis in any event.

12. Second, insofar as the judge then allowed the appeal under  Article  8,
    this was inadequately reasoned because there is no Article 8  right  to
    education.  The Appellant had been given enough time in  any  event  to
    find another college  and  it  was  not  enough  to  say  that  "it  is
    proportionate to allow him an opportunity to find a substitute  college
    and to  complete  his  course"  (paragraph  27).   To  state  that  the
    Appellant should have enough time "to complete  his  course"  overlooks
    the fact that the Section 117B considerations in favour of  the  public
    interest regarding  immigration  control  militates  against  any  such
    general assertion.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, this  is  a  case  where  the  third  party  had  withdrawn  the
    certificate issued to the Appellant.  In light of that, the third party
    plainly could not guarantee the validity of the information included in
    the certificate.  That meant that the basis for the  grant  of  further
    leave was removed as well.  The judge gave  insufficient  consideration
    to the fact that the ETS, as a third party, had removed the Appellant's
    certificate.

15. Second, the Appellant himself did not have a valid CAS and so could not
    have succeeded under the Immigration Rules in the first place.

16. Third, given the aforesaid, the judge went on to allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds ruling that, "the Appellant has to date  not  been
    able to have the opportunity to re-enrol at another institution because
    he does not have valid leave to remain and so cannot be issued  with  a
    CAS" (paragraph 27).  The Appellant did not have a Article 8  right  to
    education in these circumstances.  Given that the absence of a CAS  and
    the withdrawal by ETS of the certificate, no Article 8 basis  had  been
    set out by the Appellant such as to justify allowing the appeal on  his
    private life grounds.





Remaking the Decision

17. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before the judge, and the submissions that  I  have
    heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that  I  have
    given above.  The Appellant did not have a  valid  CAS.   The  ETS  had
    declared his results to be invalid.  No adequate explanations had  been
    given by the Appellant such as to be recounted  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination with respect to the  relevant  matters.   The  Appellant,
    accordingly, cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st October 2017





