
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27840/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 21 December 2016                |On 30 December 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 OYOMARE [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan (counsel) Instructed by Kothala & Co,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated  on  11  July  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3. The Appellant was born on 20 April 1978 and is a national of Nigeria.

4. The appellant says that she entered the  UK  in  December  2006  using  a
false passport. Her daughter was born  in  the  UK  on  12  June  2007.  The
appellant applied for a residence  card  on  2  July  2010.  The  respondent
refused that application  on  11  November  2010.  On  28  August  2012  the
appellant made an application for leave to remain in the  UK  on  article  8
ECHR grounds. The respondent refused that application on 10 September  2013.
On 18 February 2014 she was found working illegally.

5. On 2 September 2014 the appellant submitted  a  further  application  for
leave to remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds. On 6 February 2015  the
respondent refused that application. The appellant  sought  Judicial  Review
of that  decision,  and  it  was  agreed  that  her  application  should  be
reconsidered by the respondent.

6.  On  24  July  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

7.  The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Lucas ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  8  November  2016  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. It is arguable that the Judge has set out an insufficient  analysis
      as to the degree of integration of the Appellant's daughter across the
      educational, social and cultural spectrum before reaching a conclusion
      as to the application of section 55.

      3. It is further arguable that the Judge has set out  an  insufficient
      analysis of the application  of  the  relevant  criteria  pursuant  to
      section 117 in dismissing the appeal on Article 8 grounds in  addition
      to finding that the appeal could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.

The Hearing

8. Mr Khan, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal. He  told
me that the focus in this case is the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
child. He referred me to [28] to [40] of the  decision,  and  told  me  that
there  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  child   could   meet   the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(6) of the immigration  rules.  He  told
me that there had been inadequate analysis of the "reasonableness test"  and
that the Judge had failed to take account of relevant factors.  He  conceded
the Judge makes a clear finding that it  is  reasonable  for  the  child  to
return with the appellant, but told me that the analysis fails  because  the
Judge ignored the mother's inability to provide for her child on return.  He
argued that the Judge relied  on  an  inference  that  there  are  resources
available to the appellant in Nigeria, and did not consider the need to  pay
for education and health care, in Nigeria,  for  the  appellants  child.  He
accepted that objective materials were not  placed  before  the  Judge,  but
argued that, relying on the case  PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -  conjoined
family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC), the Judge  had  failed  to
consider all relative factors so that his analysis of  "reasonableness"  was
flawed. For  the  sake  of  completeness,  he  referred  me  to  R  (on  the
application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705. He urged me  to  allow  the
appeal and set the decision aside.

9. Mr Nath, for the respondent, told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law, material or  otherwise.  He  told  me  that  the  appellant's
appeal proceeds on the basis that inadequate consideration  has  been  given
to  either  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child  or   to   the
proportionality exercise required by section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He  told
me that the was no merit in either submission. Mr  Nath  told  me  that  the
Judge's findings between [31] and [46]  of  the  decision  set  out  careful
consideration of all relevant factors. He took me to [36] of  the  decision,
where the Judge finds that the appellant does not have a fear  of  returning
to Nigeria, and to [37] of the decision where the Judge finds that there  is
nothing to prevent the appellant returned to Nigeria. He  referred  to  [38]
of the decision, where the Judge clearly acknowledges that  the  appellant's
child is a qualifying child in terms of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  He
told me that the Judge considered the best interests  of  the  child  before
concluding that it is in the best interests of the child to remain with  her
mother.   Mr Nath relied on EV Philippines v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.  He
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's decision stand

Analysis

10. Between [1] and [3] of the decision, the Judge sets out  the  background
      to this case. Between [4] and [29] the Judge summarises  the  evidence
      and submissions. It is at [32]  that  the  Judge  starts  to  set  out
      findings of fact. Between [38] and [40]  the  Judge  clearly  makes  a
      finding that the appellant's daughter has been in the UK for more than
      seven years, and that she is doing well at primary school in the UK.

11. At [42] the Judge expresses sympathy for the  appellant  before  setting
      his feelings aside. He then correctly sets out the balance which  must
      be struck, taking account of the public interest.

12. Section 117B of the 2002 Act reads

Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases:

(1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
      interest;

(2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of  the
      economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who  seek  to
      enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
      because persons who can speak English- (a) are less  of  a  burden  on
      taxpayers, and (b) are better able to integrate into society;

(3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of  the
      economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who  seek  to
      enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
      because such persons- (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and  (b)  are
      better able to integrate into society;

(4) Little weight should be given  to-  (a)   a  private  life,  or  (b)   a
      relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that is established by
      a person  at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully;

(5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a  person
      at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious;

(6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the  public
      interest does not require the person's removal where- (a)  the  person
      has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying
      child, and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
      the United Kingdom.

13.  In SS, Petition for Judicial Review [2016] CSOH 122 it  was  held  that
the  expression "established" as used in section  117B(4)  and  (5)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could  not  be  interpreted  as
relating only to the formation of a person's private  life  or  relationship
with a qualifying partner, but not to its  continuation  and  extension.  An
Indian national's petition for judicial review of the Secretary  of  State's
refusal to treat further submissions made on his behalf  as  a  fresh  human
rights claim was refused where he had no right to  be  in  the  UK  when  he
married his wife, and the deepening of his relationship  with  her  and  her
extended family was not a new matter.

14. Mr Khan correctly focused this appeal on the test of reasonableness.  By
virtue of section 117D of the 2002 Act, a "qualifying child" means a  person
who is under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British  citizen,  or  (b)  has
lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or  more.
 If a child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the
2002 Act as  amended,  the  issue  will  generally  be  whether  it  is  not
reasonable for that child to return.

15. Although it is argued that the Judge was incorrect to find  that  it  is
reasonable for the appellant and  her  child  to  return  to  Nigeria,  that
amounts to little more than an expression of dissatisfaction with the  facts
as the Judge found them to be, and dissatisfaction with the conclusion  that
the Judge drew from those facts. It is clear from the  careful  analysis  of
the evidence contained between [4] and [29] of the decision that  there  was
no reliable evidence placed before  the  Judge  of  either  a  risk  to  the
appellant and her child, or a risk of destitution on return to Nigeria.  The
bundle of evidence produced for the  appellant  to  the  First-tier  focuses
entirely on the circumstances of the appellant and her daughter in the UK.

16. The only evidence of  the  circumstances  that  the  appellant  and  her
daughter are likely to face in Nigeria is contained in one sentence  in  the
appellant's witness statement dated 31st May 2016. There the appellant says

      Most of my close family, friends and relatives are  all  here  present
      and settled in the United Kingdom, I have no one to turn to in my home
      country Nigeria for any help.

17. It is clear from [36] of the decision that  the  appellant  expanded  on
her witness statement in her oral evidence, but her claim to fear return  to
Nigeria as placed before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  she  would  be
harassed by her former partner. That account is  rejected  at  [36]  of  the
decision and at [37] the Judge makes a clear finding that

      There is simply nothing to prevent the  appellant  from  returning  to
Nigeria...

18. The Judge can only make findings of fact on the basis of  evidence  led.
The evidence placed before the First-tier was carefully  considered  by  the
Judge. It was evidence based findings  of  fact  which  lead  the  Judge  to
conclusions which were well within the range of reasonable conclusions  open
to the Judge. There was no reliable evidence to support the  final  sentence
in the second paragraph of the grounds of appeal, that

      The appellant and  her  daughter  will  face  destitution  and  untold
hardship in Nigeria.

19. Although the Judge does not specifically refer to section  117B  of  the
2002 Act, the Judge clearly considered the factors set out there as part  of
the proportionality exercise. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the statutory duty to consider the  matters  set  out
in s 117B of the 2002 Act is satisfied  if  the  Tribunal's  decision  shows
that it has had regard to such parts of it as are relevant.

20. What is really pled for the appellant is a comparison of life in the  UK
and life in Nigeria.  The effect  of  the  Respondent's  decision  does  not
cause separation for this  family.  The  appellant  and  her  daughter  will
remain together. I am mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

21.  I remind myself of the cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW  [2015]  CSIH
36.  It is the intention of the Respondent to ensure that the Appellant  and
her daughter stay together. It has long been established that it is  in  the
interests of  children  to  remain  with  their  parents.  The  Respondent's
decision maintains the unity of  this  family  and  does  not  separate  the
appellant from her daughter. The interests of the appellant's  daughter  are
served because the integrity of the family unit is not challenged.

22.  The impact of the Respondent's decision is that the Appellant  and  her
daughter will return to Nigeria. The  impact  on  the  appellant's  daughter
that her education and any help she receives from health services, care  and
treatment in the UK all come to  an  end  -  but  the  background  materials
indicate that education and healthcare  is  available  (albeit  at  a  lower
level) in Nigeria. There is nothing before me (and there was nothing  before
the First-tier) from which I can draw the conclusion that return to  Nigeria
would result  in  neglect  or  destitution  for  the  appellant's  daughter.
Furthermore, it is well settled that the  "better  v  worse"  prism  is  the
wrong approach in law.

23. Mr Khan is correct that the legal test to be applied in considering  the
best interests of the appellants child is the question of reasonableness  of
return to  Nigeria.  The  only  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
tribunal related to the length of time that  the  appellant's  daughter  has
been in the UK (9 years) and her immersion in primary education in the UK.

24. Although R (on the application of Osanwemwenze) v SSHD  2014  EWHC  1563
was not specifically concerned with section 117B it has  some  relevance  in
terms of the reasonableness of a child leaving the UK.  In  that  case,  the
claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had been in the  United  Kingdom
for more than 7 years and had leave to remain in his own right. It was  held
that this was an important but not an overriding consideration  and  it  was
reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant's  family  including  the  stepson  to
relocate to Nigeria. The parents had experienced life there  into  adulthood
and would be able to provide for the children and help them to  reintegrate.
In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that when  the
question posed by s117B(6)  is  the  same  question  posed  in  relation  to
children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be posed and  answered  in  the
proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow
its parents to their country  of  origin;  (EV  (Philippines)).  It  is  not
however a question that needs to be posed and answered in relation  to  each
child more than once.

25. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held (notwithstanding reservations) that when  considering  whether  it  was
reasonable to remove a child from the UK under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, a court or tribunal should not simply focus  on  the  child
but  should  have  regard  to  the  wider  public  interest  considerations,
including the conduct and immigration history of the parents.

26. The Judge's finding that the appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of
the immigration rules is not challenged. On the evidence placed  before  the
Judge, the respondent's decision is  not  an  interference  with  article  8
family life because  family  life  exists  between  the  appellant  and  her
daughter, and there is no intention  to  separate  the  appellant  from  her
daughter. The respondent's argument can only relate  to  article  8  private
life. Because of the operation of section 117B(4) of  the  2002,  the  Judge
was correct to attach little weight to that private life.

27.  In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC)  the Tribunal held  that  (i)  Duties  to  have
regard as a primary consideration to the best interests of a  child  are  so
well established that a judge should take the point for him  or  herself  as
an obvious point to be considered, where the issue arises on  the  evidence,
irrespective of whether the appellants or the advocates have done  so;  (ii)
Although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether the  duty
requires further information to be obtained  or  inquiry  to  be  made,  the
judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case. Where that evidence  gives
no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is threatened  by  the
immigration decision in question, or that the  child's  best  interests  are
undermined thereby, there is no basis for any further  judicial  exploration
or reasoned decision on the matter.

28. There is no flaw in the Judge's fact finding. The correct  test  in  law
is  applied.  The  Judge  manifestly  considered  the   interests   of   the
appellant's daughter. The conclusion which he reached  is  well  within  the
range of conclusions reasonably open to the Judge.

29. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

30. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
appellant might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

31. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out findings  that  are
sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

32.  No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

33.  The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed   Date 23 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
