
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27144/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 8th July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                                Afsana Begum
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, who is from Bangladesh, came to the United Kingdom as  a
    visitor on 26th December 2012.  On 4th March 2013 she married  Mohammed
    Monu Miah ("the Sponsor"), who  is  a  British  citizen.   She  applied
    through solicitors for variation of her leave.  This was refused by the
    Respondent on 17th June 2013 and a decision was made under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  2006  to  remove  her  to
    Bangladesh.  The basis of refusal was that the Appellant did  not  meet
    the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules as
    she was in this country as a visitor (E-LTRP.2.1(a)) and  she  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. She  had  lived
    here for a very limited period and she had  ties  in  Bangladesh.   The
    refusal letter went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  particular
    circumstances constituting exceptional circumstances  under  Article  8
    ECHR but it was stated that both she and the Sponsor  would  have  been
    aware  of  her  immigration  status  when  they  married  and  of   the
    possibility that they might not be able to continue the relationship in
    the United Kingdom.  She had stated that she was unable to return  home
    because she had a kidney infection but she  had  been  discharged  from
    hospital with a prescription of antibiotics.  She had said that she was
    unable to fly because she was  pregnant  but  that  was  not  accepted.
    There was no basis for the matter to be considered outside the Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed against those decisions under Section 82 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Her  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Stott at the Birmingham hearing centre
    on 3rd December 2013.  In a determination promulgated on 11th  December
    2013 the appeal was dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and with
    regard to human rights.  Judge Stott heard evidence from the  Appellant
    and from the Sponsor.  In his findings he accepted  that  there  was  a
    valid marriage but noted  that  the  arrangements  had  been  conducted
    extremely swiftly and they had  married  within  three  months  of  her
    arrival.  He clearly had doubts about the suggestion that the  proposed
    marriage had not been arranged prior  to  her  arrival.   He  found  no
    reason why she could not return to Bangladesh for health  reasons.   He
    noted that her family had attended the wedding ceremony and  there  was
    no suggestion that they would  refuse  to  house  and  welcome  her  in
    Bangladesh.  She could not rely upon paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM  as
    the Rules were clear that EX.1 was not applicable  in  the  case  of  a
    visitor.  He did not accept the reasons given for  the  enhancement  of
    the Sponsor's salary. He noted that the Sponsor was prepared to  return
    to Bangladesh with  the  Appellant  whilst  an  application  for  entry
    clearance was made.  He did not find  that  there  were  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances which might have entitled  the  Appellant  to
    succeed under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal, arguing that the  judge
    had been obliged  adequately  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    pregnancy and he should have reached the conclusion that this  amounted
    to compelling and exceptional circumstances.  The child had expected to
    be born on  21st  January  2014.   The  Appellant  was  in  a  familial
    relationship which was affected by the decision.  He should have  taken
    account of  the  impact  of  the  decision  on  other  members  of  the
    Appellant's family, the Sponsor and expected child and was under a duty
    to have regard to the welfare of the child.  He was wrong  to  consider
    that it was appropriate to expect the Appellant and Sponsor  to  return
    to Bangladesh and had failed to recognise the ratio in Chikwamba v SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40 in concluding that the Appellant should apply for  entry
    clearance from Bangladesh.

 4. Permission was initially refused but the application was renewed to the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  on
    25th March 2014.  He commented that the renewed Grounds of  Appeal  did
    not suggest that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The  judge  had  given  consideration  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  was  pregnant  at  the  date  of  hearing   and   did   give
    consideration to the best interests of the child,  even  assuming  that
    there was a need to consider the best interests  of  an  unborn  child.
    Although the judge found that the Appellant could return to  Bangladesh
    with  the  Sponsor  (and  child)  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance, he granted permission in terms of  the  point  made  in  the
    grounds in relation to the decision in Chikwamba,  although  the  grant
    was not limited.  In a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule  24
    the  Respondent  contended  that  the  judge   had   directed   himself
    appropriately and there was no material error.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Mustafa handed  in  his  detailed
    skeleton argument upon which he relied.  He contended that  there  were
    two issues, whether the judge had materially erred by finding that  the
    Appellant could return to Bangladesh with her husband and child to make
    an entry clearance application and whether he had  similarly  erred  by
    dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.  He relied in particular
    on extracts from Chikwamba and from SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA
    Civ 1054.  The dismissal of the appeal on the basis that the  Appellant
    could return to Bangladesh to seek entry  clearance  was  a  breach  of
    Article 8, particularly as the Appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with  her  husband  and  child.  The  enforcement  of  the
    immigration requirement of Appendix FM was said to be disproportionate.
     There was no guarantee that  the  Appellant  would  be  granted  entry
    clearance, which would deprive the child of  the  benefits  of  British
    citizenship.  The judge, it was said, should have decided the Article 8
    claim comprehensively following R v SSHD ex parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27, despite the Appellant's visitor status.  It was put to  Mr  Mustafa
    that as at the date of hearing the Appellant had not given birth to her
    child; he said that the judge was aware  that  she  was  expecting  the
    child and he should not have disregarded the consequences.

 6. In response Mr Smart relied upon the Rule 24 response.   He  said  that
    the judge had addressed all the relevant  issues  and  had  made  clear
    findings of fact at his  paragraphs  11  to  17.   He  had  arrived  at
    conclusions open to him.  He did consider the Appellant's pregnancy but
    the child was unborn  and  as  such  had  no  Article  8  rights.   The
    prospects of success on a future application were not a matter for  the
    judge to consider.  Mr Smart referred to paragraph  24  of  Hayat.   He
    relied on the summary at paragraph 30 of that case but referred  me  to
    other sections, notably paragraphs  50  to  52.   He  said  there  were
    similarities with the current case.  Hayat had been decided in the wake
    of Chikwamba but  without  the  difficulties  which  the  Appellant  in
    Chikwamba was likely to face in Zimbabwe.   He  handed  in  a  document
    showing the length of time  necessary  to  deal  with  settlement  visa
    applications both in Dhaka and in Sylhet.  He submitted that the  times
    were modest.

 7. He continued saying that there were no compelling circumstances to take
    the matter to be considered outside of the Rules.  The judge had doubts
    about the Sponsor's income.  He  dealt  with  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition  and  also  had  doubts  about  previous  contact  and  prior
    arrangements for the match.  Furthermore the husband  was  prepared  to
    return to Bangladesh with the Appellant whilst an application was made.
     Pregnancy was not a compelling circumstance and had not in itself been
    challenged.

 8. Finally Mr Mustafa said that the judgment in Hayat did not override the
    ratio in Chikwamba but rather  assisted  in  its  interpretation.   The
    judge had found that there was a  valid  marriage  and,  he  submitted,
    financial  circumstances  were   not   relevant.    The   compassionate
    circumstances were the pregnancy.  He said to expect a British woman to
    fly out and give birth in another country would be disproportionate and
    that was similarly the case with this appeal.

 9. Having considered those submissions I reserved my determination which I
    now give.  I have come to the view that Judge  Stott  did  not  make  a
    material error of law in his determination for the  following  reasons.
    It was clear that the Appellant could not meet any of the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  It is now apparent from numerous  judgments,
    following the changes in the Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012,
    that the Rules themselves must be borne in mind, As has been stated  by
    Lord Justice Beatson in Haleemudeen v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  (at
    paragraph 40) the Rules now address Article 8 issues.  The guidance  in
    R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) make  it  clear  that
    only if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave outside  the
    Rules is it necessary to go on to consider  Article  8.  That  view  is
    endorsed in Haleemudeen.  At paragraph 44 Lord Justice Beatson said:

         "Mr Richardson's preferred position was that the Rules are only the
         starting point for an assessment of proportionality.  It  was  with
         evident reluctance that he accepted that, at least in  this  court,
         in  the  light  of  the  authorities,  it  is  necessary  to   find
         'compelling circumstances' for going outside the Rules ..."

10. Chikwamba was a case of a woman with a  child  from  Zimbabwe  who  had
    married a Zimbabwean citizen with refugee status who could  not  return
    to that country. It seemed she was likely to be granted entry clearance
    if she returned to Harare to  make  an  application  from  there.   The
    present case is readily distinguished as at the  date  of  hearing  the
    Appellant did not have a child, the Sponsor said that he was willing to
    return to Bangladesh with her while she made an application  and  there
    were doubts as to whether she  was  in  a  position  to  meet  all  the
    requirements of the Rules, for the reasons set out by the judge.

11. At paragraph 30 of Hayat Lord Justice  Elias  summarised  the  relevant
    principles relating to whether an applicant should be obliged to return
    to the home country to make an entry clearance application.  He  stated
    that each case was fact-sensitive but where Article 8  was  engaged  it
    would be a disproportionate interference with family life to enforce  a
    policy of return to make application unless there was a sensible reason
    for doing so.  At paragraph 50 he referred to the length and degree  of
    family disruption being a  highly  relevant  factor.   He  went  on  at
    paragraph 51 to state:

         "In my judgment these were all proper considerations  to  weigh  in
         the balance when considering the merits of the Article 8 claim.  As
         the Secretary of State pointed out  in  her  submissions  there  is
         strong Strasbourg and domestic authority to the effect that only in
         exceptional circumstances will a couple who have formed a union  in
         full knowledge of the precarious immigration status  of  either  of
         them be entitled to remain pursuant to Article 8 rights:  see  Y  v
         Russia [2010] 51 EHRR 21 paragraph 104."

    The documents submitted by Mr Smart indicated that at the  Sylhet  post
    76% of settlement applications were dealt  with  within  30  days,  83%
    within 60 days and 91% within 90 days.  At Dhaka 83%  were  dealt  with
    within 30 days, 95% within 60  days  and  100%  within  90  days.   The
    Appellant has her parents  and  siblings  in  Bangladesh.   The  couple
    married at a time when she could not  have  obtained  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules as a spouse.  It is not clear that she would  meet  all
    of the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the moment as the judge
    expressed doubts concerning the Sponsor's  income,  which  appeared  to
    have increased greatly of late.  The child had not been born as at  the
    date of the hearing  or  promulgation  of  the  determination  and  the
    child's best interests did not fall to be addressed as the child had no
    separate existence.  This view is consistent with that expressed by the
    Court of Appeal in CA v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  The judge was  well
    aware of the Appellant's pregnancy. It is the case that  the  Appellant
    herself had been born in Bangladesh,  her  parents  and  siblings  live
    there and her husband  was  prepared  to  travel  with  her  whilst  an
    application was made.  The judge found that there was no medical reason
    to prevent her travelling.

12. The question then is whether the judge erred in failing to  proceed  to
    consider Article 8  beyond  the  Rules  which  have  been  approved  by
    Parliament.  He did not expressly refer to Gulshan, Nagre or any of the
    other case law but he did follow the principles of those cases.  He did
    not find that there were compelling or exceptional circumstances  which
    might have enabled the Appellant to succeed under Article 8.  That  was
    an approach that was clearly open to him and does not reveal  an  error
    of law on his part.  This appeal accordingly falls to be dismissed.

Decision

The determination of Judge Stott did not  contain  a  material  error  on  a
point of law and his  decision  that  the  appeal  be  dismissed  under  the
Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds therefore stands.


Signed                              Date 03 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
