
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/27145/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th June 2015                    |30th June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                OUNANCER HRA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Cherradi (McKenzie friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant entered the UK on the 31st of January 2014 as the  spouse
    of Mr Khayi, a Spanish national living in the UK. On the  23rd  of  May
    2014 she applied for a residence card which was refused as it had  been
    shown that the Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  Her
    appeal was considered on the papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson
    and dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 8th of September 2014.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  an
    application of the 11th of September 2014. It was argued that the Judge
    had made an error in relation to the annual return  and  the  Sponsor's
    share holding in the company for which he worked and an  annual  return
    of the 2nd of July 2014 was enclosed. There was  also  said  to  be  an
    error with regard to his wages and a table was provided.

 3. The application was considered by Judge Murray who  granted  permission
    to appeal on the 21st of October 2014. He noted that it seemed that the
    Sponsor earned the minimum wage according to the table provided and the
    annual return before the judge showed that the Sponsor had 50 shares.

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant was assisted  by
    Mr I Cherradi a friend of his who addressed the Tribunal and translated
    for the Appellant. The  submissions  are  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.

 5. Having read the papers that the  Judge  had  I  am  satisfied  that  he
    correctly summarised the evidence  that  was  before  him.  The  annual
    return that he had was dated the 13th of June 2014 and  clearly  states
    that  the  Sponsor  did  not  have  any  shares  whereas  the  other  2
    shareholders had 50 each. There is an error in that the Judge said that
    they had 5 each but that is not material, the important detail is  that
    the printed evidence submitted and before the Judge showed the  Sponsor
    had no shares. It is clearly not an  error  for  a  Judge  to  rely  on
    evidence submitted and the later return submitted with the  application
    for permission to appeal has no bearing on this issue.

 6. There were other features of the evidence that the Judge had regard  to
    in assessing the paperwork  and  the  difference  between  the  various
    documents  relating  to  shareholding  would  not  have  assisted   the
    Appellant. On the evidence that was before the Judge he was entitled to
    find that it had not been shown that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty
    rights and accordingly the decision contains no error of law.

 7. At the Upper Tribunal hearing Mr Cherradi  said  that  the  Appellant's
    wife now has a Spanish passport. That of course  does  not  affect  the
    nature of the hearing or decision of Judge  Monson.  It  does  put  the
    Appellant in a different position and she  would  be  well  advised  to
    inform the Home Office of  her  EEA  national  status  and  to  provide
    evidence of that for their consideration.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision and the decision of Judge Monson stands as
the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
direction.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 29th June 2015

