

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27671/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 11 July 2013                               |On 17 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  DAMEI LI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Miss R McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. By  letter  dated  15  November  2012  the  respondent  refused  the
       appellant's application for a residence card, for lack  of  evidence
       that her EEA national husband was  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
       worker in the UK during a particular part of  the  relevant  period,
       from November 2007 to 2009.


    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
       by determination  promulgated  on  10  April  2013,  giving  similar
       reasons.

    3. The issue raised by the application for and grant of  permission  is
       whether the judge overlooked that  there  was  before  her  evidence
       which had not been before  the  respondent  to  establish  that  the
       appellant's husband was working (both in employment,  and  in  self-
       employment) during the period in issue.

    4. Mr Mullen firstly submitted that  tax  credit  assessments  for  the
       relevant time were based on the total income  of  both  husband  and
       wife, without differentiation, and so even if the judge should  have
       taken them into account, they did  not  necessarily  show  that  the
       husband was working at all.  However, it emerged that on turning the
       pages of the assessment the income was all the husband's.

    5. The judge appears to have overlooked that the  evidence  before  her
       was more extensive than before the respondent.  It is  not  disputed
       that the appellant was entitled to bring further evidence  and  that
       she could succeed on appeal, even if  her  application  was  rightly
       refused by the respondent on the information originally supplied.

    6. The evidence of earnings week by week  is  not  100%  complete,  but
       given the lapse of time and changes in the work carried out  by  the
       appellant's husband that is unsurprising.  As a whole, the  evidence
       shows it to be much  more  likely  than  not  that  the  appellant's
       husband was residing in the UK in accordance  with  the  regulations
       (as  a  worker)  throughout  the  5  year  period  required  by  the
       regulations.

    7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a  point  of  law.   It  is  set  aside.   The
       decision is remade by allowing the appeal, as originally brought  to
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    8. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


                               [pic]
                                17 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


