
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27528/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 August 2014                              |On 8 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR



                                   Between

                                      H
                           (Anonymity ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by West12
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings  and  unless
and until the court decides otherwise shall be referred to as H.  No  report
of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
Failure to comply with this direction could  lead to a contempt of court.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Singapore born in 1983  who  entered  the
    UK on 19 September 2004 as a student.  It is not disputed that she  was
    a genuine student.  She sought further leave to remain to  sit  certain
    modules for her course in October 2012 and was granted leave  until  15
    November 2012.  On 14 November 2012 she applied for  further  leave  to
    remain on form FLR(0).  In  the  form  the  appellant  stated  she  was
    transgendered and lesbian and  that  her  gender  was  not  legally  or
    socially  recognised  in  Singapore.   The   respondent   refused   the
    application under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  (HC  395).
    There were no exceptional circumstances justifying consideration  of  a
    grant of leave under Article 8 outside  the  Rules  and  the  appellant
    should in the circumstances  have  applied  for  asylum  at  an  asylum
    screening unit.

2.   An appeal was launched against the decision on asylum and human  rights
    grounds.

3.   The appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P-J  White  on  10
    January 2014.

4.   The judge summarised the  appellant's  claim  in  paragraph  6  of  his
    determination noting that the appellant had been born a male child  and
    had realised in about 2002 that  she  was  psychologically  female  and
    since 2004 had presented herself as female and behaved  and  socialised
    as such in the United Kingdom.  The judge continues:

         "In Singapore her identity card and birth certificate  continue  to
         carry her original name although she changed her name by deed  poll
         in the United Kingdom in 2009.   She has been able to use  her  new
         name in her most recent Singaporean passport.  It is  not  possible
         for her to seek a variation of her gender to female under  the  law
         in Singapore. If removed  to  Singapore  she  will  be  subject  to
         inhumane  and  degrading   treatment,   including   liability   for
         continuing  duties  as  a  male  military  reservist,  because  her
         transferred status will not be  recognised  officially  unless  she
         undergoes  intrusive   gender   reassignment   surgery.   Being   a
         transgender person is not a matter of a particular social group."

5.   The appellant was represented before the First-tier Judge,  as  she  is
    before me, by Mr Mackenzie.

6.   Apart from the oral evidence of  the  appellant  the  judge  refers  to
    three reports which had been submitted  for  his  consideration.  There
    was a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Lorimer, a legal  opinion  from
    Mr Ravi, a lawyer in Singapore and a report from Refworld published  in
    January 2013.  The judge summarises the material between paragraphs  27
    - 36 of the determination.

7.   The judge accepted the evidence that the appellant was a  non-operative
    transgender who had made a transition  to  the  adoption  of  a  female
    identity since her arrival in the United Kingdom culminating in a  deed
    poll by which she had changed her name to a  recognisably  female  one.
    She had no wish to undergo gender reassignment surgery.   She would  be
    viewed as male in Singapore unless she underwent surgery.  Her identity
    card issued in 1995 identified her as male, as did her driving  licence
    issued in 2004.  Her passport issued in 2012 gave her female  name  but
    indicated her sex as male.  None of the documents could be  changed  in
    respect of her gender unless she underwent surgery.

8.   The judge accepted that if the appellant were at  risk  of  persecution
    arising from her gender identity that would fall within  the  ambit  of
    the Refugee Convention and that she could not reasonably be expected to
    undergo gender reassignment surgery to avoid any risk  of  persecution.
    There was no risk of prosecution given the background material.

9.   The judge accepted that the appellant would face  difficulties  arising
    from the need on a regular basis to produce official identity documents
    which would show her as male, although the authorities had accepted her
    deed poll and issued the appellant with a new passport  in  her  female
    name and had accepted a photograph of the appellant  as  she  currently
    appeared.  Her gender on her documents could not be changed although it
    appeared that official recognisor of a change of name was  possible  in
    Singapore and it seemed inevitable to the judge  that  the  authorities
    would be prepared to issue new identity cards and driving  licences  so
    that the name on these official documents matched the new official name
    of the individual.   Similarly up-to-date photographs would be required
    in the view of the judge.

10.  In relation to the report from  Mr  Ravi,  the  judge  stated  that  he
    understood  Singapore  to  be  a  comparatively  conservative   country
    although the limited background evidence indicated possibly  a  gradual
    change in attitudes.

11.  While there were reports of harassment and abuse in Refworld  they  did
    not have direct  evidence  from  any  of  the  appellant's  friends  or
    acquaintances who had actually experienced harassment, abuse or assault
    and added

         "I have no reason to doubt Singapore has a functioning police force
         and judicial system and no evidence  has  been  put  before  me  to
         suggest that, certainly so far as physical  assault  is  concerned,
         sufficiency of protection from the state would not be available."

12.  The determination continues as follows:

         "47.  The appellant tells me that she would be  under  pressure  to
             present and live generally as a male.  That specific  evidence
             was not challenged, and I accept that there may well  be  such
             pressure. It seems likely that she will  have  at  least  some
             degree of family support in resisting  it,  and  I  have  very
             little indication of how strong it will be or how it  will  in
             fact be applied.


         48.      I accept  that  the  appellant  will  be  unable  to  live
             officially as female. I think it reasonable  to  suppose  that
             she will face some difficulties living openly as  female,  not
             least because every  time  she  has  to  present  an  official
             identity document it would  reveal,  certainly  to  those  who
             notice  the  details,  that  she  is  officially  male.  Those
             difficulties  will  be  increased  so  long  as  her  identity
             documents show her former name, rather than her changed  name,
             but I have already commented  on  the  possibility  that  such
             details could  be changed.


         49.       The  appellant  further  told  me  that  the  transgender
             community is very small and mostly  underground.   I  have  to
             bear in mind  that  she  has  on  the  evidence  been  out  of
             Singapore for most of the  last nine years now, and  that  the
             transition and most of her consequent social connections  have
             already been made in this country.  I  make  that  observation
             because the comments already noted in the Refworld report  are
             themselves an indication that there is an  LGBT  community  in
             Singapore ad that it is not entirely underground.


         50.      The appellant says that she will be unable to  marry.   It
             seems to me that technically she could marry another woman, on
             the basis of being officially male,  but  I  accept  that  she
             could not marry another woman on the basis that she is herself
             also female. That is a consequence of the fact that  Singapore
             like many if not most of the countries of the world, does  not
             give official recognition to same-sex unions,  and  I  do  not
             think it can be regarded as amounting to persecution.


         51.      The most significant indication in  my  judgement  is  the
             evidence about national service.  As  to  this  I  accept  the
             evidence that the appellant  will,  so  long  as  she  remains
             officially male, also remain liable for two weeks service as a
             reservist each year.  I accept that this is likely to  mean  a
             period of living communally with  other  male  reservists.   I
             note and accept her evidence that when she had to  fulfil  her
             primary national service it was very distressing for her and I
             have no doubt that any repetitions will  also  be  distressing
             and difficult for her.  She  will  clearly  not,  during  that
             limited period, be able to live openly as a woman.


         52.      On the other hand, her own evidence  is  that  friends  or
             acquaintances of hers have also had to undergo  this  and  her
             understanding is that while some of  them  may  have  hastened
             their progress to surgery, in  order  to  avoid  the  problem,
             others may simply have stuck it out.  It  has  not,  in  other
             words, been so harsh for them as to be unendurable.


         53.  I have noted Mr Lorimer's evidence that  return  to  Singapore
             would be very deleterious to the appellant, because she  needs
             acceptance as a woman and would not receive it.   Quite  apart
             from the factual issue over the extent to which she  would  be
             unable to live and be accepted  as  a  woman  in  practice  Mr
             Lorimer  does  to  say  anything  about   actual   psychiatric
             consequences, whether in the form of any psychiatric  disorder
             currently experienced or of any such disorder which  he  fears
             might be induced by the conditions he  understands  she  might
             face in Singapore.  It is difficult  therefore  to  understand
             quite how deleterious he thinks return might be.


         54.  I also note in this regard that the appellant and those acting
             on her behalf have been  assiduous in gathering evidence, both
             expert evidence and objective evidence, about the position  in
             Singapore. In those circumstances  the  lack  of  more  direct
             evidence about the actual sufferings and fears of LGBT  people
             in Singapore assumes some significance. If evidence existed of
             systematic discrimination or worse it seems likely  that  they
             would have found and produced that evidence.


         55.      I have considered all  of  this  evidence  with  care  and
             concern, but while I am satisfied that the appellant is likely
             to face some difficulties, and may well face  some  degree  of
             discrimination in  Singapore  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
             treatment she is at risk of suffering has been  shown,  either
             in individual instances or considered  cumulatively  to  reach
             the level of really serious harm, to have sufficiently serious
             prejudicial  consequences.   It   is   not   every   type   of
             discrimination  or  societal  stigma  that  will   amount   to
             persecution. In these circumstances I find that the claims  to
             asylum or humanitarian protection and under Article 8 fail, on
             the basis that it has not been shown that the appellant is  at
             real  risk  of  harm  of  the  severity  against  which  those
             provisions give protection."

13.  The judge then turned to consider  Article  8  which  the  judge  noted
    required consideration outside the Rules on the basis that returning to
    Singapore would involve a denial  of  her  rights.   The  determination
    concludes as follows:


         "59.     Claims involving  the  breach  in  such  circumstances  of
             Articles which give rise to qualified rights were discussed by
             the House of Lords in EM (Lebanon)  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  64,
             itself a case involving Articles 8 and 14.  The conclusion was
             that  such  cases  are  certainly  capable  of  engaging   the
             Convention and justifying a grant of  leave  but  it  will  be
             rare.  Appellants are not in general entitled to rely  on  the
             differing  social,  cultural  or  even  discriminatory   legal
             systems in their home countries as a  basis  for  a  claim  to
             remain in one of the Contracting States. What must  be   shown
             is that return to the country of nationality  will  involve  a
             flagrant denial of the appellant's rights under  the  relevant
             Article.  In discussing the meaning of 'flagrant  denial'  the
             House, particularly in the speech of Lord Bingham  made  clear
             than  what  was  required  was  an  interference  which  would
             effectively deny  or  nullify  the  right  which  the  Article
             existed to protect.  The point can  be  illustrated  from  the
             facts of EM, which involved a woman with a  young  child  from
             Lebanon who had come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  avoid  the
             transfer of custody of the child to  his  father,  a  transfer
             which would have arisen automatically by  reason  of  his  age
             under the family law of Lebanon.  That the  system  of  Sharia
             law in force in Lebanon would produce such a result because it
             was directly and obviously discriminatory against  women,  and
             entirely contrary to  the  approach  of  the  courts  in  this
             country, was not sufficient to prevent  removal.  What  tipped
             the balance was that on  the  particular  facts  a  close  and
             loving family life was  established  between  mother  and  son
             which would be entirely destroyed by their enforced separation
             on return, while no meaningful  family  life  existed  between
             father and son. He had been guilty of domestic violence,  been
             imprisoned for failing to provide financial  support  for  his
             son,  and  his  son  did  not  know  him.   In  was  in  these
             circumstances that the House was persuaded that the rights  of
             both mother  and  child  to  family  life  would  be  entirely
             nullified by removal and it was on that basis that  the  claim
             succeeded.


         60.  In this case the appellant's concerns  arise  from  legal  and
             society  discrimination    against   transgender   people   in
             Singapore.  As EM makes clear,  Article  8  does  not  require
             Contracting States to guarantee to citizens of  every  country
             in the world the full range of civil and  other  rights  which
             their own citizens enjoy.  I have found that the  consequences
             which the appellant is likely to face do not reach  the  level
             at which they would be a breach of her rights under either the
             Refugee Convention or Article 3.  I am not satisfied that  the
             discrimination that she fears will amount to a flagrant denial
             in the sense of a complete nullification  of her rights  under
             Article 8.  In those circumstances I conclude that, even on  a
             traditional Article 8 approach, the appeal cannot succeed."

14.  Mr Mackenzie drafted the grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had misdirected himself in  paragraph  52  of  the  determination
    (which I have set out above) when referring  to  what  the  appellant's
    friends had experienced as being not  "so  harsh  for  them  as  to  be
    unendurable".

15.  Mr Mackenzie submitted that this was putting  the  test  too  high  and
    referred to Ravichandran v Secretary of  State  [1996]  ImmAR  97.  The
    judge had  also  erred  (ground  2)  in  approaching  the  question  of
    sufficiency of protection because the appellant would  have  to  reveal
    her gender in any interaction with the authorities which  would  render
    her vulnerable to discrimination and hostility.

16.  In ground 3 it was submitted that the cumulative effect  of  the  risks
    which had been accepted met the test in EM (Lebanon) and amounted to  a
    flagrant breach.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds on 19
    June 2014.  There was a brief response to the grounds under cover of  a
    letter dated 20 June 2014.  Mr  Mackenzie  noted  that  the  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant would be  required  to  undertake  military
    service for  two  weeks  each  year  until  2023.   The  appellant  had
    undertaken military service between December 2001 and June 2004.

17.  Mr Mackenzie  submitted  that  the  judge  had  materially  misdirected
    himself in referring in paragraph 52 to her friends  and  acquaintances
    not finding military service so harsh as to be unendurable.  This was a
    crucial aspect of the determination on  which  the  judge  had  clearly
    erred.

18.  Mr  Mackenzie  referred  me  to  Ravichandran  and  the  definition  of
    persecution in ex parte Jonah [1985] Imm A R 7 as well as extracts from
    the Law of Refugee Status by Professor Hathaway.  Although the  context
    in Ravichandran was somewhat different (arbitrary detention  for  young
    male Tamils in Colombo) the appellant's case fitted within  the  second
    category of persecution as defined by Professor Hathaway.  The Canadian
    courts had recognised the need to view any sustained attack  "on  one's
    physical, moral and intellectual integrity". In Hathaway at page 112 it
    is said:  "In sum, persecution is most  appropriately  defined  as  the
    sustained to systemic failure of state protection in relation to of the
    core entitlements  which  has  been  recognised  by  the  international
    community."

19.  There was no dispute about the facts in this case and Singapore  was  a
    controlling  society  and  the  appellant   would   have   to   produce
    identification when interacting with the authorities and  it  would  be
    difficult to live only as a woman.  The judge had applied  too  high  a
    test.  He should have  considered  whether  there  was  a  sufficiently
    serious breach of the appellant's personal integrity and privacy.

20.  While it was only the first ground that would be pressed very  greatly,
    Mr Mackenzie also submitted that the judge had erred in  his  treatment
    of sufficiency of protection for the reasons advanced in the grounds of
    appeal and had misdirected himself  in  paragraph  60  in  requiring  a
    breach of Article 3 in order to establish a breach of Article 8.

21.  Mr Bramble acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had set  the
    test too high in paragraph 52 but submitted that in context  the  error
    was not a material one.   The judge had  considered  all  the  evidence
    including the report from Mr Lorimer.  It was apparent from the  report
    of Mr Ravi that the appellant would be required  to  complete  military
    service  as  a  reservist  until  the  age  of  40   and   her   gender
    identification if declared would not exempt  her  from  reservist  duty
    "unless she is declared operationally  unfit  by  a  certified  medical
    examiner".  With reference to the point made in Professor  Hathaway  at
    paragraph  110  the  requirement  to  undertake  military  service  was
    potentially a response to an emergency situation.  The appellant  might
    be declared to be operationally unfit according to Mr Ravi.  There  was
    a general lack of evidence before the First-tier Judge.  The error  was
    not a material one in all the circumstances.

22.  The judge had taken into account all material matters when  considering
    Article 8 and had not conflated the two Articles as contended.

23.  Mr Mackenzie submitted in reply that the judge had  accepted  that  the
    appellant would have to undertake military service and that  she  could
    not change her gender.  He referred to EB (Ethiopia)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    809  where  although  the  facts  were,  he  accepted,  different,  the
    appellant had been deprived of her identity documents and would  suffer
    persecution as a result.

24.  At the conclusion of  the  submissions  I  reserved  my  decision.    I
    remind myself that I can only interfere with the judge's  determination
    if it was materially  flawed  in  law.   I  am  very  grateful  to  the
    representatives for their helpful submissions.

25.  The determination is,  as  is  acknowledged  by  Mr  Mackenzie  in  the
    grounds of appeal to be, as he puts it, "for the most  part  a  careful
    and sensitive analysis of the appellant's circumstances  ...".  I would
    certainly endorse that since the judge has  plainly  taken  great  care
    with this decision.  The judge  directed  himself  correctly  on  legal
    issues in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the determination.  In paragraph 40  of
    the decision he said this:

         "40.     My concern in this appeal is over the nature of the actual
             consequences which the  appellant  may  face  on  return.  The
             notions of persecution  or  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
             involve the idea of a risk of really serious harm.   I  accept
             that it need not be shown that there is  a  risk  of  specific
             forms of such harm, or that any or all the consequences  which
             are feared need to  be  of  a  particular  gravity.   Acts  of
             discrimination and harassment, individually  not  particularly
             serious, may cumulatively reach the level  of  persecution  if
             they lead to a substantially prejudicial effect on the  person
             concerned."


     The judge also directed himself correctly in paragraph  55  -  which  I
    have set out above and will not repeat.

26.  The judge noted that there was a lack of evidence before him about  the
    position in Singapore at various parts in the determination despite the
    fact that  the  appellant's  representatives  had  been  "assiduous  in
    gathering evidence ..." - see paragraph 54 of the decision.  The  judge
    examined the material before  him with great care.

27.  The judge found the  most  significant  aspect  of  the  case  was  the
    evidence about national service and the appellant would be  liable  for
    two weeks service  each  year.   The  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence that she had found her full national service between 2001  and
    2004 very distressing and that the two weeks military service each year
    would also be distressing and difficult.

28.  In the context of a very carefully considered decision where the  judge
    fully investigated all the  facts  and  issues  and  directed   himself
    correctly on the  law,  I  do  not  find  that  the  reference  to  the
    appellant's friends' experiences in paragraph 52 to indicate  that  the
    judge misunderstood the law which he had earlier set out properly.

29.  It is to be borne in  mind  that  the  judge  had  the  benefit  of  Mr
    Mackenzie's oral submissions and his  skeleton  argument  to  which  he
    makes reference in paragraph 25 of his decision.   In  the  submissions
    the judge was reminded that cumulative discrimination might  amount  to
    persecution and persecution was not limited to torture and death.   The
    judge refers in paragraph 55 to considering matters  cumulatively.   In
    the skeleton argument Counsel goes through  meticulously  the  relevant
    learning in relation to persecution and harm.

30.  The judge in paragraph 52 in  my  view  did  not  materially  misdirect
    himself  when  making  the  comment  about  the  experiences   of   the
    appellant's friends and did  not  intend  to  say  and  should  not  be
    understood to say that unendurability was the test which he was in fact
    applying in relation to the appellant.  The judge  considered  all  the
    evidence with great care and concern as he says in paragraph 55 of  the
    decision, and he did not in my view materially misdirect himself on the
    crucial issues as contended by Mr Mackenzie.

31.  Mr Mackenzie did not stress the remaining grounds of appeal.  I am  not
    persuaded that the judge arguably conflated Articles 3  and  8  and  he
    properly directed himself by reference to EM (Lebanon).  I was referred
    to be EB  (Ethiopia)  but  that  case,  as  Counsel  acknowledged,  was
    concerned  with  a  different  factual  issue,   the   deprivation   of
    nationality.  The appellant is not being deprived of  the  benefits  of
    citizenship.

32.  As I have said, the judge had limited  material  before  him  which  he
    carefully considered and was entitled to conclude  as  he  did  on  the
    issue of sufficiency of protection and on the question of whether there
    would be a flagrant denial of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

33.  The determination is not materially flawed  in  law.  Accordingly  this
    appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 7 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


