
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 August 2016                              |On 10 October 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Hassan Hanif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
                           Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Jusmount
                           & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frankish sitting  at  Bennett  House,
    Stoke on 26 January 2015) allowing the claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to grant him  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse,  and
    against a concomitant decision to remove him as  a  person  subject  to
    administrative removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999, his human rights claim having been refused.

 2. The basis for the decision was that the claimant did  not  satisfy  the
    English language tests under Appendix FM because he had used  deception
    to obtain a TOEIC certificate.  The  claimant  was  also  said  not  to
    satisfy Appendix FM because he did not  cohabit  with  his  wife  in  a
    genuine  matrimonial  relationship.   Judge  Frankish  found   in   the
    claimant's favour on  both  issues.  The  error  of  law  challenge  is
    confined to the issue of deception.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 11  September  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         It is not the case in this appeal, unlike  in  some  others,  where
         there are unsupported allegations of deception.  There  was  before
         the First-tier judge a data sheet from the respondent  in  addition
         to the two 'general' witness statements, the data sheet  indicating
         that the test taken by the appellant on 22 August 2012 was invalid.
         Notwithstanding the other reasons given by the judge for  resolving
         the appeal in favour of the appellant in terms of the allegation of
         deception, I consider it arguable that the First-tier  judge  erred
         in law in concluding that the evidence was not specific  enough  to
         this appellant to establish the use of deception in  the  obtaining
         of the English language test certificate.

Relevant Background

 5. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth was 31  May
    1988.  He entered the United Kingdom as a student on 16 September 2010.
     On 17 September 2012 he applied for leave to remain as a student.   He
    relied on a TOEIC certificate showing he had been  tested  in  speaking
    and writing on 22 August 2012, and had achieved a score of 170  out  of
    200 in speaking.  This  placed  him  in  the  midrange  of  a  level  7
    proficiency level.  The claimed test result said that his pronunciation
    was high, meaning that reading allowed  his  pronunciation  was  highly
    intelligible.  His intonation and stress was also  high,  meaning  that
    reading allowed his use of intonation and stress was highly  effective.



 6. The claimant was granted leave to remain as a student, and in  February
    2014 he applied for further leave to remain as a spouse.  He relied  on
    the TOEIC certificate as evidence of his ability to  meet  the  English
    language requirement.  The TOEIC certificate was valid for a period  of
    two years.

 7. On 17 June 2014 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons  for  refusing
    the application, and for seeking to remove him pursuant to  Section  10
    of the 1999 Act.  Following an administrative review process,  ETS  had
    confirmed that his test was obtained through  deception.   Because  the
    validity of his test results could not be  authenticated,  scores  from
    the test taken on 22 August 2012 had been cancelled.  The claimant  was
    specifically considered a person who had sought leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom by deception following information provided by ETS  that
    an anomaly with his speaking test indicated the  presence  of  a  proxy
    test taker.  So the claimant did not meet the suitability  requirements
    in S-LTR.2.2(a) for consideration of limited leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a partner and/or as a parent and/or on the grounds of
    private life under Rule 276ADE.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Before Judge Frankish, the claimant was represented by Counsel and  the
    Secretary  of  State  was  represented  by  Mr  Thompson,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The claimant was called as a witness, and he  gave
    evidence that he had  no  need  to  cheat.   He  had  also  passed  his
    substantive courses with grades of merit or distinction.

 9. In his subsequent decision, Judge  Frankish  said  that  unusually  two
    witness statements had been filed on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    to support the allegation of deception.  The  witness  statements  were
    from Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings.  The judge also  noted  the
    following:  "a  certificate  is  attached  to  the  effect   that   the
    [claimant's]  speaking  and  writing  scores  had  been  judged  to  be
    invalid."

10. The judge's findings  on  the  issue  of  deception  are  contained  in
    paragraphs [14] to [18] of his  decision,  which  I  set  out  verbatim
    below.

    14.  What we have in this case is the respondent being blithely unaware
         that her English language testing system was a  shambles  until  it
         was pointed out to her by journalists in the Panorama  programme  a
         year ago upon which she "initiated a "Gold Command"  structure"  in
         relation to certain test centres.  The response, in this case,  has
         been the filing of two witness statements by the respondent  which,
         in fact, have nothing whatsoever to do with this specific case save
         in the most general terms.  They both relate to a  judicial  review
         application  by  one  Zaheer  Hussain  Mohammed.   ETS  used  voice
         recognition software (�26 of the  Collins  statement)  to  identify
         cheats.  More detail explaining how this works is to  be  found  in
         the Millington statement.

    15.  Beyond this, the respondent relies upon two lines from what I  was
         told was an enormous spreadsheet listing the malefactors.  The  two
         lines in question relate to the appellant.

    16.  I am unable to accept that the respondent's evidence  sufficiently
         implicates the appellant, under category (a) or (b), as  above,  by
         the ETS agents.  There are the two generalised witness  statements,
         as above and there is the two line extract  from  the  spreadsheet.
         However: (a) there is no specific reference  to  the  appellant  in
         either witness statement; (b) there is no specific explanation  for
         why analysis of the appellant's scores led to him being  placed  on
         the malefactors' list under category (a) or (b).  There are further
         reasons for not finding the objection sustainable.

    17.  First of  all,  the  appellant  had  already  passed  his  English
         language test  in  Pakistan  before  he  came,  on  4  March  2009.
         Secondly, he went on to achieve his BTec in business and marketing,
         for which he came, some parts with distinctions.  If the  appellant
         was referred to test centres by the respondent which  were  run  in
         such a shambolic manner,  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  he  was
         supposed to do.

    18.  Finally, however, and most importantly in my judgement, he did  do
         something about it.  He took his  test  again  (taken  April  2014,
         certificate issued on 1 May 2014) and passed before the  respondent
         issued her decision (17 June 2014).  The  appellant  said  that  he
         took this re-sit because he received a letter from  the  respondent
         inviting him so to do.  Mr Thompson conceded that such letters were
         sent to those candidates who were  thought  to  have  been  wrongly
         caught up in the ETS malpractice.  However,  he  denied  that  this
         applied to the appellant because nobody could produce  the  letter.
         He said, on the contrary, that the appellant re-sat because he knew
         his first test was  dubious.  However,  I prefer  the  appellant's
         evidence on this point that he took the further test in response to
         such a letter.  My reasons for so concluding are that,  firstly,  I
         have found  in  his  favour  on  all  credibility  points  so  far.
         Secondly, quite spontaneously, the appellant  provided  me  with  a
         number of details from the letter: it was two weeks before he  went
         for the test; it advised him of the ETS coming under  scrutiny;  he
         was therefore required to take a further biometric English language
         test; the letter was combined with a request for  further  evidence
         of cohabitation.  Having regard to all the  foregoing,  I  conclude
         that the fraud allegation is not made out.

11. It is convenient to note at this stage that part of the  reasons  given
    by the judge for not making a fee award was  because  "the  [SSHD]  had
    sufficient grounds for concern for the [claimant] to have made his  way
    onto her malefactors spreadsheet".

The Error of Law Hearing

12. At the outset of the hearing before me to determine whether an error of
    law was made out, I  granted  Mr  Ahmed's  application  to  admit  into
    evidence the letter referred to by Judge Frankish in paragraph [18]  of
    his decision.

13. The letter in question was dated 16 April 2014.  The Home Office  wrote
    to the claimant's solicitors apologising for the delay in deciding  his
    application.  As  part  of  his  application,  he  had  submitted  test
    evidence of the English language requirement from ETS TOEIC.  They  had
    identified discrepancies with some evidence from  this  test  provider,
    and so they would not be able to process his  application  and  it  had
    placed it on  hold  while  they  investigated.   If  the  claimant  was
    concerned about the delay in his application, he could choose to take a
    new English language test as one of the other providers listed  on  the
    Home Office website, and submit the alternative test  evidence  to  the
    Home Office.  This  would  enable  the  Home  Office  to  progress  his
    application.  The letter continued:

         "We still need to undertake a full assessment of  your  application
         against all other requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  this
         letter does not act as confirmation that your application  will  be
         successful  should  you  choose  to  provide  alternative   English
         language test evidence."

14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Mills developed  the  arguments
    advanced in the application for permission to  appeal,  and  he  relied
    heavily on the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department and (1) Muhammad Shehzad and (2)  MD  Chowdhury
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

15. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Ahmed submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal
    had been wrong to grant permission to  appeal,  in  the  light  of  the
    findings made by the presidential panel in SM and Qadir v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]
    UKUT 00229 (IAC).  He further submitted that the error of law challenge
    was untenable in the light of the contents of the letter dated 16 April
    2016, and the fact that the claimant had gone on to take an alternative
    test in which he had achieved a grade of A1 with distinction.

16. In the further alternative, he submitted that any error on the part  of
    the judge was not material.   He  relied,  among  other  things,  on  a
    passage in R (Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -
    judicial review) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327 (IAT), at paragraph [25],  where
    the President was quoting from the findings of  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in one of the cases under  discussion.  That  judge  allowed  the
    appeal  of  the  claimant  before  him  because  the  generic  evidence
    acknowledged (in his view) that invalidation did not  necessarily  mean
    that fraud was involved:

         "As appears from the following passage, the Tribunal  also  had  at
         its  disposal  written  evidence  from  ETS:  'the  ETS  themselves
         actually confirm in writing that there  are  multiple  reasons  for
         invalidation, some of which may not involve  fraud  or  deception.'
         [Emphasis added]."

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

17. Mr Ahmed's first submission is that in the light of the decision in  SM
    and Qadir, Judge Frankish was entitled to reach  his  decision  on  the
    basis of the evidence that was before him.  The legal burden of proving
    deception rested with the Secretary of State,  and  "it  is  abundantly
    clear" (he submits) that on the basis of the evidence that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary of State had failed to discharge
    that burden.

18.  Mr  Ahmed's  submission  fails  to  engage  with  the  fact  that  the
    Presidential panel in SM and Qadir held that, despite the  shortcomings
    in the generic evidence relied on by the Secretary  of  State,  it  was
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of raising a prima  facie
    case, such that the evidential burden shifted to Messrs SM and Qadir to
    produce  an  innocent  explanation  for  their   test   results   being
    invalidated by ETS.

19. The significance of the recent Court of Appeal decision relied on by Mr
    Mills is that this crucial finding by the Presidential panel  has  been
    endorsed by higher, and thus binding, authority.   Beatson  LJ,  giving
    the leading judgment of the court, summarised the central  issue  which
    the court was addressing at paragraph [19]:

         "These appeals are only concerned with whether their evidence  (the
         generic evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings  regarding  ETS's
         analysis of the  spoken  English  component  of  the  TOEIC  test),
         together with evidence that  the  tests  of  the  individual  under
         consideration  has  been  assessed  as  'invalid'  rather  than  as
         'questionable' because of problems at the test centre, suffices  to
         satisfy the evidential burden of showing dishonesty  that  lies  on
         the Secretary of State and to impose an evidential  burden  on  the
         individual to raise an innocent explanation.  The  question  before
         us is thus not the ultimate reliability  of  the  evidence  or  the
         ultimate disposition of the appeals."

20. In Mr Chowdhury's case, discussed by Beatson LJ at paragraphs [24]  and
    [25], the first instance judge held there was no  evidence  identifying
    Mr Chowdhury as a person whose test  was  invalid.   But  in  fact  the
    evidence included a screenshot of the results which  stated  that  this
    was the position.  The same first instance judge held  there  could  be
    multiple reasons for invalidation, some  of  which  might  not  involve
    fraud or deception (thus relying on the same point  now  sought  to  be
    taken by Mr Ahmed.)  Beatson LJ went on to hold  that  both  the  first
    instance judge and the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge who dealt  with  the
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  had  misunderstood  the  nature  of  the
    evidence.  Beatson LJ continued in paragraph [26]:

         "The reason for the misunderstandings by the Tribunals may be  that
         the language used  by  Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings  in  their
         statements to explain a technical process is not altogether  clear.
         But, whatever the reason, in these circumstances,  in  my  judgment
         the in limine rejection of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  as
         even sufficient to shift the evidential  burden  was  an  error  of
         law."

21. The same evidence that was  deployed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    Chowdhury was deployed before the First-tier Tribunal.   This  was  the
    generic evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings coupled with specific
    evidence supplied by ETS that the speaking and writing  test  taken  by
    the claimant had been designated by ETS as invalid.

22. Accordingly, applying the reasoning of Beatson LJ with  respect  to  Mr
    Chowdhury's case, Judge  Frankish  erred  in  law  in  holding  at  the
    beginning of paragraph [16] that he  was  unable  to  accept  that  the
    Secretary of State's evidence "sufficiently implicates"  the  claimant.
    The judge was clearly thereby directing himself that the  Secretary  of
    State had not raised a prima facie case of fraud, so as  to  impose  an
    evidential burden on the individual to advance an innocent explanation.



23. There is a strong argument that this is enough in itself to vitiate the
    entirety of the decision, as the effect of not acknowledging  that  the
    Secretary of State had satisfied the evidential burden meant  that  the
    scales were already unfairly tipped against the Secretary of  State  in
    discharging the legal burden  of  proof  when  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider "further reasons for not finding the objection sustainable".

24. However, this is academic as the reasoning in paragraph  [18]  is  also
    materially  flawed  for  two  reasons,  one  of  which  flows  from   a
    misapprehension of the true facts  (for  which  the  judge  is  not  to
    blame).

25. The first error in paragraph [18] is the judge treating the claimant as
    enhancing his general credibility with regard to his denial of cheating
    in the test of 2012 by taking a fresh test.  The judge did  not  engage
    with the fact that the test taken in April  2014  did  not  purport  to
    replicate the rigour of  the  speaking  test  taken  nearly  two  years
    earlier in August 2012.  As was  agreed  by  both  representatives,  A1
    represents a very basic level of proficiency in the  English  language,
    whereas the explanatory rubric for level 7  in  the  TOEIC  certificate
    states as follows:

         'Typically test takers at level 7 can  create  connected  sustained
         discourse appropriate to the typical workplace.  They  can  express
         opinions or respond to complicated requests effectively.'

26. Since objectively the new test result only showed that the claimant had
    a very basic command  of  English  (albeit  he  had  achieved  A1  with
    distinction) his alacrity in undertaking such a  test  pursuant  to  an
    invitation  from  the  Home  Office  did  not  logically  enhance   his
    credibility  with  regard  to   him   having   genuinely   achieved   a
    significantly higher level of proficiency in the earlier disputed test.
     However, as is apparent from the  beginning  of  paragraph  [18],  the
    judge treated the claimant's behaviour  in  April  2014  as  being  the
    single most important factor in underpinning his innocence.

27. The second error has been illuminated by the introduction into evidence
    of the letter of 16 April 2014. Its contents show that  the  judge  was
    wrong to proceed on the factual premise that the claimant had been sent
    a letter inviting him to take an alternative test because he fell  into
    the category of those candidates who were thought to have been  wrongly
    caught up in the ETS malpractice.

28. The line taken by Mr Thompson was that the claimant had not received  a
    letter inviting him to re-sit  his  English  language  test,  precisely
    because he did not fall  into  the  category  of  candidates  who  were
    thought to have been wrongly caught up in the ETS  malpractice.   Since
    Mr Thompson did not accept that the claimant had received any letter at
    all, he is not in retrospect to be taken  as  conceding  that,  if  the
    claimant did receive such a letter, it was in the context of  the  Home
    Office treating him as being innocent of any malpractice himself.

29. It was open to the judge to find  that  the  claimant  had  received  a
    letter inviting him to sit an alternative test, and he has  been  shown
    to be correct.

30. However, as is apparent from the actual contents of the letter, and  in
    particular the passage which I have quoted earlier in this decision, it
    did not purport to distinguish between applicants who were suspected of
    fraud and applicants who were believed to be innocent.  The letter  was
    entirely neutral on this issue.

31. As  was  canvassed  in  the  generic  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in April 2014 ETS were in the  very  early  stages  of  their
    investigation of the validity of previous test results.  Moreover, they
    initially focused on test results in an eight month period running back
    from February 2014.  The claimant's test result was obtained in  August
    2012 and so it fell outside this eighth month period; and it  was  only
    scheduled to be checked later on.

32. Mr Ahmed submits that the position taken by  the  Home  Office  in  the
    letter of 16 April 2014 means that the subsequent refusal decision  is
    untenable, and hence no material error of law  is  made  out.   But  in
    making this submission Mr Ahmed ignores the  chronology  which  I  have
    discussed above.  There is no reason to suppose that  by  the  eventual
    date of refusal the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  received  specific
    notification that the claimant's test results had been declared invalid
    by ETS.

33. Mr Ahmed submits in the alternative that the passage in Gazi upon which
    he relies shows that an invalid test result is not  necessarily  caused
    by the use of a proxy test taker, and thus the judge was right to  find
    that the legal burden of proof had not been discharged.

34. I am satisfied that the finding referred to in  Gazi  was  based  on  a
    misapprehension of the  evidence  given  by  Mr  Millington.   When  Mr
    Millington's evidence is taken in conjunction with  that  given  by  Ms
    Collings, it is clear that ETS settled upon a clear delineation between
    test results which were categorised as questionable  and  test  results
    which were categorised as invalid.  It may have been the case  that  in
    early communications between ETS and the  Home  Office  in  March  2014
    there was some confusion as to what was meant by a test being  invalid.
    But as of June 2014, when Ms Collings  and  Mr  Millington  made  their
    statements, it had been clarified between ETS and the Home Office  that
    "invalid" only meant one thing, which was evidence of proxy test taking
    or impersonation.  Thus Ms Collings  says  at  paragraph  [28]  of  her
    witness statement:

         "ETS described that any test categorised as cancelled (which  later
         became known as invalid) had  the  same  voice  for  multiple  test
         takers.  On questioning they advised they were  certain  there  was
         evidence of proxy test taking or impersonation in those cases."

35. In any event, it is now accepted by the Court of Appeal that where  ETS
    designates a result as "invalid" this means that ETS is satisfied  that
    the result has been obtained by fraud.  So the passage relied on by  Mr
    Ahmed is no longer of any relevance.

36. For the above reasons, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law such that  it  must  be
    set aside and remade.

Future Disposal

37. Mr Ahmed submitted that the appeal could and should be  remade  without
    the need for a further hearing, as the same arguments relied on him  to
    say that any error of law by the judge was not material, also supported
    the alternative  proposition  that  I  should  have  no  difficulty  in
    remaking the appeal  in  the  claimant's  favour.   However,  Mr  Mills
    submitted that remaking the decision should be  postponed  until  after
    the Court of Appeal has heard at the end of October 2016 the  Secretary
    of State's appeal against the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SM  and
    Qadir.

38. I do not consider that it would be fair or safe to remake the  decision
    on the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

39. Firstly, as discussed previously,  the  test  result  achieved  by  the
    claimant in April  2014  is  of  little  probative  value.  Conversely,
    bearing in mind the results of the IELTS test which the  claimant  took
    in 2009, there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  claimant  can
    demonstrate, through a more exacting  English  language  test,  a  much
    higher level of proficiency  in  the  English  language  than  A1  with
    distinction.  If he were now to undertake such a test, it  would  be  a
    long time after the event,  but  nonetheless  the  results  might  have
    greater probative value than the test result obtained in April 2014.

40. Secondly, Mr Mills included in the bundle of documents which he  handed
    up at the outset of the hearing a report about a criminal inquiry  into
    abuse of the TOEIC at the  Innovative  Learning  Centre  in  Manchester
    where the claimant apparently took the disputed  ETS  test.   Detective
    Inspector Andrew Carter reports that between 15 May  2012  and  14  May
    2013 this centre undertook 1061 TOEIC speaking  and  writing  tests  of
    which the ETS identified the following:

       . invalid 479;

       . questionable 582;

       . not withdrawn (no evidence of validity) zero;

       . percentage invalid 45%.

41. He says in paragraph [12] that this shows the organised and  widespread
    abuse of the TOEIC that took place at this test centre.  There is  also
    included in the bundle an ETS TOEIC test centre lock up  tool  relating
    to the tests undertaken at the Innovative Learning Centre on 22  August
    2012.  A total of 26 tests were taken, and the vast  majority  (twenty)
    were found to be invalid.

42. It is clear that the Secretary of State wishes to rely on this evidence
    to fortify her case that the claimant used a proxy test  taker  at  the
    Innovative Learning Centre on 22 August 2012. Thus  fairness  requires
    that the claimant be given a reasonable opportunity  to  consider  this
    evidence in advance of the hearing to remake the decision.

43. In  the  event  that  a  rehearing  was  required,  Mr  Ahmed's  strong
    preference was that there should  be  a  rehearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and Mr Mills was in agreement with him on this question.  Due
    to the extent of  the  fact-finding  which  will  be  required,  it  is
    appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside.

45. No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

46. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Stoke  for  a  de
    novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Frankish.  None  of  the
    findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

47. The substantive rehearing of the appeal should not be listed before the
    beginning of January 2017.  The time estimate for the  hearing  is  two
    hours.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson               10 October 2016

