
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           MARTIN OBIORA UGWUKONAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chelvan of Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foulkes-Jones promulgated on 18 March 2015 dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  grant
    indefinite leave to remain and to remove the  Appellant  from  the  UK,
    dated 26 June 2014 (served on 2 July 2014).

2.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  15  June  1973.   He
    initially entered the United Kingdom in March 2009 with leave to  enter
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant and was  granted  successive  periods  of
    leave  in  that  capacity,  the  last  being  granted  pursuant  to  an
    application made on 12 December 2011 and being  leave  valid  until  25
    January 2014.  Thereafter the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to
    remain by way of application form SET(O) together with an  accompanying
    letter of representation from his solicitors dated 18 February 2014.

3.   The Respondent refused the application with reference in particular  to
    paragraph 245CD(b) and paragraph 322(1C)  of  the   Immigration  Rules.
    Essentially  the  Appellant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  was
    refused on the basis  that  he  had  been  convicted  of  two  motoring
    offences.   Full  reasons  for  this  decision  are  set  out  in   the
    Respondent's  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  and  are  also
    reproduced in substance in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Respondent, and  his
    appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration

5.   The challenge before the Upper Tribunal does  not  primarily  seeks  to
    impugn the approach of the First-tier Tribunal Judge but focuses on the
    conduct of Counsel that appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Appellant (not Mr Chelvan).  In the fourth section of the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, headed 'The Hearing', at paragraph
    1 it is recorded that Counsel "said that he was not proceeding with the
    appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention".  It is now said on  the
    Appellant's behalf  that  such  a  concession  had  been  made  without
    instructions.

6.   In support of that contention the Appellant's solicitors have  produced
    email correspondence detailing a  complaint  to  Counsel  made  shortly
    after the receipt of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  via  his
    clerk in chambers. I do not propose to go through the correspondence in
    its entirety, but there is a response to that  complaint  from  Counsel
    and it is clear from that response that Counsel did not pursue  Article
    8 and it is equally  clear  that  he  did  so  without  any  particular
    discussion with the Appellant as to whether he should or should not  be
    adopting  such  a  position.   Indeed  Ms  Everett  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent,  having  had  the   opportunity   of   seeing   the   email
    correspondence (which was submitted with the application for permission
    to appeal) acknowledges that the concession was made before the  First-
    tier Tribunal without instructions.

7.   That being the primary ground of challenge, permission  to  appeal  was
    nonetheless initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on  19
    May 2015 on the basis that this was essentially not a  mistake  on  the
    part of the Judge.  However  on  15  July  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul granted permission to appeal on the basis that it was  arguable
    that the Judge had in effect "proceeded to determine the appeal on  the
    basis of a mistake of fact and/or a procedural error, albeit unknown to
    her, bur which was nonetheless arguably  capable  of  amounting  to  an
    error of law": indeed it is that essential submission that  is  pressed
    upon me today by Mr Chelvan pursuant to the grounds  of  challenge  and
    necessarily in light of Ms  Everett's  concession  as  to  the  factual
    premise.

8.   So far so good, as far  as  the  Appellant's  challenge  is  concerned.
    However I invited the observations of the representatives in respect of
    the materiality of the circumstances of the Judge  not  having  engaged
    with a consideration of Article 8 in his determination. In this  regard
    I pause to note that the Appellant does not seek in any way  to  impugn
    the judge's evaluation of his case under the Immigration Rules.

9.   The application for indefinite leave to remain made on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant addressed the circumstances of the offending  behaviour  that
    had culminated in the convictions for motoring offences.  The letter of
    representations in support of  the  application  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors dated 18 February 2014 seeks to offer an explanation  as  to
    the circumstances of those particular offences.  The  letter  does  not
    otherwise seek to advance any sort of case on behalf of  the  Appellant
    by reference to Article 8.

10.  The  decision  having  been  made  by  the  Respondent  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application, the Appellant's solicitors lodged a Notice  of
    Appeal in the usual way to which were attached grounds of  appeal.   In
    the opening paragraph of those grounds of appeal the substance  of  the
    grounds were listed and that included an allegation "That the  decision
    breaches the appellant's human rights".

11.   The  rest  of  the  grounds  primarily  then  go  on  to  repeat   the
    representations that had been made in respect of the driving  offences,
    but there is nonetheless in the penultimate paragraph  of  the  grounds
    the following:

         "In addition  to  the  above  criteria  the  Appellant  also  forms
         complete private and family life in the United Kingdom.  All of his
         family members are  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.  His  younger
         brother and his family are British nationals."

12.  It is the case that the First-tier Tribunal Judge before recording  the
    concession made before him by the Appellant's Counsel identified in the
    opening paragraph of his decision that  "The  Appellant  also  appealed
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms".

13.  So, it is clearly the case that as  a  matter  of  form  the  issue  of
    Article 8 had been raised in the Notice of Appeal and was, at least  at
    the commencement of the hearing,  a  matter  recognised  to  have  been
    raised.

14.  However, the information provided in support of the appeal by way of  a
    witness statement and an Appellant's bundle (forwarded to the  Tribunal
    under cover of a letter dated 5 March 2015 for use  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal) contains little way by way of detail in respect  of  the
    Appellant's private and/or family life in the  UK.  Again  the  witness
    statement for the  main  part  rehearses  the  events  surrounding  the
    Appellant's motoring offences, before  including  a  single  paragraph,
    paragraph 12, at the end of the statement to this effect:

         "In addition to the above criteria I also form complete and private
         family life in the United Kingdom.  I established my  own  business
         in the United Kingdom. I don't rely on public funding or  benefits.
         My subsistence is attached to  the  UK.   Therefore  it's  my  main
         home."

15.  The supporting evidence contained in the Appellant's  bundle  submitted
    before the First-tier Tribunal contains nothing that is relevant to any
    of those matters referred to either in the grounds  of  appeal  or  the
    Appellant's witness statement in respect of human rights.  There is  no
    detail about his business.  There is no detail of the way he is able to
    support himself without recourse to public funds or benefits. And there
    is nothing about his family or any other personal relationships enjoyed
    in the United Kingdom.

16.  Disregarding for a moment the error of Counsel in making  a  concession
    that he had not been instructed to make, it seems  to  me  that  it  is
    pertinent to question on what basis Counsel might have been  instructed
    to advance an Article 8 case given the lack of any detailed particulars
    of the Appellant's private and/or family life and the complete  absence
    of any supporting documentation in that regard?

17.  Be that as it may, as I have observed, the  matter  of  Article  8  was
    formally before the Tribunal and it was withdrawn from the Tribunal  on
    the basis  of  a  concession  that  was  not  duly  authorised  by  the
    Appellant.

18.  Mr Chelvan  for  his  part  emphasises  the  importance  of  procedural
    propriety.  Ms Everett, mindful of the contents of the Rule 24 response
    herein which raises the issue of materiality, invites me to be cautious
    in this regard and indeed suggests that she would not be  confident  in
    making the submission that the Appellant's Article 8 case was so 'thin'
    that it could be characterised as being  wholly  without  merit  to  an
    extent that the failure to address it by the First-tier Tribunal  could
    be said to be an immaterial error.

19.  It is primarily on the basis of that concession by Ms  Everett  that  I
    am persuaded - albeit with some hesitation - that I should not conclude
    that the failure of the Tribunal to address Article 8, (a failure which
    arose through no express error on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge but on the basis  of  an  inappropriate  concession  by  Counsel)
    should be characterised as immaterial. To that extent the Appellant has
    not had any sort of hearing in respect of  his  Article  8  rights  and
    accordingly it is appropriate that I set aside the decision because the
    First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis of a  factual  misconception
    serious enough to amount to an error of  law,  and  such  misconception
    deprived the Appellant the right of a full  and  fair  hearing  on  the
    matters appropriately raised in his appeal.

20.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  accordingly  set  aside.
    There having been no proper exploration of any of the relevant  factual
    issues it is most appropriate that the matter  be  reheard  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

21.  However the remaking of the decision before the First-tier Tribunal  is
    confined to the Article 8  issues,  the  decision  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge not having been
    impugned.  Indeed, whilst Mr Chelvan was clear to emphasise that he was
    not instructed to concede the case  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  he
    quite properly acknowledged that the issues under the  Rules  had  been
    dealt with and were no  longer  'live'  in  the  proceedings;  in  such
    circumstances he was overt in raising no objection to the issues  being
    limited to Article 8 on rehearing.

22.  I note that some further materials have been  filed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of the Appellant's circumstances  in  contemplation
    of advancing his Article 8 case, but it may well be that  with  further
    advice the Appellant may wish  to  revisit  those  materials  and  more
    particularly revisit the  substance  of  his  witness  statement  which
    continues to be somewhat short in detail as to the full extent  of  his
    private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However  those  matters  are
    ultimately a matter for the Appellant and his advisors, and I  make  no
    specific Directions.

Notice of Decision

23.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law in consequence of which the Appellant's appeal was  not  considered
    on human rights grounds. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss
    the appeal is accordingly set aside.

24.  There was however no material error of law in  respect  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision under the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly  the
    decision in the appeal is to be remade only in respect of human  rights
    grounds. The decision is to be remade before the First-tier Tribunal by
    any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foulkes-Jones.

25.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

