
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/27339/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 24th July 2019                  |   On the 08th August 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                           zakia khatoon
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Jesurum instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


   DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                 RULES 2008


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  29th
    November  2018  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse her application for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of her family and private life made on the 24th November 2014.

 3.  The appeal was listed before the  Upper  Tribunal,  permission  having
    been granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on the 14th February
    2019. There is a long and complicated litigation history  which  it  is
    not necessary to set out for the purposes of this decision in the light
    of the agreement of the advocates as set out below.

 4. At the hearing it was agreed by consent that the decision of  the  FtTJ
    demonstrated the making of an error on a  point  of  law  and  that  it
    should be set aside with an order remitting the appeal  afresh  to  the
    FtT. There were a number  of  grounds  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
    including the issue of procedural unfairness (ground 1) and the failure
    to consider evidence by the FtTJ (ground  2).  It  was  agreed  by  the
    parties that ground 2 was made out in  the  light  of  the  bundles  of
    documentation being provided to the FtT prior to  the  promulgation  of
    the decision and  that  this  procedural  irregularity  undermined  the
    decision as a whole and also went to the issue raised in ground 1.

 5. Therefore by consent the parties agree that the FTT decision should  be
    set aside and that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. Both advocates  agree  that  this  appeal
    meets the criteria for a remittal given that there still remains a fact-
    finding exercise to be undertaken.

 6. Mr Jesurum invited the  Tribunal  to  make  further  directions.  I  am
    satisfied that upon remission of the appeal to the  FtT  in  accordance
    with this decision, a paper case management hearing should take  place.
    For that to be undertaken, the appellant's solicitors  shall  file  and
    serve a schedule of issues to be determined by the FtT and set out  any
    further directions which they consider should be made within 14 days of
    this order being made. The respondent shall file and serve any reply to
    that document and set out what directions are necessary for the  appeal
    to be heard within 14 days after service of the  appellant's  document.
    The FtT will then consider this as a paper CMH or  in  the  alternative
    list for a CMRH. I consider that the FtT will be best  placed  to  deal
    with case management issues and do not find it necessary  to  make  any
    further directions at this stage.

 7. Having heard the advocates and considering  Rule  39  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make an order in the terms set
    out considering it appropriate to do.


Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law. The decision is set aside and is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 24/7/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



