
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27909/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2013                               |O 18 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     RG

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr L Fransman QC and Mr S Sayeed, instructed by
                    Gherson Solicitors
For the Appellant:     Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (who will hereafter be referred to as the appellant,  as
    he was below) is a national of Russia born in 1982.  He appealed  to  a
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    (hereafter the respondent's) decision of 16th November 2012 refusing to
    vary leave to remain and purporting  to  make  a  decision  as  to  his
    removal to Russia.  I say purporting since it is I think common  ground
    that the decision on removal cannot be upheld in light of what was said
    by the Tribunal in Ahmadi, subsequently upheld by the Court of Appeal.

2.   The appellant sought  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    migrant.  It was accepted that he could not satisfy the requirements of
    the relevant Immigration Rule, paragraph 245DD, in that he had not been
    previously granted entry clearance or leave to  enter  in  one  of  the
    prescribed categories set out in that paragraph, but he asked that that
    requirement be waived.  His application as originally  formulated  also
    failed to satisfy the requirements of the  Rules  concerning  the  bank
    letter which he had submitted which did not state the  regulatory  body
    for  that  bank,  nor  did  it  confirm  that  the  funds   held   were
    transferrable to the United Kingdom.  It seems that subsequently  those
    defects in the application were remedied.

3.   The appellant claimed to be at  risk  on  return  to  Russia  of  being
    subjected to politically imputed charges and/or harassment on the  part
    of the authorities.  He had  previously  worked  as  the  head  of  the
    executive office of the President of the Bank of Moscow.   Three  other
    people associated with the bank - AB, the President of  the  bank;  DA,
    AB's deputy; and BS, the head of a property company related to the bank
    - had all come to the United Kingdom and sought asylum, on the basis on
    the case of the former two that criminal proceedings against them  were
    unfounded and politically-motivated, and amounted to  persecution,  and
    in the case of the latter that the authorities had attempted to  coerce
    him to give false evidence against AB and DA.

4.   When the appellant was briefly in the  United  Kingdom  on  6  November
    2011 he had lunch with AB who warned him  that  the  authorities  might
    attempt to coerce him to give false evidence just as they had attempted
    to do in respect of BS.  This led the appellant to abandon his plan  to
    return to Germany, where he  had  moved  intending  to  study,  and  he
    remained in the United Kingdom and made the application with which  the
    judge was concerned.

5.   Before the judge it was argued that the decision did  not  give  proper
    respect to the appellant's rights to family life under Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights and with respect to the Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.  The judge noted at paragraph 23 the point I have  set  out  above
    that the removal decision was clearly unlawful, but it  was  of  course
    proper to proceed to consider the refusal to vary leave decision.

6.   I need say little more about the not in accordance with the law  point.
     The judge found in the appellant's favour  in  that  regard,  and  the
    Secretary of State did not take issue with that finding in her grounds,
    beyond noting it and remarking that  it  did  not  guarantee  that  the
    appeal would be allowed outright.

7.   The issues with which I am essentially concerned are those  in  respect
    of Article 8.  In this regard the judge accepted that the appellant and
    his partner had been in a relationship for  some  years  and  had  been
    effectively living together as a married couple in the  United  Kingdom
    since December 2012 at which time the appellant's partner, EK,  entered
    the United Kingdom, having been granted leave to enter by way of Tier 2
    employment.  The judge noted the fact  that  the  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom had lasted for a period of just under three and  a  half
    months and commented that if that were the only consideration he  would
    have great problems in finding that the interference  was  sufficiently
    grave to engage Article 8 because the family life enjoyed in the United
    Kingdom had been over such a brief period.  However, he  factored  into
    the equation the fact  that,  as  he  found  it,  the  appellant  could
    cogently argue that he reasonably feared return to Russia on the  basis
    that there was a real risk that he, like his colleagues, would  be  the
    subject  of  politically  imputed  charges  and/or  harassment  by  the
    authorities.  He took  into  account  remarks  by  the  AIT  in  Nhundu
    (01/TH/00613), and concluded  that  although  the  actual  family  life
    enjoyed by the appellant and his partner in the United  Kingdom  as  at
    the date of appeal  was  very  limited  in  time,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant on the judge's view would face a  real  risk  of  significant
    harm or "serious obstacles" on return  to  Russia,  was  sufficient  to
    establish on the evidence before the judge that Article 8 was  engaged,
    especially as  it  was  not  established  before  the  judge  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain actual legal rights of residence  for
    both himself and his partner in any other  country,  as  distinct  from
    being able to make visits to other countries.

8.   On this basis the judge then went on to  consider  the  proportionality
    of the decision.  He noted a clear benefit to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    that the Tier 1 application as an entrepreneur was necessarily based on
    the investment of considerable funds in the United Kingdom and to  that
    extent there was a clear benefit to the United Kingdom.  He noted  that
    no point was taken against the appellant in relation to any  aspect  of
    character, and that it appeared to the judge that on the  evidence  any
    application from abroad would be bound to succeed, given  his  findings
    that the appellant on a balance  of  probabilities  had  the  necessary
    funds for investment in the UK as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  He said  that
    it was clear that the decision of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40 was not  restricted  to  cases  where  one  partner  had
    refugee status in the United  Kingdom  but  applied  generally  to  the
    essential question whether, in terms, there was any sensible reason for
    insisting on an appellant seeking lawful entry clearance  from  abroad,
    especially when  he  was  bound  to  succeed  in  that  application  in
    circumstances  where  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    disrupted.  He  concluded  that  the  appellant  established  that  the
    decision breached his rights to family life  under  Article  8  of  the
    Convention, relying upon the Human Rights Act, rather than the recently
    amended Immigration Rules, and also  stated  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to satisfy him that the decision was necessary for the  purposes
    of immigration control and that it was  proportionate  in  relation  to
    that aim.  He therefore allowed the appeal under Article 8.

9.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on several  grounds.
     The grounds are set out in six paragraphs, but the sixth point is  the
    Immigration Rules point to which I have referred above, which  did  not
    contain a ground  of  appeal  but  rather  an  acknowledgment  of  that
    particular point.

10.  In the first paragraph of the grounds the  Secretary  of  State  argued
    that the Tribunal had failed to consider the relevant sections  of  the
    Immigration Rules but had considered exclusively Article 8 of the ECHR.
     In the second ground it is argued that the Article 8 sections  of  the
    Immigration Rules reflect the Secretary of State's view as to where the
    balance lies between the individual's rights and  the  public  interest
    and therefore  a  Tribunal  considering  an  individual  appeal  should
    consider proportionality in the  light  of  this  clear  expression  of
    public policy and the Secretary of State would  expect  the  courts  to
    defer to her view.

11.  In the third ground it is argued that the findings  on  the  Article  8
    assessment are speculative in concluding that an application for  entry
    clearance by the appellant would be bound to succeed.   In  the  fourth
    ground  it  is  argued  that  the  Tribunal  inappropriately   extended
    Chikwamba to a case where there were no children and in so doing failed
    to give appropriate weight to the legitimate objectives set out in  the
    Immigration Rules of  requiring  some  applications  to  be  made  from
    abroad.  It was argued that though weighting was usually a  matter  for
    the decision maker, where the effect of that weighting  was  to  render
    the Immigration Rules invalid, that made the decision irrational.

12.  In the fifth ground it was argued that the  Tribunal  had  allowed  the
    appellant to use the European Convention on Human Rights to  circumvent
    the Immigration Rules.  It is argued that if the appellant had concerns
    which were tantamount to an asylum claim it was up to him to make  such
    a claim and he had specifically not done so and  therefore  should  not
    benefit from failing to make such an application.

13.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  With regard to the argument  that  the  judge
    erred in law by failing to consider Article 8  within  the  Immigration
    Rules, it was said that this argument appeared to  be  misconceived  as
    the appellant was not asserting in his appeal that he could succeed  by
    relying on those provisions and there was therefore  no  need  for  the
    judge to consider them.  Thereafter it is said that the grounds  go  on
    to argue that the judge failed to take account of the respondent's view
    as to where the Article 8 balance should be struck as expressed in  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules dealing with Article 8.  The  judge
    granting permission considered that although there was no necessity  to
    deal with those provisions as a substantive part of the appeal  it  was
    nevertheless arguable that the judge was required to  take  account  of
    the respondent's views, and reference was made to the decision  of  the
    Tribunal in MF [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC).  It is suggested however that the
    submission that the judge was required to  defer  to  the  respondent's
    view seemed to go too  far.   Finally  the  judge  granting  permission
    considered it  arguable  that  the  finding  that  an  entry  clearance
    application by the appellant would be bound to succeed was speculative.


14.  In Mr Fransman and Mr Sayeed's skeleton argument, it is  contended,  in
    light of what was said by the Court of Appeal  in  DK  (Serbia)  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1747, that permission was refused in respect of paragraph 1 of
    the Secretary of State's grounds, permission was granted in respect  of
    paragraph 2, in paragraph 3, but not with regard to paragraphs 4 and 5.
     The skeleton did, however, deal with all the  matters  raised  in  the
    grounds as did Mr Fransman and Mr Sayeed's oral submissions.

15.  In her submissions Ms Martin relied on  the  grounds.   It  was  argued
    that the judge had clearly failed to consider the Immigration Rules  in
    respect  of  Article  8.   However,  Ms  Martin  accepted  after   some
    discussion that the judge who granted permission had refused permission
    on this particular ground.  She argued, however,  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the Secretary of State's view of where  the  balance
    was to be struck in this case.  The appellant  was  in  a  relationship
    with his partner and had been in the United Kingdom for a very  limited
    amount of time.  The judge had noted what was said in Nhundu, and there
    was little assessment of why the appellant had  refused  to  apply  for
    asylum and why he could  not  return  to  Russia  and  this  seemed  to
    outweigh  the  balance.   There  was  a  failure  to  give  appropriate
    consideration.  The appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules under the PBS and as such it seemed the  judge  had  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 in order to circumvent  the  Rules.   Ms  Martin
    relied on NM [2009] UKAIT 00037 where it was said in the headnote  that
    a student in the United Kingdom on a temporary basis had no expectation
    of a right to remain in order to further social ties and  relationships
    if the criteria of the points-based system were not met.  The appellant
    had no expectation of a right to remain in this case.  There  was  very
    little reason why his family life right should outweigh the immigration
    control provisions put forward by the Secretary of State.

16.  As regards the point in paragraph 4 of the grounds,  the  situation  in
    Chikwamba was very different from the  appellant's  case.   There  were
    children in that case and not in this, and there was little reason why,
    the appellant having refused to claim asylum, he could  not  return  to
    Russia if the claim was not such as to reach  the  threshold.   It  was
    accepted that  the  judge  had  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  a
    reasonable fear of return to Russia, being the subject  of  politically
    imputed charges and/or harassment by the authorities, but his situation
    was compared to that of asylum seekers in the United Kingdom and he did
    not say that he had an asylum claim.  So for him to be compared to  two
    people who were seeking asylum was a misdirection on the  facts  before
    the judge.  That led him to put the proportionality balance at too high
    a level.  He had accepted the appellant was a refugee  without  calling
    him such.

17.  As regards the third paragraph of the  grounds,  paragraph  26  of  the
    determination  was  very  speculative.   As  regards  the   Record   of
    Proceedings put in by the appellant and including the questions to  the
    Presenting Officer, there was in particular to be noted the  answer  at
    page 9 where the Presenting Officer had said that he  could  not  speak
    for the decision maker.  So although it would  appear  the  application
    would succeed it was for the decision maker to decide so it was  not  a
    concession on the part of the Secretary of  State,  and  therefore  the
    finding at paragraph 26 was speculative.
18.  Mr Sayeed made submissions in respect of grounds 1 to 2, in respect  of
    the former of which I will say little since  I  accepted  that  it  was
    ruled out by the judge who granted permission.  The new Rules were  not
    in force at the time when the application was made and though they were
    in force at the time of his appeal, the appellant did not argue that he
    could bring himself within the Rules.  The point had not been argued by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing before the judge.  The matter was
    only raised in generic terms  in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.

19.  As regards ground 2,  Mr  Sayeed  read  that  as  indicating  that  the
    Secretary of State said that wherever Article 8 was engaged  the  Rules
    still informed her views on how the balance was  to  be  struck  in  an
    Article 8 case, as was said at paragraph  23  of  MF  [2012]  UKUT  393
    (IAC), where among other things it was said that in this type  of  case
    the primary decision maker would still have to undertake much the  same
    type of two stage of process of assessment described earlier and to  do
    so ungoverned by any Article 8 specific criteria set out in the  Rules.
    It was argued that there was  no  new  Immigration  Rule  covering  the
    particular scenario in this case.  It was not a case  where  the  claim
    was in respect of a relationship with a British citizen  or  a  refugee
    and it was clear that the new Rules  did  not  cover  every  Article  8
    situation.  The Presenting Officer at the hearing before the judge  had
    not sought to argue that the new Rules applied.  The Article 8 argument
    had been based on traditional Article 8 grounds.   It  was  clear  from
    paragraph 27 that the judge was cognisant of the new Rules but they did
    not apply.

20.  With regard to the other points in the grounds, Mr  Fransman  first  of
    all set out the factual background.  It was not the case,  with  regard
    to ground 3, that the judge  had  concluded  that  an  entry  clearance
    application would be bound to succeed.   It  could  be  seen  from  the
    Record of Proceedings provided that the Presenting Officer had accepted
    that were the appellant to make  an  application  from  abroad  he  was
    likely to meet all the requirement for an entrepreneur application  and
    that if the further letter from the bank had been produced at the  time
    of the application  it  appeared  that  it  would  have  satisfied  the
    Secretary of State.  That  was  the  proper  context  for  the  judge's
    findings.  As was pointed out at paragraph  23  of  the  skeleton,  the
    words "would be bound to succeed" were qualified by "it appears  to  me
    that" and "on the evidence" and "given my findings".  As a  consequence
    what was said by the judge was not speculative.  It was  also  relevant
    to bear in mind that on 21 February  2013,  AB,  DA  and  BS  had  been
    granted asylum.  In  making  his  application  the  appellant  had  put
    forward a great deal of evidence concerning all their  cases,  but  the
    Secretary of State, wrongly in the view of the  judge,  had  said  that
    only the evidence directly concerning the appellant's case itself would
    be considered.  It was relevant to bear in mind that there had been  no
    challenge to the appellant's credibility before the judge and a  number
    of relevant facts had been found in his favour.  It was  also  relevant
    that his partner had re-established herself in the United Kingdom so as
    to be with the appellant, having entered in December 2012 as a  Tier  2
    entrant, it having previously been intended that they would be together
    in Germany.  It  was  clear  from  what  the  appellant  had  said,  in
    particular as recorded at paragraph 19 of the determination,  that  the
    appellant had his views  about  asylum  applications.   He  could  have
    applied for asylum but had not wished to do so.  Alternatively he could
    have applied as the dependant of a Tier 2 migrant.  He  however  had  a
    wish to pursue his original application.

21.  As regards ground 4 it was clear that  Chikwamba  was  not  limited  to
    children.  This could be seen from the quotation in MA [2009] EWCA  Civ
    953 in the skeleton and also in what was said by Mr Justice  Turner  in
    Zhang [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).  It was clear  from  what  was  said  in
    these cases that a mandatory entry clearance requirement  was  dealt  a
    considerable blow by Chikwamba as subsequently interpreted.

22.  As regards ground 5, reliance was placed  in  particular  on  what  was
    said in the skeleton which  made  such  points  as  the  absence  of  a
    requirement in domestic or international  refugee  law  that  a  person
    should apply for asylum whenever they were  eligible.   The  point  was
    also made that there  are  many  reasons  why  a  person  eligible  for
    immigration status under the Immigration Rules might prefer to rely  on
    that status to pursuing an asylum claim; for example, for them to  make
    a claim might exacerbate problems for them or  their  family  at  home.
    Also there were different legal tests and evidential requirements.   It
    was accepted that there was no authority directly on the point that  it
    was not mandatory for a person claiming a risk in their home country or
    prejudice there to claim asylum and be barred otherwise.  Reliance  was
    placed, as the judge had properly done, on what was said in Nhundu.

23.  By way of reply Ms Martin relied on what had been said by the Court  of
    Appeal in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840 at paragraphs 24 and 60.  It could
    be seen for example from paragraph 24 that the degree of likelihood  of
    the adverse effect occurring in an Article 8 case  in  the  context  of
    risk of harm was no less than that required to establish  a  breach  of
    Article 3.  That was not so in this case, as could  be  seen  from  the
    final sentence of paragraph 24 of the judge's determination.  The point
    in Nhundu was refuted by what was said in Razgar.

24.  There would be an applicable Rule if the  appellant  applied  and  that
    was paragraph 319C as considered in Zhang.  When  the  application  was
    completed the Rule would be considered.  The arguments  in  respect  of
    Zhang were speculative.  It could not be said that  because  the  three
    other people had succeeded in asylum claims  the  appellant  would,  in
    particular  since  he  was  yet  to  be  charged,  so  the   risk   was
    substantially different.  The outcome of a  PBS  dependency  claim  was
    again uncertain.  Zhang was in  any  event  High  Court  authority  and
    therefore persuasive only and also the two cases were not on all fours.
     All the evidence had to be taken  in  the  round.   Zhang  involved  a
    person who had entered the United Kingdom in 2003 who lost  a  job  but
    got a new job which required leave in the United Kingdom  and  she  had
    married here also.  Those facts were very different from the  facts  in
    the instant case.  With regard to the claimed concession, the fact that
    something was "likely" did not mean that it would happen.  It was not a
    concession that the appellant met the requirements of the  Rules.   The
    Presenting Officer made it clear  that  he  could  not  speak  for  the
    decision maker.  It was clear from paragraph 78 of Zhang that the  High
    Court could not redraft the Rules  but  they  were  the  expression  of
    Parliament's will.  There was a substantial Article 8  case  there  but
    the instant case was very different.  It was not a  case  of  a  switch
    from general to partner as was the case in Zhang.

25.  By way of response Mr Fransman referred to paragraph 1 of Razgar  which
    made it clear that it was concerned with the context of Article 8(1) in
    contrast to the appeal before the Tribunal which involved Article  8(2)
    proportionality, entailing the consideration of all  relevant  matters,
    including whether it was sensible for the appellant to  go  and  obtain
    entry clearance.  There was a wide range of relevant matters  including
    a risk which was less than Article 3 risk.

26.  By way of response Mr Martin referred to paragraph 24  of  the  judge's
    determination.  There was a finding that the  appellant  would  face  a
    real risk on return.  Consideration of  physical  and  moral  integrity
    risk was dealt with in the context of a real risk of harm.

27.  I reserved my determination.

28.  I will deal with the grounds in the  order  in  which  they  have  been
    argued before me.  It is common ground that ground 1  did  not  receive
    permission from the judge who granted permission.  The reason for  that
    is, as he put it, that the appellant was not asserting  in  his  appeal
    that he could succeed by relying on Article 8  within  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore the judge was not required to consider  them.   The
    point is also made that at the time of the application the  Rules  were
    not in place.  But in any event, particularly for the reason  given  by
    Judge Brunnen in refusing permission, I consider that it is clear  that
    that ground is unarguable and no more needs to be said about it.

29.  There was some debate about the ambit of ground 2.  In many  ways  this
    is a development from ground 1 in which it  refers  to  the  Article  8
    sections of the Immigration Rules reflecting the Secretary  of  State's
    view as to where the balance lies between the individual's  rights  and
    the public interest.   Proportionality  is  to  be  considered  by  the
    Tribunal in the light  of  this  clear  expression  of  public  policy.
    Insofar as this is simply a rewording of ground 1, I do not consider it
    to be a ground with  any  merit.   The  appellant's  skeleton  argument
    quotes from what was said in Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) to the  effect
    that there can be no  presumption  that  the  Rules  will  normally  be
    conclusive as to the Article 8  assessment  or  that  a  fact-sensitive
    enquiry is not normally needed.  The Tribunal went on to say  that  the
    conclusion under the Rules may often have little bearing on the judge's
    own assessment of proportionality.  It is relevant  to  note  that  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of Article 8 were not  argued  before  the
    judge, though he referred to them at paragraph 27  in  concluding  that
    the decision in the case breached the appellant's rights to family life
    under Article 8 of the Convention relying upon  the  Human  Rights  Act
    rather than on the Immigration Rules.
30.  The point is also made that there is no corresponding provision in  the
    Rules purporting to cover the particular situation in this case.   That
    is right in the sense that the Rules do not, as I understand it, govern
    the situation of a person who is enjoying family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a long time partner who is in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2
    (General) Migrant, as opposed to joining such  a  person,  but  in  any
    event the issue was not argued before the judge  and  I  consider  that
    there was no error of law as set out above in not addressing the issues
    in respect of the Immigration Rules for the reasons already explained.

31.  Insofar as ground 2 is concerned rather with the need to place  in  the
    balance the Secretary of State's views as to the public  policy  issues
    involved in the proportionality exercise, I consider that this was done
    by the judge at paragraph 26.  I note that no point was  taken  against
    the appellant in relation to any aspect of character; the judge bore in
    mind that the appellant met all the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as it was now clear that  the  missing  element,  i.e.  the  bank
    evidence, had now been supplied; and there was also the fact  that  his
    application was necessarily based on  the  investment  of  considerable
    funds in the United Kingdom.  The judge  gave,  in  the  circumstances,
    proper  consideration  to  the  relevant  factors  to  be  balanced  in
    concluding as he did.

32.  Ground 3 addressed  the  claimed  speculative  nature  of  the  judge's
    findings.  I see force in what has been argued by Mr  Fransman  and  Mr
    Sayeed in this regard.  What  the  judge  had  to  say  about  this  at
    paragraph 26 has to be seen in the context of such terms as "it appears
    to me", "on the evidence" and  "given  my  findings".   The  judge  was
    entitled to express a  view  as  to  the  likelihood  of  a  successful
    application upon the Rules in considering the proportionality  exercise
    under Article 8(2) and I do not think it can properly be said  that  he
    engaged in excessive speculation.  He was not saying that an appeal was
    bound to succeed.  It  is  relevant  to  note  what  was  said  by  the
    Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  as  recorded  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings that has been provided, including  the  acceptance  by  the
    Presenting Officer that were the appellant to make an application  from
    abroad he was likely to meet all the requirements for  an  entrepreneur
    application and that it appeared the bank letter would  have  satisfied
    him if it had been produced  at  the  time.   The  Presenting  Officer,
    properly, did not provide absolute assurances in  this  regard  and  at
    page 9 is recorded as saying that he could not speak for  the  decision
    maker, although this was in the context rather of the point  about  the
    matter which was found to be not in accordance with the  law  with  the
    decision maker addressing only what the appellant had  put  forward  in
    respect of his own case rather than the evidence as a  whole  that  had
    been submitted.

33.  As regards paragraph 4 of the grounds, I am satisfied,  and  indeed  it
    is clear from the authorities, that Chikwamba  is  not  concerned  with
    children only.   For  example,  as  was  said  at  paragraph  7  in  MA
    (Pakistan) by Sullivan LJ,

         "The view that return should be insisted upon simply  in  order  to
         secure  formal  compliance  with  entry   clearance   rules   'only
         comparatively rarely' is not confined to cases where  children  are
         involved.  While the suggested approach  in  Chikwamba  'certainly'
         applies in such  cases,  it  also  applies  to  family  cases  more
         generally."

     This approach was further  endorsed  in  Zhang  at  paragraph  66,  for
    example, where it is said:

         "Nevertheless, there is no suggestion  from  the  opinion  of  Lord
         Brown that the absence of children should mean that it  would  only
         be in rare cases that  Article  8  rights  would  prevail.  On  the
         contrary, the sort of exceptions he  was  particularly  willing  to
         entertain were those where the applicant  had  a  poor  immigration
         record and thereby fell squarely into the  category  of  those  for
         whom the deterrent effect of the threat of having to leave  the  UK
         in order to make an application would be the most proportionate."

     It is relevant in this context to bear in mind that the  appellant  was
    found to be credible and there is no suggestion of any  adverse  issues
    concerning his character or conduct.  Accordingly, I consider the judge
    was entitled to say as he did at paragraph 26 that  the  principles  in
    Chikwamba apply generally to:

         "... the essential question of whether,  in  terms,  there  is  any
         sensible reason  for  insisting  on  an  appellant  seeking  lawful
         clearance from abroad, especially where he is bound to  succeed  in
         that application and in circumstances where family life in  the  UK
         would be disrupted."


     This was the point in  which  he  went  on  to  say  in  slightly  more
    measured terms that he thought the appeal was one  that  was  bound  to
    succeed, having already found that there was family life which would be
    disrupted.

34.  Accordingly, I reject the contention at  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds
    that the judge erred in what he said about  Chikwamba  and  the  proper
    approach to be taken in an entry clearance case.  As was said by Turner
    J in Zhang at paragraph 69:

         "... it is also evident that in a succession  of  recent  decisions
         the  courts  have  recognised  that  the  application   of   Razgar
         principles, as  seen  through  lens  of  Chikwamba,  leads  to  the
         conclusion that an Article 8 compliant requirement for an applicant
         to leave the UK before  making  an  application  is  the  exception
         rather than the rule."

     For example, in VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5, at paragraph 43,  Sedley
    LJ said:
         "The likelihood of  return  via  entry  clearance  should  not  be
         ordinarily treated as a factor rendering removal proportionate;  if
         anything, the reverse is the case."

36.  I do not read what was said by the judge as  in  any  way  inconsistent
    with this.

37.  The final ground concerns the argument that the  Tribunal  had  allowed
    the appellant to use the ECHR to circumvent the Immigration Rules.

38.  In this regard I see force in the argument that  an  appellant  is  not
    bound just because he has fears of significant ill-treatment on  return
    to make an application to be considered as a refugee or in  respect  of
    Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   It  can  be  seen  from
    paragraph 19 of the determination that he had not applied  for  refugee
    status because he saw it as a serious step which people chose as a last
    resort, he would prefer to obtain status in another way and  considered
    there was an element of stigma attached to  the  obtaining  of  refugee
    status.  The judge at paragraph  34  found  that  in  relation  to  the
    Article 8 grounds the appellant was the subject of  interest  from  the
    Russian authorities in connection with criminal proceedings which three
    of his colleagues had successfully claimed to be persecutory within the
    meaning of the Refugee Convention.  At paragraph 24  he  accepted  that
    there was a real risk that the appellant, like his colleagues, would be
    the subject to politically-imputed charges  and/or  harassment  by  the
    authorities.  He noted what was said in Nhundu and considered that  the
    appellant would face a  real  risk  of  significant  harm  or  "serious
    obstacles" (a term used in Nhundu) on return to Russia  and  that  that
    was sufficient to establish on the evidence before him that  Article  8
    was engaged.  This was, as noted above, in the context of  the  finding
    that though there was family life  it  was  for  only  a  very  limited
    period, since the appellant's partner  had  only  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom three and a half months before the hearing.

39.  I do not read what was said in Razgar,  as  quoted  by  Ms  Martin,  as
    going against the judge's  findings  on  this.   At  paragraph  24  the
    submission was accepted that in  respect  of  seriousness  of  harm  in
    Article 8  cases  the  degree  of  likelihood  of  the  adverse  effect
    occurring was no less than that  required  to  establish  a  breach  of
    Article 3.  That is to do with the degree of likelihood rather than the
    level of harm.  As regards the degree of harm, that was dealt  with  at
    paragraph 23 where it was said that it had to be  sufficiently  serious
    to engage Article 8 and that  there  must  be  a  sufficiently  adverse
    effect on physical and mental integrity, and not merely on health.  The
    other paragraph on which Ms Martin relied, paragraph 60, seems to me to
    be essentially fact-specific.  The judge had held that the Secretary of
    State could not reasonably conclude that  the  appellant's  case  under
    Article 8 was clearly bound to fail.  The case under Article 3 was  far
    more difficult but it was not necessary to reach a final conclusion  on
    the issue in the light of the judge's decision in relation  to  Article
    8.  It is relevant to bear in mind that the case was concerned with the
    lawfulness of decisions by the Secretary  of  State  to  certify  under
    section 72(2)(a) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as  "manifestly
    unfounded", human rights claims raised by asylum seekers  whom  he  had
    decided to remove to other  European  Union  states  under  the  Dublin
    Convention.  Paragraph 60 does not seem to me to support the contention
    that in some way the Court of Appeal was saying that it is illegitimate
    to assess under Article 8  matters  that  might  cross  the  Article  3
    threshold.  The test is essentially that as set out  at  paragraph  23,
    and the judge's findings at paragraph 24 and subsequently at  paragraph
    34 seem to me to be essentially consistent with the proper test.
40.  As noted above, there is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 6 of the grounds which is rather concerned with a recognition
    of the force of the conclusions in respect of  the  not  in  accordance
    with the law finding.

41.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that it has not been  shown
    in  any  respect  that  the  judge  erred  in  law.   He  gave  careful
    consideration to the evidence in the context of the proper legal  tests
    and came to findings which were properly open  to  him.   His  decision
    allowing the appeal on the basis on which he did is, in  all  respects,
    maintained therefore.






Signed                                  Date 17th July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
