
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27483/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2015               |On 21st October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          Mr Shaminder Preet Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 9th December 1988.  On  3rd
    March 2014 the Appellant made  a  combined  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system  (PBS)  and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit (BRP).  That application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    in a Notice of Refusal dated 9th July 2014.  The basis for refusal  was
    that the Appellant had claimed 30 points for Confirmation of Acceptance
    for Studies (CAS) but the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the
    Appellant's Tier 4 Sponsor had ensured that the  Appellant  was  either
    competent in English language at a minimum level of B2  of  the  Common
    European Framework of Reference for languages or that the Appellant was
    a  person  who  met  an  alternative  requirement.   Consequently   the
    Secretary of State was therefore not satisfied that the  Appellant  met
    the requirements of the 30 points to be awarded under Appendix  A.   In
    making that decision the Secretary of State  was  aware  that  on  28th
    November 2010 the Appellant had been granted leave to enter the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 28th March 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Adio sitting at Hatton Cross on 19th February 2015.  In a
    determination promulgated on 20th February 2015 the Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed on the grounds that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  Judge Adio's findings of fact and conclusions
    are set out in detail at paragraphs 8 to 15 of his decision.

 3. On 12th March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those  grounds  made  two  contentions.   Firstly,
    whilst the judge of the First-tier Tribunal had allowed the  appeal  to
    the extent the decision was not in accordance with the law, the  appeal
    before him was against a Tier 4 refusal and a Section 10 decision.  The
    grounds contend that the judge found that deception had not  been  made
    out by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  and  so  the
    Section 10 decision was unlawful.  They also note that the judge  found
    that the refusal decision under the Immigration Rules was also unlawful
    and contend that the judge erred in both respects.  It is the Secretary
    of State's argument that even if the deception had not  been  made  out
    the fact remains the Appellant did not have a  valid  English  language
    test and that the Appellant was not awarded  points  for  a  valid  CAS
    because:

         "As the examination process used to assess  your  English  language
         ability was confirmed to be not  genuine,  your  Tier  4  Sponsor's
         assessment does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  A  and
         Appendix O of the Immigration Rules.  It has therefore been decided
         that you have not met the requirements  and  no  points  have  been
         awarded for your CAS."

    The grounds contend that the Appellant accepted that his  English  test
    had been declared invalid by the provider (ETS) but disputed the  basis
    for that and it remained therefore that he did not have a valid CAS and
    his Tier 4 application was therefore rightly refused.

 4. Secondly the grounds contend that the judge was also wrong to allow the
    appeal against the Section 10 decision on the basis of the ETS evidence
    before him and that the evidence before him was cogent  enough  on  the
    balance of probabilities to prove  that  the  Appellant  had  exercised
    deception.

 5. On 6th May 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth concluded that it did
    not follow, arguably, that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law because the Respondent had failed to make out a case  of  deception
    and that a further arguable error may have arisen in  relation  to  the
    absence of a CAS and the consequences thereof.

 6. There  was  no  Rule  24  response  served  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives.  I note there has been a  change  of  the  Appellant's
    legal representatives and that new solicitors place themselves  on  the
    record on 11th September 2015.  It is on that  basis  that  the  appeal
    comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  note  that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  but  for  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout the legal  process  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    referred to herein as the Respondent and Mr  Singh  as  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel, Mr Iqbal.  Mr Iqbal is
    familiar  with  this  matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion/Analysis of Gazi

 7. Mr Bramble refers to the two specific grounds in the Grounds of  Appeal
    and contends that the certificate is not genuine and that as  the  test
    is accepted as invalid the Appellant does not  have  a  valid  CAS  and
    therefore the appeal should have been dismissed.   They  indicate  that
    documentary evidence by way of witness statements from Rebecca  Collins
    and Peter Millington were relied upon.  He seeks to place  reliance  on
    the decision in R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC).

 8. It is clear from the submissions/discussion that it is  appropriate  to
    give due consideration to Gazi.  Gazi is authority for stating  that  a
    challenge to the strength and quality of the evidence underpinning  the
    Secretary of State's decision to  remove  a  student  from  the  United
    Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on  the
    ground of fraud in procuring a TOEIC English language qualification, is
    best suited to the fact-finding forum of the First-tier Tribunal and is
    unsuitable for determination by an application for judicial review.

 9. Mr Bramble takes me to the evidence in Gazi and to the  conclusions  to
    be found at paragraphs 34 and 35.  Relying  on  an  analysis  that  the
    Respondent's evidence provide an adequate foundation for  the  decision
    under Section 10 of the 1999 Act and that nothing has been produced  by
    the Appellant.  His submission is that taking Gazi at its  simplest  it
    is necessary to analyse the Appellant's claim and the Appellant has put
    forward no evidence that would refute the findings of the Secretary  of
    State.

10. In response Mr Iqbal states that Gazi was an in-country appeal and  the
    issue was jurisdictional.  He takes me to paragraph 13  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's determination pointing out the witness statements
    therein at best can be described as generic and  none  of  the  witness
    statements  remotely  say  that  the  Appellant  obtained  his  ETS  by
    deception.  That is to be found conclusively in the findings of fact of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that they are findings  that  he  was
    entitled to  make.   He  points  out  the  witness  statement  from  Mr
    Sartorious is at its best hearsay and points out that he was not called
    to give evidence and  was  not  cross-examined.  He  submits  there  is
    nothing that links the reference to a spreadsheet with the  Appellant's
    ETS.  So far as the second ground is concerned he points out that  this
    is mere disagreement.  He asked me to dismiss the Secretary of  State's
    appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. This is a well considered  and  well  constructed  determination.   The
    judge has given due and full consideration to the witness statement  of
    Mr Sartorious and has considered it  at  some  length  particularly  at
    paragraphs 9, 10 and 13.  He has also considered  the  generic  witness
    statement of Miss Collins in some detail at paragraph 14.   Further  he
    has considered the  generic  witness  statement  of  Mr  Millington  as
    expressly set out at paragraph 10.  The judge has  made  findings  that
    there was no satisfactory evidence from ETS other than the  details  of
    the Appellant and the fact his results are regarded  as  invalid.   The
    judge has made findings of fact at paragraphs 12 and 13 setting out why
    it is not possible on a balance of probability to conclude that a  case
    of deception has been made out against the Appellant and has made  full
    findings at paragraph 13 that he was entitled to.

14. Consequently I am satisfied that  this  ground  discloses  no  material
    error of law and that the judge was entitled to  make  his  conclusions
    that there had been no proof  of  fraud.   In  such  circumstances  the
    appropriate step was  to  award  leave  to  the  Appellant  to  get  an
    alternative CAS and that the judge was correct to conclude that  whilst
    the Appellant had not met the requirements of paragraph  245ZX  of  the
    Immigration Rules the correct and just approach was to adopt that taken
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to allow the appeal to the  extent
    that it was remitted back to the Respondent.

15. So far as the  second  Ground  of  Appeal  is  concerned  this  is  not
    addressed in any great detail in submission.  Mr  Bramble  does  little
    more than rely on the Grounds of Appeal.  Mr Iqbal indicates  that  the
    ground amounts to little more than disagreement.  I agree with the view
    expressed by Mr Iqbal.  All the Secretary of State seeks to  do  is  to
    disagree with the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Such
    an argument does not find favour with me  and  does  not  constitute  a
    material error of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

