
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/27732/2014
                                                               IA/30284/2014
                                                               IA/30288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th September 2015               |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                   MR MD IBRAHIM KHALIL (FIRST APPELLANT)
                MRS JANNATUL FERDAUS DISHA (SECOND APPELLANT)
            MASTER SNEBO IYAAD KHALIL (A MINOR) (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Davison, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born respectively on 5th June
    1985, 10th June 1989 and 11th June 2010.  The Second Appellant  is  the
    First Appellant's partner.  The Third Appellant is the minor  child  of
    the First and Second Appellant.  Unless specifically referred to herein
    all references refer to the First Appellant.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is set out in detail at paragraph 3
    of the Notice of Refusal.  The Appellant and his dependants seek  leave
    to remain in the  United  Kingdom  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights on the basis of  family  and  private  life.
    They claim that  it  will  breach  their  human  rights  to  return  to
    Bangladesh.  That application was considered by the Home Office  and  a
    Notice of Refusal was issued on 17th June 2014.  The  Appellant  lodged
    Grounds of Appeal and the appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Symes sitting  at  Richmond  on  19th  February  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 18th March 2015 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed.

 3. On 23rd March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended firstly that  the  judge's
    approach to Article 8 was arguably materially flawed and that the judge
    had arguably failed to  properly  apply  the  public  interest  factors
    particularised within Section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  secondly  that
    the judge had failed to identify the relevant standard of proof.

 4. On 8th May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Parkes in granting permission  noted  that  the  appeals
    were allowed with the judge finding that the Appellants  had  been  let
    down by the educational establishments attended by the First  Appellant
    and that they would not be a burden on the tax payer.   He  noted  that
    the first two Appellants had arrived in the UK in  2008  and  that  the
    Third Appellant had been born in  2010.   Further  he  noted  that  the
    grounds argued that the judge had failed to apply the  public  interest
    properly and made findings that were open to him  and  that  the  First
    Appellant's applications had  been  refused  three  times  for  reasons
    within his control.  He noted that the  Secretary  of  State  contended
    that one Sponsor may have lost a licence but there was no  evidence  to
    show other efforts to obtain a Sponsor and there was no  assessment  of
    proportionality.  In such circumstances he considered  that  the  Third
    Appellant's best interests had not been fully considered  and  attached
    undue weight to good character.  He considered that the decision failed
    to take into account Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and the  limitations  on  the
    nature of Article 8 in addition to the facts that the  Appellants  were
    admitted with no expectation of being allowed to remain on  any  basis.
    No Rule 24 response appears to have been served by the Appellants.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is no material error of  law.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer  Mr  Bramble.   The
    Appellants appear by their instructed Counsel Mr Davison.  I note  that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  but  for  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout the appeal process Mr Khalil and  his  dependants
    are referred to herein as the Appellants and the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent.



Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Bramble submits that the grounds are clear  pointing  out  that  the
    judge has referred to Mr Khalil originally being in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully until 18th August 2008 and  that  his  stay  being  to  some
    extent precarious.  He submits that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom having been unlawful
    for the purposes of Section 117B(4)(a) since August 2008 and  that  the
    judge had failed to properly take  into  account  the  public  interest
    factors particularised within Section 117B(1) of the Immigration Rules.
     He takes me in particular to paragraphs 23 and 25 of the decision  and
    whilst he notes that the judge has at paragraph 24 set  out  Rule  117B
    the question remains as to whether or not he has actually addressed it.
     He acknowledges that this decision is written against a background  of
    the Home Office not appearing with a Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    He submits that the reference in paragraph 25 whereby the  judge  found
    that the family's Article 8 rights have been built on a stay  which  is
    "to some  extent  precarious"  is  not  a  basis  for  due  and  proper
    consideration pursuant to  paragraph  117B(4)  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant's lawful leave ended in 2008 and the failure to address  this
    is material.  He claims the judge has failed to  apply  proportionality
    properly.  Whilst noting that  the  judge  has  made  reference  to  EV
    (Philippines) and  Others  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the judge has failed properly to address
    this authority.  He notes that in paragraph  22  of  the  decision  the
    judge has concluded that  the  Third  Appellant's  wellbeing  could  be
    compromised by leaving the school where he is established.   He  points
    out firstly that the judge erred in finding at the age  of  5  that  an
    Appellant could be established at school and secondly he has failed  to
    give  due  and  proper  appropriate  consideration  to   the   relevant
    authorities.

 7. He submits that there is an error in that the  judge  has  treated  CDS
    (PBS "Available" Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC)  as  being
    decisive case law and then goes and stands aside from that pointing out
    that where there is evidence that an Appellant is  midway  through  the
    course the factors set out in CDS have not  been  taken  into  account.
    Further he contends that the judge had failed to identify the  relevant
    standard of proof and that he had failed to  explicitly  refer  to  the
    standard of proof required and that therefore in both of these  aspects
    there were material errors of law.   He  asked  me  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, for none of the findings  of  fact
    stand and to remit the matter back to the First-tier for re-hearing.

 8. Mr Davison starts by reminding me that at paragraph 12 of  the  judge's
    decision  he  has  emphasised  that  there  was  no  representative  in
    attendance on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  that  there  was  no
    explanation given for the failure of the Secretary of State  to  attend
    and there was no application for an adjournment.   He  notes  that  the
    judge has taken account of the guidelines  annexed  to  MNM  (Surendran
    Guidelines for Adjudicators) (Kenya) [2000] UKIAT 00005 namely that the
    Respondent's case is consequently limited to that found in the  refusal
    letter and that the judge should only raise further matters at his  own
    instance where they are readily apparent on  reading  the  papers.   He
    consequently submits that this is exactly what the judge has  done  and
    therefore there is no error in law disclosed within the  determination.
    He submits all the grounds are is an attempt to  re-argue  a  decision.
    He points out that the judge has initially considered the Rules and has
    then gone on to consider the appeal outside the Rules.  He asks  me  to
    note at paragraph 15 that the judge recognises that the failure of  the
    appeal under the Rules tends to show that the public interest would not
    be served by the Appellants' remaining  in  the  UK  but  that  he  has
    thereafter quite properly gone on to consider the  appeal  outside  the
    Rules and the tests set out in  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).   He
    submits that the judge has picked up a proper approach to  this  matter
    at paragraph 18 and directed  himself  in  an  appropriate  manner  and
    thereafter at paragraphs 18 to 21 has gone on to  consider  the  issues
    thoroughly and particularly those with regard to the  Third  Appellant,
    has properly analysed the decision in EV (Philippines)  and  thereafter
    Rule 117B and made findings which he  was  perfectly  entitled  to  and
    given his reasons.  In such circumstances he submits  that  the  appeal
    amounts to little more than disagreement and that it does not  disclose
    any material error of law and he asks me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. I start by reminding myself that it is the role of the judge within the
    Upper Tribunal to determine whether  or  not  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has erred in law in his decision.  Unless I find that that is the
    case or  that  a  decision  is  so  perverse  (which  in  itself  would
    constitute an error of law) then the fact that I or  another  judge  on
    another day may have come to a different conclusion is not  a  material
    factor.  It is clear that the Secretary of  State  may  well  not  have
    helped herself in this matter by  failing  to  provide  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  That failure is addressed thoroughly at  paragraph
    12 by the judge within his determination.  He has  gone  on  to  direct
    himself fully therein as to the approach that he needs to adopt and  he
    cannot be criticised for this.  The question remains as to  whether  he
    has in such  circumstances  actually  followed  the  approach  that  he
    indicated he intended to.  I am satisfied that he has.

12. Mr Bramble relies on two contentions.  Firstly the judge has failed  to
    properly  apply  the  public  interest  factors  particularised  within
    Section 117B.  This is a judge who  has  thoroughly  examined  the  law
    within his approach.  He has noted that the failure of the appeal under
    the Rules shows that the public interest would not  be  served  by  the
    Appellant's remaining here and  has  gone  on  to  give  due  and  full
    consideration to important and relevant authorities such as Nagre,  CDS
    Brazil and Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).   He  has
    thereafter directed himself quite properly by  stating  that  the  mere
    fact that a person may have come to this  country  and  embarked  on  a
    course of studies  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  they  will  have
    established private life here,  particularly  once  they  finish  their
    course, where the Immigration Rules do  not  make  provisions  for  any
    further residence for them.  He has set out how and why  this  case  is
    distinguishable from the Nasim class of case and has thereafter gone on
    to consider the position of the  Third  Appellant.   He  has  found  at
    paragraph 21 that it is relatively rare for a young child of the  Third
    Appellant's age to have any independent private life outside the family
    unit and has made findings at paragraph 21 and 22 relating to the Third
    Appellant socialising outside the family and to becoming established at
    school.  As stated previously whether I or  another  judge  would  have
    come to that conclusion is a matter of conjecture but this is  a  judge
    who has heard the evidence and has  given  reasons  for  his  findings.
    Those  reasons  are  not  so  perverse  as  to  be  unsustainable   and
    consequently just because the Secretary of  State  seeks  to  challenge
    them and disagree with them does not constitute  a  material  error  of
    law.  If the judge has gone through the due and proper process and made
    findings which are not perverse as I am  satisfied  he  has  here  then
    those conclusions do not constitute a material error of law.

13. Further however this judge has then gone on  to  give  due  and  proper
    consideration to the question of proportionality and to  give  due  and
    full consideration to paragraph 117B of the Immigration Rules.   Whilst
    I can understand the use of the words to some  extent  "precarious"  at
    paragraph 25 may well not have been the best phrase for a judge to have
    used the judge has at  paragraph  25  analysed  the  First  Appellant's
    position and made findings which were open to him.  Further whilst  the
    judge has not specifically  referred  to  the  burden  of  proof  I  am
    satisfied that he has given due and  full  consideration  and  has  not
    applied the wrong test.  In such circumstances the  decision  discloses
    no material error of law.  The Secretary of State  disagrees  with  the
    decision.  That is  the  Secretary  of  State's  entitlement.   However
    unless there is a material error of law disclosed in the decision  then
    it is not  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  overturn  that  decision  and
    consequently the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

