
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2016                               |On 22 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                                 XUEQIN WENG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, Legal Representative, Rana & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 22 October 2015 dismissing her appeal  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds against the respondent's  decision
    made on 20 June 2014 refusing her application for leave to  remain  and
    making directions for her removal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 23 March 1979.   She  made
    an unlawful entry into the UK on 11 December 2006.  She did not seek to
    regularise her status until she made an application for leave to remain
    on human rights grounds on 28 March 2011.  This application was refused
    on 13 May 2011 and an appeal against that decision was rejected on  the
    basis that there was no valid appeal as  no  immigration  decision  had
    been made to remove her.   On 20 January  2014  an  immigration  status
    questionnaire was completed on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  on  28
    February 2014 she was  served  with  a  notice  informing  her  of  her
    liability to be detained.  She was given instructions to report to  the
    Home Office.  On 13 May 2014 the respondent wrote  to  the  appellant's
    representatives requesting information on her current circumstances and
    a letter in response was received on 11 June 2014.   This  led  to  the
    decision of 20 June 2014 refusing her application for leave  to  remain
    and giving directions for her removal.

3.   The reasons for the decision are set out in the  decision  letter  also
    dated 20 June 2014.  The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appeal
    would be able to meet the requirements for leave to remain as a partner
    under the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") as amended in 2012.   As  she
    could not meet the eligibility requirements of para E-LTRP,  her  claim
    was considered under para EX.1(b) but the respondent was not  satisfied
    that there were any insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  her
    husband continuing outside the UK.  The respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant was married to the sponsor, also a citizen of China.  He  had
    entered the UK in 2002 and claimed asylum.  His application was refused
    but he was subsequently granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  2010
    under the legacy scheme and was naturalised as a British citizen on  12
    April 2012.  As his asylum claim had not been accepted, the  respondent
    did not consider that there were any barriers to him returning to China
    with the appellant to continue their family life  together  where  they
    had two children living with the appellant's mother.

4.   The respondent went on  to  consider  the  provisions  of  para  276ADE
    setting out the requirements for leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private life based on residence in the UK but  she  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant could meet any  of  those  requirements.   She  also
    considered whether there were exceptional circumstances that would make
    it appropriate to allow the appellant to remain in the UK  outside  the
    Rules but was not satisfied that  there  would  be  sufficiently  harsh
    consequences to make removal disproportionate.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing of the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  the
    judge heard evidence from both the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   The
    appellant confirmed that her travel arrangements to  the  UK  had  been
    made by an agent who had bought her to the UK  illegally  although  she
    had not been aware of this.  She did not  know  that  she  was  leaving
    China illegally.  Her mother was looking after their  two  children  in
    China.  The sponsor confirmed that he  had  married  the  appellant  in
    China in 2000. He had been living with her before he left in 2002.   He
    was now working in Chinatown and was supporting the appellant and their
    children.   He  had  claimed  asylum  because  he  was  a  Falun   Gong
    practitioner but his claim had been rejected  by  the  respondent.   He
    said he could not live in China with  his  wife  because  he  would  be
    persecuted by the Chinese  government  but  he  accepted  that  he  had
    returned to China in 2013 and 2015 to see his children, saying that  he
    thought he could return because the British government would be able to
    protect him because of his citizenship.  If he had to return to  China,
    this would affect  his  employer's  business.   He  accepted  that  his
    parents, one brother, five sisters, two uncles  and  three  aunts,  all
    lived in China.

6.   At the hearing there were submissions  about  whether  the  appellant's
    application for leave made in March 2011 should be considered under the
    Rules as they stood at the date of application or under  the  Rules  at
    the date of decision.  The judge was referred to Edgehill  v  Secretary
    of State [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and accepted that  the  old  Rules  should
    apply, the Presenting Officer apparently agreeing  that  this  was  the
    case and that there would be no need  to  consider  Article  8  if  the
    appellant in fact met the old Rules, namely para 281 of HC 395.

7.   The judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  married  to  a  British
    citizen,  the  marriage  was  subsisting,  there  would   be   adequate
    maintenance and accommodation and, therefore, the requirements  of  the
    old Rules on marriage were met.  However, he went on  to  consider  the
    provisions of paras  320  and  322  which  set  out  grounds  on  which
    applications for leave to remain and variation of leave should normally
    be refused.  The judge found that the  application  must  fail  as  the
    appellant had failed to produce a  valid  national  passport  or  other
    document satisfactorily establishing her identity as required  by  para
    320(5) or because she had previously breached the  Rules  by  being  an
    illegal entrant.

8.   In the light of his finding that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules  he  went  on  to  consider  Article  8.   He
    accepted that the appellant's husband was now a British citizen and was
    working but said that there was no valid reason why he could not return
    to China.  He had never been granted refugee status and had returned on
    two occasions to visit  his  children.   He  was  fully  familiar  with
    Chinese customs and culture. He had a large family  network  in  China.
    He had said that he could not leave his employment in  the  UK,  as  it
    would affect his employer's business but that  was  hardly  a  credible
    reason as, being a chef, it would be possible to utilise  those  skills
    in China.  The judge  found  that  it  would  be  both  reasonable  and
    proportionate to expect family life to continue  in  China,  where  the
    parties were married and where they lived together before  the  sponsor
    came to the UK.

9.   So far as  the  appellant  was  concerned,  she  had  come  to  the  UK
    illegally  to  join  her  husband,  thereby  circumventing  immigration
    control.  She had done nothing to regularise  her  status  until  2011.
    There was nothing to prevent her returning to China and resuming family
    life with her children and her husband as hitherto.  He found  that  it
    was entirely reasonable and proportionate to expect  the  appellant  to
    return to China where her mother and children lived.  Her husband could
    return with her and there would be a continuation of  family  life  or,
    alternatively, she could return  and  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance in the proper way if able to satisfy the Rules.  Accordingly,
    the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

10.  In the grounds of appeal it is argued that it was  common  ground  that
    the appeal should be decided according to the pre-July 2012  Rules  and
    the judge had found that those requirements had  been  satisfied.   The
    appeal should have been allowed accordingly.  The judge  had  erred  by
    dismissing the appeal under the provisions of para 320(7)(b)  and  (c).
    These issues had not been raised prior to the decision being  made  and
    the decision was therefore flawed and  unsupportable.   It  is  further
    argued that, when considering article  8,  there  was  a  need  for  an
    independent proportionality evaluation. The substance of the Rules  had
    been met.  The appellant had  given  evidence  that  the  fact  of  her
    illegal exit from China would expose  her  to  repercussions  from  the
    authorities which could include a period of imprisonment and this would
    make it unreasonable for her to have to return. Finally, it  is  argued
    that the judge failed to make any findings of his  own  in  respect  of
    s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended.
    The sponsor's interests should also be considered as he was affected by
    the decision and his return as the breadwinner for the family could  be
    neither reasonable nor proportionate as  suggested  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11.  In the Rule 24 response, the respondent refers to the judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid v Secretary of  State  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74 and argues that there was no material error of law  in  the  way
    the judge disposed of the appeal on Article 8  grounds.  It  is  argued
    that as the appellant could not meet the new Rules, she could  as  such
    obtain no positive benefit under s.117B of the 2002 Act.

12.  In his submission Mr Adophy accepted in the light of Singh  and  Khalid
    that the old Rules did not in fact apply  but  submitted  that  in  any
    event  the judge had erred by considering matters under paras  320  and
    322 without giving the parties an opportunity of making submissions  on
    those issues.  The errors the judge made by applying the old Rules  and
    considering issues not raised by the party were sufficiently serious to
    vitiate the decision as a whole. This affected not  only  the  decision
    under the Rules but also under article 8 as  his  assessment  had  been
    coloured by his unlawful approach to the Rules.  He had failed to  take
    proper account of the difficulties on return and,  in  particular,  the
    fact that the sponsor could only return for visits and not to live  and
    the appellant would be at risk of penalties for making an illegal  exit
    from China.

13.  Mr Avery accepted that the judge had erred by  considering  the  matter
    under the old Rules but his decision on Article 8  grounds  was  wholly
    sustainable and the decision had not been tainted by  the  errors  when
    considering the Rules. There was no evidence  that  any  penalties  for
    illegally exiting China would be disproportionate or that  the  sponsor
    could not live in China. The fact remained that he had returned on  two
    occasions after being granted British citizenship.

Consideration of the Issues

14.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    its decision should be set aside. The  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took place on 29 September 2015, over  six  months  after  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Singh  and  Khalid  was  issued  on  12
    February 2015.  In that judgment the Court of Appeal held that save for
    a brief window between 9 July  2012  and  6  September  2012  when  the
    provisions of HC 565 came into effect, the respondent was  entitled  to
    apply the new Rules in  reaching  decisions.   Therefore,  whether  the
    application is treated as made on 28 March 2011 or on 20 June  2014  in
    the light of  the  information  given  about  the  appellant's  current
    circumstances in May  2014,  the  respondent  was  acting  lawfully  by
    considering the position under the amended Rules.  In any  event,  when
    considering the application under the old Rules  the  judge  failed  to
    note that the appellant as  an  illegal  entrant  could  not  meet  the
    requirement that she should have limited leave to remain  as  specified
    by those Rules.  Therefore the application  could  not  have  succeeded
    under the old Rules and would have been considered under article  8  as
    at the date of the judge's decision. As far as the application of paras
    320 or 322, this was a new issue and the judge should  have  given  the
    parties an opportunity of making submissions.  In any event, as I  have
    already indicated, the application could not have succeeded  under  the
    old Rules.

15.  I referred the parties at the hearing to Koori  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2016] EWCA Civ 552 where the court held that a failure  by  a  party's
    legal representative to appreciate a matter in his client's favour  did
    not in itself amount to a concession and that the respondent should  be
    allowed to remedy mistakes on appeal.  I need not deal  with  this  any
    further as Mr Adophy did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the  respondent's
    agreement at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  old
    Rules applied amounted to a concession.

16.  In summary, I accept that the First-tier Tribunal's decision under  the
    Rules was made in error and amounted to an error of law but it was  not
    a material error.  The appeal could not have succeeded  under  the  old
    Rules and  it  has  not  been  argued  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the amended Rules.  However, Mr Adophy sought to  argue
    that the judge's decision under article 8 was vitiated and  tainted  by
    the errors made in his assessment of the Rules.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that this was the  case  or  that  there  was  any  unfairness  to  the
    appellant.  The fact remains that the appeal could not  have  succeeded
    under the old Rules, and only under the amended Rules if the  appellant
    could show that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK in accordance with para EX.1.

17.  On this issue I am satisfied that the judge reached  findings  properly
    open to him on the evidence for the reasons he gave.  He accepted  that
    the parties were married and  that  they  were  able  to  maintain  and
    accommodate themselves in the UK.  However, the appellant was not  able
    to meet the eligibility  requirements  of  the  Rules.  When  assessing
    insurmountable obstacles to living in China, the judge was entitled  to
    take into account the fact that there were two children of  the  family
    living with the appellant's mother.  The  grounds  argue  that  as  the
    appellant made an illegal exit from China,  she  would  be  exposed  to
    repercussions from the authorities which could   include  a  period  of
    imprisonment.  However,  there  was  no  adequate  evidence  about  the
    likelihood of imprisonment or its length or  that  such  a  consequence
    would be unreasonable in  the  appellant's  circumstances  such  as  to
    amount to insurmountable obstacles.

18.  So far as the sponsor is concerned, the fact remains that  he  returned
    to China after being granted British citizenship for two visits to  his
    children in 2013 and 2015.  He has extended family members  there.   It
    was asserted at the hearing before me that the  appellant  could  visit
    but would not be allowed to remain in  China  but  there  has  been  no
    evidence to support that contention. In any event, as the judge pointed
    out, there was no reason why the appellant could not return and make an
    entry clearance application if  able  to  satisfy  the  Rules.  In  the
    grounds it was  argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the factors raised in s.117B of the 2002 Act but it is
    clear that the judge was aware of the relevant provisions, referring to
    the section  in  [21]  of  his  decision.  When  his  consideration  of
    proportionality is looked at in the light of the facts before him, I am
    not satisfied that there is any substance in the assertion made in  the
    grounds that there was no independent consideration of proportionality.
     The judge's findings on proportionality were properly open to him  for
    the reasons he gave.  The appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules and there were  no  compelling  circumstances  to  justify  a
    finding that removal would be disproportionate.

19.   For  these  reasons,  although  the  judge  erred  in   law   in   his
    consideration of the appeal under the old Rules, that was not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal and caused no unfairness to the  appellant
    such that his findings on the issues of  insurmountable  obstacles  and
    proportionality should be set aside. His findings under Article 8  were
    not tainted by the errors in respect of the Rules.

Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in  any  way  requiring  the
    decision to be set  aside  and  accordingly  the  decision  stands.  No
    anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 18 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

