
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           MR PARISH RATILAL JADAV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr Michael Wainwright, legal representative, Chancery
                    CS Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 18 March 2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler (hereinafter referred to as the
       FTTJ).

Background

    2. The appellant applied for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
       (General) student on 23 May 2014 in order to follow  a  NQF  level  6
       Diploma in Tourism and Hospitality Management at Newcastle Academy of
       Business and Technology. That application was refused on 16 June 2014
       as the respondent considered  that  he  had  failed  to  achieve  the
       minimum standard of English  required.  Reference  was  made  to  the
       appellant's IELTS certificate, which indicated that he had not scored
       a minimum of 5.5 in  all  components.  Consequently  no  points  were
       awarded for the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.

    3. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant requested 60 days  to  appear
       at a further IELTS test so that he could provide results at level  B2
       or above.

    4. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the appellant did not appear and  nor
       was he represented. The FTTJ recorded that the respondent argued that
       the appellant had not shown that he was  competent  at  "B1"  of  the
       Council of Europe's European  Framework  for  Language  in  all  four
       components as required by paragraph  118(b)  of  Appendix  A  to  the
       Immigration  Rules.  The  FTTJ  considered  that  the  appellant  was
       required to show that he is competent in the English  language  to  a
       minimum level "B1" but found that the appellant had not achieved  5.5
       in each component owing to his score of 5.0 for writing.

    5. The grounds of application argue, that the FTTJ erred in finding that
       the appellant had not met the English language requirement. Reference
       was made to Appendix A, at  paragraph  118(b)(iii)(4),  which  showed
       that for courses below  degree  level,  only  level  B1  English  was
       required and the appellant had a lower band score to  meet  than  for
       level B2.

    6. FTTJ Frankish granted permission on the above basis, commenting  that
       the  appellant  had  lost  an  opportunity,  by  not  attending,   to
       demonstrate that his target was 5 rather than 5.5.

    7. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24 response on 10 June 2015.  In
       opposing the appeal, the respondent referred to [7] of  the  decision
       where reference was made to the appellant's request for  60  days  to
       provide the test results. It was said to be  unclear  what  documents
       were before the FTTJ and he  could  only  have  regard  to  documents
       submitted with the application.

Error of law

    8. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Wainwright  agreed  with  Mr  Avery's
       preliminary view that there was a typographical error in  the  FTTJ's
       decision in that he wrote B1 rather than B2. Otherwise, Mr Wainwright
       conceded that the appellant's course was equivalent to  degree  level
       and therefore he was required to show competency in English at  level
       B2 and not level B1.

    9. In view of Mr Wainwright's concession, I had no hesitation in finding
       that there was no material error of law in the FTTJ's decision.

   10. The course the appellant proposed to take was a diploma at NQF  level
       6,  which  is  equivalent  to  a  bachelor's  degree.  Therefore  the
       appellant was required to show that he was competent in  the  English
       language at B2  level  in  all  four  components.  B1  competency  is
       required for courses at below degree level.

   11. As set out in paragraph 118(b)  of  Appendix  A  of  the  Rules,  the
       appellant was required to score a minimum of  5.5  for  each  of  the
       individual components. It is not in dispute that the appellant scored
       5.0 for writing.

   12. Accordingly, the FTTJ was correct at {12] to find that the  appellant
       had not met the requirements of the paragraph 118(b)  of  Appendix  A
       and at [13] to dismiss his appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Conclusions

      1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.






    Signed:  Date: 16 August 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
