
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27626/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th October 2017                  |On 7th December 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr MD Mostafa Belal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Shah (Solicitor)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision  to  refuse  his  application
    for leave in the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) category and to  remove  him  by
    way of directions under section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act  2006  ("the  2006  Act")  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Veloso ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  12th
    January 2017.

2.   The judge found that  the  Secretary  of  State  included  reasons  for
    finding the appellant not to be a genuine entrepreneur,  in  the  "non-
    points scoring reasons" part of her decision letter.  Under the heading
    "points scoring", the Secretary of State recorded in the same letter an
    award of 75 points under Appendix A  to  the  immigration  rules  ("the
    rules"), 10 points under Appendix B and 10  points  under  Appendix  C.
    The judge went on to find, at paragraph 35 of the  decision,  that  the
    grounds on which the application was refused were not  related  to  the
    acquisition of points.   The  judge  decided  that  the  appellant  was
    therefore not prevented, under  section  85A  of  the  2002  Act,  from
    relying on new evidence, in other words evidence which was  not  before
    the decision maker when the adverse decision was made.

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and found him to be  a
    credible  and  reliable  witness.   His  evidence  clarified   concerns
    regarding several service agreements,  letters  from  directors  having
    failed to provide the necessary clarification.  Her overall  conclusion
    was that the appellant had shown that his business  plans  were  viable
    and credible, that  he  had  the  necessary  educational  and  business
    experience to fulfil his chosen role as an IT consultant, and  that  he
    remained a director of the business and genuinely  intended  to  invest
    funds as claimed.  He did not intend  to  take  employment  other  than
    under the terms of paragraph  245DE  of  the  rules.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis that the relevant requirements of the  rules  were
    met.

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   She
    contended that the judge failed to apply guidance given  in  Ahmed  and
    Another [2014] UKUT 365 and misdirected herself at paragraph 35 of  the
    decision in finding that refusal of the application under the rules  in
    paragraph 245DD was not related to the  acquisition  of  points.   Also
    flawed was her consequential finding that the  appellant  was  able  to
    rely on new evidence which was not  before  the  decision  maker.   The
    headnote in Ahmed and Another  made  it  clear  that  where  the  rules
    provide that points will not be awarded if the decision  maker  is  not
    satisfied as to another (non-points scoring) aspect of the  rules,  the
    non-points  scoring  aspect  and  the  requirement   for   points   are
    inextricably linked.  As a result, the prohibition on new  evidence  in
    section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act applies to the non-points scoring aspect
    of the rule.

5.   The judge erred by engaging with evidence  which  was  not  before  the
    decision maker, as shown by paragraphs 35 to 37 of the decision.   This
    evidence was  wrongly  taken  into  account  as  part  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the genuineness of the enterprise.

6.   The grounds also contained a submission that  the  rules  provide  that
    points will not be awarded in circumstances where refusal is made under
    paragraph 245DD(k), where the decision maker is not satisfied as to the
    non-points scoring aspects of the rule.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  1st
    August 2017.





Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Mr Shah handed up written submissions by way of a response  under  rule
    24.  In brief, it was submitted on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the
    judge made no material error of law and that what appeared in paragraph
    35 of the decision was immaterial  to  the  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal.

9.   Mr Walker said that paragraph 35 of the decision showed that the  judge
    had fallen into error.  She found that the grounds of refusal were  not
    related to the acquisition  of  points.   The  headnote  in  Ahmed  and
    Another gave guidance on paragraph 245DD(k) of the  rules.   There  was
    new evidence before the Tribunal, not before the  decision  maker,  and
    the judge erred in engaging with it at paragraphs  36  and  37  of  the
    decision.

10.  On page 4 of the Secretary of State's decision letter, dated 27th  July
    2015, was a table which showed that the points  awarded  matched  those
    claimed for the purposes of Appendices A, B and C to the  rules.   This
    was, nonetheless, merely clarification to enable the appellant  to  see
    how the decision was reached.   The  operative  part  of  the  decision
    letter was the second paragraph from the top on the  same  page,  where
    the Secretary of State made it clear that the application for leave was
    refused under paragraph 245DD,  as  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules at paragraphs  245DD(h),  with  reference  to
    paragraph 245DD(i) and paragraph 245DD(a).

11.  Mr Shah relied on his written  submissions.   The  key  was  to  assess
    whether any error on the judge's part was  material.   The  appellant's
    stance was that any error was plainly not material to the decision.  It
    might be accepted that at paragraph  35  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    summarised the law inaccurately.

12.  What was the new evidence which was not before the decision maker?   It
    consisted of four letters from directors of companies.  At  page  3  of
    the written submissions it was contended that Ahmed was distinguishable
    from the present appeal.  Moreover, it was clear that  there  were  two
    types of evidence before the Secretary of State.   There  was  evidence
    from the appellant, who was interviewed by the decision maker and found
    to be credible  and  documentary  evidence.   The  judge  recorded  the
    decision maker's favourable assessment of the appellant  following  the
    interview.  She went on in the decision to say that she had  considered
    written statements.  The appellant's witness statement was  taken  into
    account by the judge but this could not be  properly  characterised  as
    new evidence as the contents of the statement were already  before  the
    Secretary of State.  The appellant was cross-examined and gave  answers
    to questions, which the judge found resolved any difficulties.

13.  Paragraph 12 of the written submissions recorded the  appellant's  case
    that Ahmed was not intended to  exclude  oral  evidence  but  only  new
    documentary evidence which was not before the decision maker.   In  any
    event, the appellant's oral evidence was the same in substance as  what
    he said in interview before the decision on his application was made.

14.  The judge found the appellant to be a credible witness on the basis  of
    oral, and documentary evidence and, contrary to what  appeared  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal, the judge gave no  weight  to  the  four
    letters from directors, these items being the new  evidence.   Instead,
    the judge gave weight to the appellant's oral evidence, including  what
    emerged in interview, and to other supporting documents.  This was what
    the judge referred to when she said that she  had  considered  all  the
    evidence in the round, at paragraph 54 of the decision.

15.  Although at the end of the decision, on  page  12,  in  the  fee  award
    part, the judge expressly stated that the appeal was allowed  following
    oral evidence and the consideration  of  documents  "including  witness
    statements not before the respondent at the time of her  decision",  in
    substance the judge allowed the appeal only on the  basis  of  evidence
    which was before the decision maker and she gave no weight to  the  new
    documentary evidence.

16.  The appellant might have been in difficulty if no interview  had  taken
    place before the decision was made and if the interviewing officer  had
    not found the appellant to be a credible witness.  There was,  however,
    an interview in which the appellant's case emerged.  There was  nothing
    in Ahmed and Another which prevented oral evidence from emerging  at  a
    hearing.  In the fee award part of the decision, the judge  might  have
    intended to refer merely to what the appellant said in interview.   The
    case turned on the credibility of the business.

17.  Returning to Ahmed and Another, Mr  Shah  said  that  nothing  in  that
    decision could be read as excluding oral evidence or indeed  a  witness
    statement.  On the facts in Ahmed and Another, no points were given  in
    the maintenance (funds) category.  In  that  case  new  documents  were
    before the judge, which justified the award of points.  The appellant's
    case was rather different.  The judge did not allow the appeal  on  the
    basis  of  the  new  evidence,  consisting  of  the  letters  from  the
    directors.  These were found to have no weight.  The  judge  found  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.

18.  Mr Walker had nothing to add to his earlier submissions.

Decision on Error of Law

19.  I am grateful to the representatives for  the  succinct  way  in  which
    they put their respective cases.  Notwithstanding  Mr  Shah's  detailed
    submissions I find that the judge materially erred in law.

20.  The decision letter, dated 27th July 2015, begins  on  the  first  page
    with a clear adverse finding based on non-points scoring reasons.   The
    Secretary of State set out there the reasons why she was not  satisfied
    that the appellant genuinely intended and was  able  to  establish  his
    enterprise or that he genuinely intended to invest the  funds  referred
    to in Table 4 of Appendix A.  She was also not satisfied that the funds
    were genuinely available and would remain available until spent on  the
    business.  On the fourth page of the decision letter, there is a  clear
    finding that the requirements of the rules were not met in this  regard
    and so the application fell to be refused under paragraph 245DD of  the
    rules.

21.  The next part of the decision letter deals with  "points  scoring"  and
    the appellant was awarded all the points  in  the  attributes,  English
    language and maintenance (funds) categories.  That might appear odd but
    the decision under appeal in Ahmed and Another [2014] UKUT  365  shared
    this feature (save that whereas the  appellant  succeeded  in  all  the
    categories, the appellants in Ahmed and Another did not succeed in  the
    attributes category).

22.  It is clear  from  Ahmed  and  Another  that  the  prohibition  on  new
    evidence in section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act applies  to  the  non-points
    scoring aspect of the rule, the purpose of that provision being, as the
    Upper Tribunal held, to ensure that where a points-based application is
    made and refused, the assessment by the judge is to be of the  material
    that was before the decision maker rather than a new  consideration  of
    new material.

23.  Turning to  the  decision  giving  rise  to  the  present  appeal,  the
    critical question is this:   did  the  judge  consider  and  take  into
    account new material?  The clear answer is "yes".  Paragraph 35 of  the
    decision includes a  finding  that  the  grounds  for  refusal  of  the
    application were not related to the acquisition of points.   This  self
    direction cannot be reconciled with the guidance given in Ahmed but, if
    it were clear that the assessment by the judge proceeded  only  on  the
    basis of what was before the decision maker, the  error  might  not  be
    material.  The difficulty is that in the paragraphs which follow, it is
    apparent that new evidence was considered and taken into account.

24.  Mr Shah emphasised that the new  evidence  consisted  of  four  letters
    provided by directors of companies.  At paragraph 30 of  the  decision,
    the judge stated that she had taken all the documents before  her  into
    account.  Plainly,  that  included  the  four  letters.   Paragraph  42
    referred to the same items, which  were  described  as  supporting  the
    appellant's case.  Paragraphs 42 and 43 refer in  some  detail  to  the
    letters.  The judge's assessment was that  the  appellant's  claim  was
    supported by three of the four letters provided.  At paragraph 49,  the
    judge noted that the authors of the letters did not attend and so  they
    were not questioned on the contents of their letters.  At paragraph 54,
    the judge referred to all the evidence in the round, including the oral
    and documentary evidence and her detailed comments  on  that  evidence,
    all showing that the appellant was a credible witness.   Some  concerns
    remained about the service agreements,  which  the  judge  assessed  as
    having not been "answered by the four directors' letters", although the
    concerns were "clarified by the appellant in considerable detail in his
    witness statement and in part by the supporting documents".

25.  In the last part of the decision, where  the  judge  explains  why  she
    decided not to make a fee award, having allowed the  appeal,  there  is
    the following:

         "The appeal was allowed following detailed oral  evidence  and  the
         consideration of a number of documents including witness statements
         not before the respondent at the time of her decision."

26.  I am unable  to  accept  Mr  Shah's  submission  that  the  judge  gave
    sustainable reasons for allowing the appeal which were unrelated to the
    new evidence before her.  The decision cannot be read as  showing  that
    the judge concluded that the appeal should be allowed only on the basis
    of the evidence which was before the decision-maker.  Even  though  the
    overall conclusion is clear in itself, it is plain that in reaching it,
    the judge took into account and assessed evidence which should not have
    been considered by the Tribunal in the light of section 85A(4)  of  the
    2002 Act.

27.  The decision has been carefully prepared but, for the reasons  set  out
    above, I conclude that it contains a material error of law.  As was the
    case in Ahmed and Another, it is impossible to say what conclusion  the
    judge would have reached if she had not  taken  into  account  evidence
    which she was not entitled to hear.

28.  The decision must be set aside and remade.  In view of  the  extent  of
    the fact-finding required, the  appropriate  venue  is  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, before  a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Veloso.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

The judge made no anonymity order or direction and none has been sought.   I
make no order or direction on this occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell

