
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27662/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2015                            |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          Mutairu Akinkunmi Kolapo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, instructed by Adonai Beulah, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Mutairu Akinkunmi Kolapo was born on 15 November 1971 and
    is a male citizen of Nigeria.  He had applied  to  the  respondent  for
    permanent residence as confirmation of  his  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom but his application was refused by a decision  dated  19
    June 2013.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chana) which,
    in a determination promulgated on 27 May 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is married to Jutta Muller-Cinar, a German  national  who
    was born on 13 August 1952.  The couple married in Lagos in  May  2005.
    The application and appeal turned on the question of  the  exercise  of
    Treaty Rights by the appellant's wife (see Regulation 15(1) of the  EEA
    2006 Regulations).  The refusal letter dated 19 June 2013 recorded that
    the appellant had "provided bank statements  for  the  period  February
    2007 to October 2008" but noted that these did not refer to a  business
    bank account for the wife but, rather,  her  personal  account.   Judge
    Chana [6] appears to  have  adopted  the  assessment  of  the  evidence
    submitted to the Secretary of State.  At  [17],  the  judge  noted  the
    documents which had been submitted by the appellant in respect  of  his
    appeal (dealt with on the papers) as opposed to  those  submitted  with
    the application.  She recorded that "[the appellant] also  states  that
    the bank statements were from February 2007 and 2008 (sic) and from  24
    January 2012 until 17 April 2012.  The appellant has therefore accepted
    that he did not provide bank statements for the full five years."   The
    judge went on to conclude that "in the absence  of  this  evidence  the
    appellant has not proved to a balance of probability that his wife  has
    been economically active in this country for five years."

 3. The grounds of appeal [3] note that the paragraph  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement [14], upon which Judge Chana had  based  that  latter
    statement, had done little more than to detail the documents which  had
    been submitted with the application; the grounds  of  appeal  aver  [4]
    that, "all the five years bank statements of the sponsor were submitted
    with the appeal bundle  as  stated  in  paragraph  9  of  the  skeleton
    argument and the submission of the appellant."

 4. I was assisted by Ms Smith of Counsel who had, unfortunately,  not,  in
    turn, been assisted by those instructing her who had sent the papers to
    her at very short notice and within inadequate instructions.  Ms  Smith
    was, however, able to clarify the position by reference to  the  bundle
    of documents before the First-tier Tribunal.  From what I was shown  by
    Miss Smith, I am satisfied that the appellant had  provided  full  bank
    statements for  his  wife  for  the  five  year  period  prior  to  the
    submission of his application save for the omission of  statements  for
    the period October 2008-April 2009.  What is more, the  statements  had
    (apart from that gap) covered the period  February  2007  to  September
    2013, that is considerably longer period  than  five  years.   A  large
    number of invoices relating to the sponsor's business also appeared  in
    the bundle of documents [163-242] together with tax  returns  (and  tax
    calculations) for the inclusive period 2007-2013.

 5. I am satisfied that the judge has fallen into error by failing to  have
    proper regard to material evidence before her.   Her  conclusion  (that
    the sponsor could not show the exercise of treaty rights by her  for  a
    continuous period of five years prior to the date of  the  application)
    was based on an incomplete assessment of the evidence and cannot stand.
     I set aside her determination accordingly.

 6. The question, therefore, remains as to whether the sponsor has provided
    sufficient evidence to show  that  she  was  exercising  treaty  rights
    throughout the material period.  I am satisfied that she has  done  so.
    It is unfortunate that there is a gap in the bank statements but it  is
    important that the Tribunal considers the evidence as a whole.  Had the
    bank statements been  the  only  financial  evidence  relating  to  the
    sponsor's business activities, the missing  statements  may  have  been
    problematic.  However, I have other, relevant documents  including  the
    tax  returns  and  calculations  and  National  Insurance   statements.
    Looking at all that evidence  as  a  whole,  I  am  satisfied,  to  the
    standard of the balance of probabilities, that the appellant's wife was
    exercising treaty rights throughout the material period of five  years.
    In consequence, the appellant's appeal should be allowed.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  27
May 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's  appeal
against the decision of the respondent dated 19 June 2013 is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 22 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

