
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27559/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 April 2013 &  19 June 2013              |On 17th July 2013            |
|Prepared 15 July 2013                         |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                             Razia Ebrahim Attia
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim, Counsel, instructed by A K Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Presenting Officer (26/04/13)
     Ms C Martin, Presenting Officer (19/06/13)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant with permission against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 27 February 2013 dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's decision made on 27  November  2012  to
    refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 6 February 1963. It is  her
    case that she is married to Mr Saleh, who is  a  British  Citizen,  and
    that they have a son born in  1999.  who is also a Pakistani citizen as
    he was born before his father was naturalised.

 3. The appellant and her son entered the United Kingdom  on  6  July  2011
    with leave to enter as visitors. On  19  December  2011  the  appellant
    applied for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen;  no
    application was made for their son to be granted leave in line.     The
    application was refused on 11 November 2012 by reference to Appendix FM
    and paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration  rules.  The  respondent  also
    took a decision to remove the appellant pursuant to section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appeal against these  decisions  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan on 21 February 2013.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's son is the  son  of  the  sponsor;  that  the  relationship
    between the  appellant  and  her  husband  was  subsisting;   or,  that
    removing the appellant to Pakistan would be in breach of her  protected
    rights pursuant to  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  convention.  He
    therefore dismissed the appeal on immigration rules  and  human  rights
    grounds but  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  section  47  decision.
    Permission to appeal against that decision was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer on 19 March 2013.  The matter then came before me
    on 26 April 2013.

Did the determination of the first-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?

Hearing on 26 April 2013

 5. Mr Nasim sought permission to vary the grounds of appeal to  include  a
    claim that the judge ( and the respondent) had erred in considering the
    appeal by reference to appendix FM and paragraph  276  ADE,  given  the
    transitional provisions set out in HC 194, as the application had  been
    made prior to 8 July 2012.

 6.  In  the  circumstances,  and  given  that  this  was  a  clear   error
    acknowledged by  Ms  Isherwood,  I  was  persuaded  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to admit this late ground of appeal.

 7. I am satisfied that this  ground  of  appeal  is  made  out,  and  that
    determination  had  been  made  by  reference  to  entirely   incorrect
    provisions of the immigration rules; the application should  have  been
    considered by reference to paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.

 8. That said, as Mr Nasim candidly admitted, the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules as  she  had
    not at the time of application been in possession of  leave  to  remain
    for a period of sufficient length.

 9. I am persuaded that, as the appellant contends, the conclusion that the
    appellant's son is not the son of the sponsor, was made as a result  of
    errors of fact. The judge ignored the presumption  that  a  child  born
    within wedlock is the child of the married couple. He also misread  the
    child's passport which gives his surname as "Saleh" followed by a comma
    and then his forenames as giving "Saleh"  as  his  first  name.   While
    there are differences  in  the  transliteration  into  English  of  the
    forenames, there is no indication that there was any  variance  in  the
    Urdu originals, and I  take  note  that  there  are  several  different
    renderings into English of Mohammed.   Further,  it  was  incorrect  to
    state that there was no other evidence  of  the  son's  parentage;  the
    sponsor's  daughter  had  confirmed  this  in  her  evidence  and   the
    citizenship numbers in the appellant's passport and  birth  certificate
    match.

10. I considered that such an  error  is  likely  to  have  infected  other
    findings about the marriage and the best interests of  the  child,  and
    thus these are unsustainable.

11. Accordingly, for these reasons I am satisfied  that  the  determination
    did involve the making of errors of law, and I set it aside.  As it  is
    accepted that, owing  to  the  length  of  her  leave  to  remain,  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules,  I  do
    not set aside the determination insofar as it relates to dismissing the
    appeal on immigration grounds.  I do not set aside  that  part  of  the
    determination relating to the section 47 appeal either. I  do  however,
    set aside the determination insofar as it relates to article 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention, and that part will need to be  remade  in  its
    entirety.  The matter was then adjourned, and I gave directions  as  to
    how the matter was to be remade, entailing a further hearing on 19 June
    2013.

Re-making the determination

The hearing on 19 June 2013

12. When the matter came before me to be remade, I heard oral evidence from
    the appellant, the appellant's stepdaughter,  the  appellant's  husband
    and the appellant's sister.  In addition I heard submissions from  both
    representatives.

13. The appellant adopted her witness  statement  and  was  cross-examined.
    She said that she had married her husband in 1998 but  did  not  recall
    the date on which her husband had been divorced although appears to  be
    January 1990.  She said that  her  husband  had  last  visited  her  in
    Pakistan in 2011 some one or two months before she came to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She said that she had applied to come to the  United  Kingdom
    some four to five years before that to attend her  sister's  daughter's
    wedding and had been sponsored by her sister and her  husband  on  that
    occasion.  She said there had been no special reason to wait until 2011
    to visit the United Kingdom again but that her husband had  called  her
    here and, as he was not so well, she wanted to  stay  here.   She  said
    that she knew that she should have returned but her husband's condition
    was such that she realised that he needs her and she  could  not  leave
    him here.  She said that she and her  husband  had  decided  that  they
    wanted to live together in one country and had applied for  a  visa  in
    Pakistan but it had been refused.  She  did  not  recall  when  but  it
    transpired that this was in 2001.  She confirmed that the visa  was  to
    stay in the United Kingdom with her husband.

14. The appellant said that there was no special reason  why  she  and  her
    husband decided not to live together but he used to visit her regularly
    in Pakistan staying some three to four months each year.  She said that
    they had had no other option prior to 2011 because an  application  had
    been made before and had been refused.  It was put to her that all  the
    previous  visa  applications  had  been  for  visit  visas  which   she
    confirmed.  As to why there had been no previous  application  to  join
    her husband as a spouse she said she had told her husband  but  he  had
    done nothing; that he was unwell and used  to  come  to  visit  her  in
    Pakistan which is why they never thought of coming here but that now he
    was not able to come to Pakistan and so she wanted to stay  here.   She
    said that her husband has kidney problems, diabetes  and  now  problems
    with his eyesight which requires an operation in July 2013.   She  said
    he had not told her prior to July 2011 that he was unwell although  she
    did know that he had diabetes  and  kidney  problems.   She  said  that
    before he came he was not feeling too bad but now feels worse and has a
    problem with hearing also.  She said that prior to coming to the United
    Kingdom she had been in close communication  with  his  daughter.   She
    said the daughter had told her that her father was not  well  and  that
    she had used to look after him but is now married  and  cannot  do  so.
    She said that the daughter works at John Lewis' on Saturday and  Sunday
    and during the week stays at home to look after the children.  She said
    she cannot look after her father  as  she  has  to  take  care  of  the
    children but that prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom the father
    had not been so well and now has difficulty getting  up  from  his  bed
    without help.  She said he sometimes cannot control his bladder and has
    hearing problems.  She said that she has also had to call an  ambulance
    for  him  some  two  to  three  times.   She  denied  exaggerating  his
    illnesses.

15. The appellant said that she, her husband and their son live in a single
    bedroom in a shared house which is occupied by strangers.  The rent  is
    paid by housing benefit and she and the son's presence there  has  been
    declared.  The room has a double bed and a single bed and  there  is  a
    separate living room.  She said that if she is granted permission to be
    here they will arrange another house and that she will be able to get a
    job to pay for that.  She said at present they cannot afford to move to
    bigger premises as they cannot afford to do so.

16. The appellant said that prior to coming to the United Kingdom  she  had
    lived in a two bedroom flat with her son and no-one else; that she  had
    started living in that flat after  getting  married,  had  lived  there
    alone with her son and  had  had  no  problems  at  the  time  but  the
    situation would now be different as she has a grown up child  whom  she
    could not send anywhere in the city as  there  are  so  many  cases  of
    kidnapping.  She said that she owned the flat;  that  it  is  currently
    deserted as there is no-one living there and that she still owns it.

17. The appellant said that her husband could not go to live in Karachi  as
    he is getting medical treatment which would not be of the same standard
    as in the United Kingdom.  She said  she  had  no  medical  conditions.
    She said that once on one of the occasions  her  husband  had  been  in
    Pakistan he had an accident and had to have an operation  and  on  that
    occasion the medical treatment was ok.  He said he would not be able to
    afford the medicine and treatment in Pakistan as  it  is  free  in  the
    United Kingdom.

18. The appellant said that when she was living  in  Pakistan  her  husband
    supported her and her son but that he could not return to Pakistan  nor
    could they occupy the flat and live there, the only reason  being  that
    her husband knows this country better.

19. The appellant confirmed that she had enrolled her son in school in  the
    United Kingdom on 6 September 2011 but denied saying that by that stage
    she had  fully  intended  to  remain  here,  and  the  reason  for  his
    admittance to school being that she did not want him to waste his time.
     She confirmed that she had waited  until  December  2011  to  make  an
    application.  She said that her son would get  a  good  education  here
    which he would not be able to get in  Pakistan  and  that  her  son  is
    attached to his father.  She said that most of the time the schools  in
    Karachi are closed due to the situation but that when he was  there  he
    got a good education.  She said her son is happier here and  likes  the
    education here.  She said that her  husband  had  paid  for  the  son's
    school fees in Pakistan.

20. I then heard evidence from the  appellant's  husband  who  adopted  his
    witness statement and was cross-examined.  He gave evidence  through  a
    court interpreter.

21. The sponsor said that  between  1998  and  2011  he  did  not  make  an
    application for his wife to join him here  as  he  used  to  visit  her
    regularly, was fit, and felt no need for this.   He  said  he  was  not
    happy and used to visit regularly and that he had to live here  due  to
    his medical condition and he was totally unfit.  He said that  now  his
    condition is worse and he cannot visit her; that his health has changed
    and he gets up in the night and needs to be taken to the bathroom.   He
    said that his health is getting worse since June 2011,  that  his  left
    leg was fractured and  has  three  screws  in  it.   He  said  that  he
    confirmed that his health had begun to deteriorate  substantially  from
    2009; that he told his wife about this and she had  suggested  that  he
    should come to Pakistan but he was not  able  to  travel  or,  that  he
    should call her to the United Kingdom as he could not live without her.
     He said that he had decided to call her to the United Kingdom  because
    he was not able to travel due to his medical condition.

22. The husband said that he did not recall when his son had been  enrolled
    in school in the United Kingdom or when the application had  been  made
    for his wife to stay here.  He said that he did not want to  break  his
    son's education which is why he was enrolled in September 2011 and that
    he had come here initially during his holidays.

23. After some difficulty  in  comprehending  the  questions,  the  husband
    confirmed that the application he had made in 2001 was for a visit  and
    that there had been no intention for his wife to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said that they had thought that when she comes  here  they
    would decide whether or not she would live here permanently.

24. The husband said that his daughter had used to help care  for  him  but
    she was not able to visit regularly as she had been at university.  She
    said that she has a full-time job, working Monday to Friday 9  -  5  at
    John Lewis and some weekends as well.  She said that she  is  a  single
    mother with two children and lives with her mother.

25. The husband said that he, his wife and the children  all  live  in  one
    room, that he pays �173 a week in rent which is paid by housing benefit
    and the government is aware that both his wife and  child  live  there.
    He said that he supports his family on his pension and that if his wife
    gets status here she would do a part-time job and they would be able to
    get a better life as they could not all stay in one room.

26. The husband said that the property his wife had lived  in  in  Pakistan
    had been his father's property long ago and that this  had  been  sold.
    He said that it was a two bedroom house, it had been sold to pay  money
    to creditors.  It was put to him  that  his  wife  had  said  something
    different in her own evidence and he said that the sale  of  the  house
    had not been finalised due to a dispute with the  creditors  eventually
    adding that the house was to be given to the creditors  to  settle  the
    debt.  He also said that the creditors were relatives.

27. The husband said that he had every right to stay in the United  Kingdom
    as he is a British citizen, he is very sick, has spent  half  his  life
    here and cannot start again in  Pakistan.   It  was  put  to  him  that
    essentially it was more convenient for him to remain here to  which  he
    agreed.  He said his son could not return to  Pakistan  now  as  people
    think all British citizens are  multimillionaires  and  try  to  kidnap
    them.

28. In re-examination the husband said that his wife had lived  in  Karachi
    in the same house which had been owned by him with his son.

29. I then heard evidence from Sarah Attia, the  appellant's  stepdaughter.
    She adopted her witness statement adding that she had studied  law  but
    in 1999 to 2005, followed by a masters degree and the LPC  in  2009/10.
    She said she is about to start work next week as a Case Adjudicator for
    the Financial Ombudsman and part of that  has  been  working  for  John
    Lewis for the past twelve years, at times  part-time,  at  other  times
    full-time particularly over Christmas and other busy periods.

30. Miss Attia said that at the time  her  stepmother  had  come  here  her
    father had diabetes but did not recall how bad his health  was  at  the
    time and that although he was frail, it was not to the extent  that  it
    is now.  She said that the appellant had not been brought to the United
    Kingdom as a carer but that it was in part a visit for her to  see  her
    children.  She said it had not been an intention to apply for a  spouse
    visa as up to that point  it  was  for  her  to  visit  and  return  to
    Pakistan.  She did not know whether  her  father  and  stepmother  were
    happy in their relationship living apart but that there were no  cracks
    and considered she could see and that they have a loving  relationship.
    She said she did not know why her father did not want his  wife  to  be
    with her and to have joined her and she had enough going on in her  own
    life not to ask those questions.  She said she had a close relationship
    with her stepmother but it would be difficult to continue were  she  to
    return to Pakistan.  She said that her  father  had  now  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for forty years and he did not need to relocate.

31. I then heard evidence from Safia Begum Khan,  the  appellant's  sister,
    who adopted her witness statement and  was  then  cross-examined.   She
    confirmed that she had used to take money to the appellant in Pakistan,
    given to her by the husband, that she had last  been  in  Pakistan  the
    previous month for a period of three weeks.  She said she did not go to
    Pakistan every year.

32. There are, as Ms Martin submitted, a substantial number of  differences
    between the evidence given by the witnesses who appeared before me.  In
    assessing these, and the evidence of the witnesses overall, I note that
    the appellant,  her  husband,  and  the  appellant's  sister  all  gave
    evidence through an interpreter.  It was also evident that the  husband
    had difficulty in hearing the  questions  put  to  him  and,  it  would
    appear, in understanding what was being asked.

33. In assessing the evidence, I bear in mind that the  appellant  and  her
    husband were asked about incidents which had occurred as  long  ago  as
    2001.  Further, as is indicated by the reports from  the  husband's  GP
    dated 14 March 2013 indicates, his health is failing.

34. It is not clear from the evidence of the appellant and her husband that
    she thought the application made  in  2001  was  to  join  her  husband
    permanently.  It is not in dispute that the application was for a visit
    visa or that it was refused or that no appeal was  lodged.   Whilst  Ms
    Martin sought to draw inferences adverse to the appellant from apparent
    discrepancies to  whether  she  thought  she  was  able  to  stay  here
    permanently whereas her husband had said that he knew it  was  a  visit
    visa, the words put to the appellant were that she wanted to stay here.
     Had she been asked whether she was wanting to stay permanently  or  to
    remain here then this might have been a distinction but  there  was  no
    follow up on that point nor was she asked  how  long  she  intended  to
    stay.

35. That said, it is not entirely clear from the evidence before me whether
    the parties were happy with that situation whereby  the  appellant  and
    her husband spent three to four months  a  year  together  in  Pakistan
    rather than cohabiting permanently.  Further, if the intention in  2001
    had been, as said, to be to see whether it would  work  out  with  them
    living in the United Kingdom together, that does  not  explain  why  no
    decision was made after the appellant had spent time here in 2005.   It
    does not explain either why, if the parties were  not  happy  with  the
    situation, no application was made for the appellant to come here as  a
    spouse at any stage.

36. Despite Mr Nasim's submissions to the contrary, I consider  that  there
    are discrepancies in the evidence before me as to  what  the  appellant
    knew about her husband's state of health before  she  arrived  in  July
    2011.  He accepted that his health had been  deteriorating  since  2009
    and that he discussed it with his wife; she however said  that  he  did
    not.  Even allowing for the possibility that the husband had  concealed
    the extent of his ill-health, and that  the  appellant  was  not  fully
    aware of this until she arrived, I do not accept that I am  being  told
    the truth about what was known.  I do not, however, consider that  Miss
    Attia was aware of any intention on the part of either the appellant or
    her husband that she would not return to Pakistan. She gave no evidence
    to that effect, nor was it put to her that  she  was  not  telling  the
    truth.

37. It is of course possible that a decision was taken for the appellant to
    come to this country because by this stage the  husband's  illness  had
    deteriorated to such extent that he could not safely travel to Pakistan
    but it does not necessarily follow that because the appellant  and  her
    husband have not been truthful about one aspect of the claim, that they
    have been untruthful about other aspects.

38. It does, however, appear that by September 2011, a  decision  had  been
    taken that the  appellant  and  her  son  would  not  be  returning  to
    Pakistan, at least for an extended period, given that steps were  taken
    to enrol him in school.  It appears that certainly  by  that  stage,  a
    decision had been taken that an  application  would  be  made  for  the
    appellant to remain here permanently.

39. It is difficult to assess how much weight to attach to the  appellant's
    decision to remain in this country rather than to return to Pakistan in
    accordance with the terms of her visit visa. It was of course  open  to
    the respondent, on considering the application, to make a decision that
    deception had been used to obtain the visit  visa  and  accordingly  to
    declare the appellant an illegal entrant.  No such steps were taken.

40. While there was extensive cross-examination regarding the appellant and
    her husband's intentions at various stages and  the  reasons  why  they
    cannot live together  in  Pakistan,  there  was  little  or  no  cross-
    examination as to whether they are living together as husband and wife,
    whether it is their intention to do so permanently and indeed there was
    no alternative submission  made  that  there  was  no  family  life  in
    existence between the appellant and  sponsor  and  that  therefore  the
    appellant could be expected to return  to  Pakistan   as  there  is  no
    family life between them.

41. It is, however, unclear who owned the property in which  the  appellant
    and her son lived in Karachi before they came to  the  United  Kingdom.
    She described it as a flat; her husband described it as a  house.   She
    said that she owned it; he said that he owned it; she made  no  mention
    of there being any difficulties about the house  and  stated  that  the
    sole reason they were not living there was it was not convenient.   His
    evidence is that the house had been promised to creditors  to  repay  a
    loan and was somewhat equivocal as to whether or not  it  had  in  fact
    been sold.

42. The effect of the husband's evidence was to suggest that  the  property
    was no longer available in, what I  consider  to  be,   an  attempt  to
    divert the possibility that they could be expected to go back and  live
    there.  I consider that it is instructive  that  nobody  mentioned  the
    creditors before now and I considered that this is an embellishment.  I
    consider that I have not been told the truth about  the  accommodation,
    and that this casts doubt on the credibility of the appellant  and  her
    husband.

43. I accept, there being no reason not to do  so,  that  the  husband  did
    suffer an accident in Pakistan at some point in the past during one  of
    his visits and he received hospital  treatment  there.   It  does  not,
    therefore necessarily follow, Ms Martin having failed  to  address  the
    chronology, that, as she submitted, the appellant's continuing  medical
    needs which now of course may be considerably different, would continue
    to be met by the facilities in Pakistan.  I bear in mind that he  is  a
    British citizen and is therefore entitled to NHS treatment and I accept
    that he would not be able to get free medical  treatment  in  Pakistan.
    Except perhaps on an emergency basis and certainly not to the level  of
    care he now receives.

44. I consider, however, that the appellant and sponsor  have  deliberately
    exaggerated the difficulties they would have on return to  Pakistan  in
    terms of the general situation.  There  is  in  reality  little  or  no
    evidence to suggest that the appellant and her son would  be  at  risk,
    given that she admitted they had had no problems before 2011.  There is
    insufficient evidence before me to suggest that there had been  such  a
    deterioration since then that she or he would now be at risk  nor  that
    he would be seen as British and therefore  wealthy.   I  consider  that
    this aspect is  also  an  embellishment  in  an  attempt  to  show  how
    difficult it would be for the family to relocate to Pakistan.

45. Viewed as a whole, where the evidence of the appellant and her  husband
    is lacking in credibility and truthfulness relates to  the  appellant's
    intentions when she most recently applied for a visa  and  the  alleged
    accommodation difficulties, as well as the general  situation  she  and
    her son would face, on return.  The issue of the  husband's  ill-health
    is corroborated by documentary evidence from various  medical  sources,
    and the family circumstances in  this  country  are  confirmed  by  the
    evidence of the appellant's stepdaughter.

46. There was no challenge to the evidence of the appellant's  stepdaughter
    whom I found to be an impressive and clear witness  and  who  confirmed
    the existence of the relationship, and its continuance in this country,
    including the fact of  their  continuing  cohabitation.  While  I  have
    considered that she may, as a relative,  have  reason  to  support  her
    father and stepmother's evidence, I have discounted  that  possibility,
    and no submission to that effect was made.

47. Whilst there are differences in the evidence between what she said  and
    the appellant and her husband said about her work for John Lewis, it is
    evident from her evidence that her  hours  and  days  of  working  have
    fluctuated over time and at no stage was either the  appellant  or  her
    husband asked if the answer they had given as to when Miss Attia worked
    was a current situation or one in the past.  Whilst it may be said that
    their answers were less than fulsome, I bear in mind the  circumstances
    of giving evidence in court,  their  relative  unfamiliarity  with  the
    situation, the fact they were giving evidence  through  an  interpreter
    and for a second time, and I am not satisfied that there is in  reality
    any significant discrepancy in their evidence.

48. In taking these factors into account including the evidence as a whole,
    I consider that I am satisfied that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  live
    together in one room in a shared house.  I am satisfied that they  have
    established a family life together.

49. In considering the paternity of the son, for the reasons given above, I
    am satisfied that there are no discrepancies in the documents  relating
    to him which include his passport and birth certificate which name  the
    appellant's  husband  as  his  father.   The  statements  of  both  the
    appellant and husband confirm that he is their son and I consider  that
    none of the evidence put forward by the  respondent  is  sufficient  to
    rebut the presumption that a child born within marriage is the child of
    the parents, given the evidence of Miss Attia.

50. In assessing whether it would be a breach of the human  rights  of  the
    appellant, her husband and her son, to require the  appellant,  and  in
    practice her son, to return to  Pakistan,  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
    child's interest is a primary  consideration.   Whilst  there  is  some
    merit in Ms Martin's submission that it is wholly inappropriate  for  a
    14 year old to be living in the same bedroom as his parents,  and  that
    he would have his own room were he return to Pakistan, it is  difficult
    to accept that such material considerations would outweigh the needs of
    the child to be with both parents.  I consider that the  former  is  in
    the appellant's interests although for the reasons advanced above it is
    not a position without difficulty.  That said, it does not  necessarily
    follow that the child's best interests are that he should remain in the
    United Kingdom with his parents.

51. As noted above, this is  not  a  case  to  which,  given  the  date  of
    application to which Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applies.
    That said, I do consider that due weight has  to  be  attached  to  the
    Rules as an expression of how the respondent views the public  interest
    in immigration control and the weight to be attached thereto.

52. In assessing Article 8, I have considered the five  steps  set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  On the facts of this case I  am  satisfied  for
    the reasons given above  that  there  is  a  family  life  between  the
    appellant, her son, and the appellant's  husband  who  is  the  child's
    father and that removing any of them to Pakistan would  interfere  with
    their right to respect for  family  life.   I  accept  also  that  this
    decision would have the legitimate of maintaining  immigration  control
    and is in accordance with law.  The question then remains as to whether
    this would be proportionate.

53. It is accepted that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules not just because she did  not  have  the  appropriate
    entry clearance but because of failure to meet  the  accommodation  and
    maintenance requirements.  I accept that it would be difficult for  her
    to return on the current  state  of  the  husband's  finances.   It  is
    evident from Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, Ekinci v SSHD [2003] EWCA
    Civ 765 and the learning on article 8 as well as SSHD  v  Hayat  [2012}
    EWCA Civ 1054 that  such  a  course  of  action  may  be  proportionate
    although  that is less likely where children are involved.

54. The question here is, following Hayat,  whether  there  is  a  sensible
    reason why this should not be required.  The situation in this case is,
    however, somewhat different from those set out in Chikwamba or for that
    matter Hayat.  Here, the appellant is here lawfully; her husband  is  a
    British citizen and whilst he is also a citizen  of  Pakistan,  he  has
    lived in this country for nearly 40 years.  It would not be fair to say
    that the appellant has a poor immigration history given  that  she  has
    always complied with the terms of her visa and is currently  here  with
    leave to remain.

55. This is not a situation where a couple have  formed  a  union  in  full
    knowledge of their precarious immigration  status.  The  marriage  took
    place many years  ago.   I  accept  given  the  substantial  amount  of
    material relating to the husband's ill-health [appellant's bundle 63 to
    112] that he has significant health problems which have increased  over
    the years.  He now suffers from a defect in his eyesight and is hard of
    hearing.  He does, I accept, speak Urdu and is a  citizen  of  Pakistan
    but he has lived in this country for some 40 years and has  a  daughter
    and grandchildren here.  He has other relatives here and there would be
    significant difficulties in him now  returning  to  Pakistan  where,  I
    accept on the basis of the evidence put before  me,  that  the  medical
    care for him would not be as good as that he  accesses  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

56. Whilst I note Ms Martin's submissions that that may be so, this is  not
    a situation where there would be no medical care but that test  is  not
    appropriate where the person in question is  a  British  citizen.   The
    question is whether it would be reasonable to expect him  to  go  to  a
    country where he would not get the care he receives  now.   I  conclude
    that, taking into account his age, the length of time he has spent  her
    and his health, as well as his ties to other family here, that it would
    not be reasonable to  expect  him  to  go  to  live  now  in  Pakistan,
    irrespective of whether he has a house there.

57. While the appellant's child has spent a relatively short time here,  he
    would now face separation from his father with whom  he  has  now  been
    able to form a stronger bond. I consider that it would not  be  in  the
    child's best interests now to be separated from his  father  who  could
    not be expected to go to Pakistan, and that  would  be  the  effect  of
    removing his mother. While the interruption may well be temporary,  its
    duration is uncertain  and  may  well  be  prolonged.  This  is  not  a
    situation akin to that in  Ekinci

58. That said, I consider that there is a significant  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of a fair system of immigration control  which  applies
    to all.  In this case the argument is that the appellant  and  her  son
    should be allowed to stay  here  even  though  they  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and where there is likely  to  be
    significant cost to the taxpayer.  This case can be distinguished  from
    Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC given that it is not a case to which  the  new
    Rules apply and, following Green (Article 8 - new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00254 (IAC) it would not be possible to  consider  how  the  new  Rules
    would apply given that by definition they do not.

59. Taking these factors into account, I consider  that  bearing  the  best
    interests of the child in mind,  and  given  that  that  is  a  primary
    consideration, I consider that on the on the particular facts  of  this
    case, it would be disproportionate to require the  appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and I therefore allow the appeal on that basis.


SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

   1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of
      an error of law, and I set it aside.


   2. I re-make the determination by allowing the  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds.


Signed                                  Date:  17 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



