
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27774/2015
                                                               IA/27776/2015
                                                               IA/27780/2015
                                                               IA/27781/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2017                 |On 26 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Subhani Kumari Attanayake Mudiyanselage
                     JANAKA THUSHARA KAHADUWA ARACHCHIGE
                                   [A K A]
                                  [S T K A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms K Reid, instructed by Kothala & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in the  proceedings  I
    refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are Sri Lankan nationals a wife and husband who together
    with their son and daughter appeal against decisions of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 22nd July 2015 to  refuse  the  application  of  Subhani
    Kumari Attanayake Mudiyanselage (hereinafter the First  Appellant)  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 General Student Migrant and  those  of  the
    First Appellant's husband and two children as dependants of  the  First
    Appellant.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  allowed  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and the Secretary  of  State  appeals  with
    permission against that decision.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the First Appellant's application  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules on the basis  that  she  had
    submitted  a  fraudulently  obtained  a  TOEIC  certificate  from   the
    Educational Testing  Service.  The  relevant  provisions  of  paragraph
    322(1A) for the purpose of this appeal are:

         "... the following provisions apply in relation to the  refusal  of
         an application for leave to remain, variation of leave to enter  or
         remain or, where appropriate, the curtailment of leave..

         (1A) where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application."

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  evidence  from  the
    Secretary of State as well as evidence from the Appellant  in  relation
    to this issue and found that the First  Appellant's  appeal  should  be
    allowed in relation to that aspect of the decision.

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State  further  refused  the   First   Appellant's
    application on the basis that she had not submitted valid  Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) because  Lea  Valley  College  was  not
    listed as a Tier 4  Sponsor  when  the  register  was  checked  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
    Secretary of State should consider granting  the  First  Appellant  the
    customary 60 days (in accordance with Home  Office  policy)  so  as  to
    provide the Appellant with a reasonable opportunity  to  locate  a  new
    college Sponsor.  This aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision was
    not challenged.

 6. The Secretary of  State  challenges  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision in relation to paragraph 322  (1A)  on  two  grounds.   It  is
    firstly contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  material
    misdirection of law in applying an impermissibly high standard of proof
    in determining the deception issue.  The Secretary  of  State  contends
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred at paragraph 16 where he said;



         "For these reasons, and having regard to the documentary  and  oral
         evidence before me, which the Appellant gave in English, I  do  not
         accept that the Respondent has established  to  a  high  degree  of
         probability that the Appellant has acted dishonestly and  that  the
         Respondent has established the facts upon which it therefore sought
         rely (sic)."

 7. In the grounds and at the hearing the Secretary of State relied on Re B
    (Children) [2008] UKHL 35 at paragraph  13  where  Lord  Hoffman  said;
    "there is only one civil standard of proof and that is proof  that  the
    fact in issue more probably occurred than not."

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Reid submitted that when  the  decision  is
    read as a whole it is clear that the judge took the  correct  approach.
    She accepted that there is only one standard of proof which is  on  the
    balance of probabilities but submitted that the case  law  makes  clear
    that the cogency of evidence required may be higher.  She admitted that
    the judge took the correct approach in this case.  The  judge  set  out
    the burden of proof at paragraph 2 where he referred to the decision in
    SM and Qadir v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00229 saying that the burden  of  proof
    is upon the Respondent to establish the facts upon which  it  seeks  to
    rely and to establish to a high degree of probability  that  the  First
    Appellant has acted dishonestly through  the  production  of  false  or
    misleading evidence documentary or otherwise.  The judge set  out  that
    there is  a  burden  on  the  First  Appellant  to  raise  an  innocent
    explanation and that if this is established the burden then falls  upon
    the Respondent to show that there is in fact dishonesty on the part  of
    the Appellant through credible and reliable  evidence.   She  submitted
    that it is clear from this paragraph that the judge  did  not  apply  a
    higher standard of proof but was cognisant of the appropriate  standard
    in these cases and the requirement that credible and reliable  evidence
    should be produced. Accordingly she submitted that the judge  took  the
    correct approach.

 9. The Secretary of State contends in the second Ground of Appeal that the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for findings on material matters.
     It is submitted that the judge  referred  to  the  witness  statements
    submitted by the Secretary of State but did take them into account.  Ms
    Ahmed relied on the case of MA (ETS - TOEIC Testing) [2016] UKUT  00450
    (IAC) in particular paragraph 51  where  the  Tribunal  said  that  the
    "invalid" assessment generated on the excel spreadsheet  was  reliable.
    She submitted that the judge noted that documentation had been produced
    from ETS identifying the Appellant as falling within  the  category  of
    those taking the speaking test where it was found to have been taken by
    a third party proxy and her test was described as  'invalid'  [8].  She
    submitted that the judge had not engaged with that piece of evidence.

10. Ms Ahmed further relied on paragraph 57 of MA where the Tribunal said;

         "In the abstract, of course,  there  is  a  range  of  reasons  why
         persons proficient in English may engage  in  TOEIC  fraud.   These
         include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of failure,  lack
         of time and commitment and contempt  for  the  immigration  system.
         These reasons could conceivably overlap  in  individual  cases  and
         there is scope for other explanations for deceitful conduct in this
         sphere.  We are not required to make the further finding of why the
         Appellant engaged in deception and to this we add that  this  issue
         was not explored during the hearing.  We resist any  temptation  to
         speculate about this discrete matter."

11. She submitted that the judge says at paragraphs  10  and  11  that  the
    Appellant speaks English but she submitted that this in itself  is  not
    sufficient to indicate that the Appellant would  not  have  engaged  in
    deception.

12. Ms Reid submitted that the judge went through the Home Office  evidence
    in great detail at paragraphs 6 to 8 of the decision and she  submitted
    that the judge looked at the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 10  and
    11 and took into account the guidance in SM and Qadir. She referred  in
    particular to paragraph 15 where the judge undertook an analysis of the
    evidence put forward in SM and Qadir by  Dr  Harrison.   She  submitted
    that the judge balanced the evidence put forward by  the  Secretary  of
    State against his own findings in relation to  the  Appellant  and  her
    significant  background   in   learning   through   English   and   her
    qualifications in English.  She submitted  that  the  judge  gave  very
    clear reasons as to why he had not accepted the Respondent's evidence.

Error of Law

13. The burden and standard of proof in these cases was set out by  Beatson
    LJ in SSHD v Shezhad & Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 as follows;

         "3.  It is common ground that for  a  decision  to  be  made  under
         paragraph 322(1A) there must be material  justifying  a  conclusion
         that the individual under consideration has  lied  or  submitted  a
         false document. It is also common  ground  that  the  Secretary  of
         State bears the initial burden of furnishing  proof  of  deception,
         and that this burden is an "evidential burden". That means that, if
         the Secretary of State provides prima facie evidence of deception,
         the burden "shifts" onto the  individual  to  provide  a  plausible
         innocent explanation, and that if the individual does so the burden
         "shifts back" to the Secretary of State: see Shen (paper  appeals:
         proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT  00236  (IAC) at  [22]  and  [25]
         and Muhandiramge (section S-LTR 1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 at [10]. As to
         the standard of proof, the civil standard of proof applies to  this
         question. The approach in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] 1
         AC 11 to the standard of proof required to establish that  a  child
         "is likely to suffer significant harm" under section 31(2)  of  the
         Children Act 1989 is of relevance in the present  context.  It  was
         held in that case that the standard  required  is  the  balance  of
         probabilities. Baroness Hale stated (at  [70])  that  "neither  the
         seriousness  of  the  allegation  nor  the   seriousness   of   the
         consequences should make any difference to the standard of proof to
         be applied in determining the facts. The inherent probabilities are
         simply something to be  taken  into  account,  where  relevant,  in
         deciding where the truth lies.""

14. Thus there is an initial evidential burden on the Secretary of State to
    furnish prima facie  proof  of  deception.  The  judge  considered  the
    evidence submitted by the Secretary of State, both generic and specific
    to the First Appellant [5]-[8]. The judge also took  into  account  the
    observations made in SM and Qadir about the evidence submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State [15]. It is clear from reading  the  decision  as  a
    whole that  the  judge  accepted  that  this  evidence  was  enough  to
    discharge the initial evidential burden on the Secretary of State.

15. The judge then went on to consider the evidence submitted by the  First
    Appellant including her witness statement, her oral evidence, her score
    in the IELTS examination, the programme she undertook in Sri  Lanka  in
    relation to English skills, her previous employment in  Sri  Lanka  and
    her lack of a motive  to  cheat.   The  judge  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's account that she had written and spoken English  in  school
    from the age of 9 to 16 and the fact she had passed her ordinary  level
    examination  in  English.  The  judge  also  took  into   account   the
    Appellant's evidence about how and when she sat the ETS test.

16. Ms Ahmed relied on paragraph 57 of MA submitting that  the  Appellant's
    ability to speak English is not enough to show that she would not  have
    engaged in deception. However the judge took into account  a  range  of
    factors including the Appellant's ability to speak English and her work
    experience in an English speaking  role.  Accordingly  the  Appellant's
    ability to speak English was not accorded excess weight in the  judge's
    consideration of the evidence.

17. The judge set out the test correctly at paragraph 13  of  the  decision
    and concluded that the evidence provided by the Appellant was  credible
    and reliable evidence pointing to her honesty and  refuting  the  claim
    that she has acted dishonestly.

18. The judge reached the conclusion at paragraph 16  that  the  Respondent
    had not discharged the burden of proof in relation  to  the  allegation
    that the Appellant had acted dishonestly.   The  judge  said  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  established  'to  a  high   degree   of
    probability' that the Appellant had acted dishonestly;  this  might  at
    first reading indicate that too high a burden was imposed.  However  it
    is very clear looking at the way the judge approached the evidence  and
    the case law in the rest of the decision, particularly at paragraph 13,
    that the judge applied the appropriate burden and standard of proof and
    reached a decision open to him on the evidence.

19. In these circumstances  the  judge  made  no  material  error  of  law.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
