

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/27119/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 21 March 2014                            |On 31 March 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                 Rashed Khan
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons
Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson in respect of the determination of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson who dismissed the appeal by way  of
      a determination dated 30 January 2014.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 5 May 1989. His
      application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant was refused on  14
      June 2013 and he appealed that decision. There was no  appearance  for
      or by the appellant at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  and  he  proceeded  in  the  appellant's  absence,  heard   the
      respondent's submissions and then dismissed the appeal  on  the  basis
      that the appellant had failed to show he had the required funds.

   3.       The appellant challenged the judge's decision. He adduced a copy
      of a letter dated 12 December 2013 from a presenting officer at  Angel
      Square which confirmed that  it  had  been  decided  to  withdraw  the
      Secretary of State's decision and that in  accordance  with  paragraph
      17(2) of the Procedure Rules 2005, the  appeal  would  be  treated  as
      withdrawn.  Not  surprisingly  the  appellant  was   upset   and   his
      application for permission to appeal was granted.

   4.       A letter dated 4 March 2014 from the Specialist Appeals Team  at
      Angel Square confirms that the decision was  withdrawn  prior  to  the
      hearing and that there was no appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

   5.       There was no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant at  the
      hearing before me on 21 March. Mr Deller  submitted  that  as  he  was
      without the file, he did not know if the Presenting Officers' Unit had
      notified the Tribunal of the decision to withdraw but  submitted  that
      that had plainly be the intention and  the  appellant  should  not  be
      prejudiced.

   6.       It is  unfortunate  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
      attending the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of  the
      Secretary of State was not informed of his colleague's decision. It is
      also unfortunate that the appellant's representatives, who  would  not
      have received any confirmation from the Tribunal that the  appeal  had
      been withdrawn, did not pursue the absence of such  confirmation.  The
      judge had no way of knowing that the decision had been withdrawn since
      neither party notified him of that, and not surprisingly he  proceeded
      with the hearing in absence of the appellant. Be that as it  may,  the
      decision had been withdrawn by the respondent so there was in fact  no
      appeal for the judge to hear in December. It follows that  he  had  no
      jurisdiction to dismiss the appeal and his determination cannot stand.

Decision

   7.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law.  His decision is set
      aside. There is no valid appeal before the Tribunal.

      Signed:


      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      21 March 2014
