
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/27722/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th June 2017                      |        On 20th June 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              MD JOYNUL ABEDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Eurasia Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Mathews of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 27th March 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant. The  Claimant  is  a  male
    citizen of Bangladesh born 20th January 1990.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 1st October 2009 with leave as a Tier 4 Student valid  until
    15th April 2013.  On 7th June 2013 the Appellant  was  granted  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student until 2nd September 2014.

 3. On 1st September 2014 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 Student.  This application was refused on 20th  July  2015.
    The application was refused with reference to paragraph  245ZX(a),  (c)
    and (d), and paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent
    noted that in a previous application for leave to remain the  Appellant
    had submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS).   ETS  had  subsequently  undertaken  verification  checks,  and
    concluded that the Appellant's test had been  taken  by  a  proxy,  and
    therefore the Appellant's  results  had  been  cancelled  and  declared
    invalid.  On  the  basis  of  the  information  provided  by  ETS,  the
    Secretary of State was satisfied that  his  ETS  certificate  had  been
    fraudulently obtained.

 4. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT  on  5th  April  2016.   The
    Secretary of State was not represented.  The FTT  heard  evidence  from
    the Claimant and found that the Secretary of State had  not  discharged
    the legal burden of proving  dishonesty,  and  allowed  the  Claimant's
    appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This application was initially refused by an FTT judge,  and
    thereafter a renewed application was submitted to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that the FTT had erred by failing to consider material
    evidence, that being an ETS  spreadsheet  which  was  specific  to  the
    Claimant.  It was contended that  the  correct  approach  is  contained
    within Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and the FTT had  erred
    by not following that approach.

 6. It was contended that witness statements submitted by the Secretary  of
    State together with  the  ETS  spreadsheet  discharged  the  evidential
    burden of proof upon the Secretary of State, and an  evidential  burden
    then switched to the Claimant to provide an innocent explanation.   The
    FTT had erred by not appreciating that the evidential burden  was  met,
    and had failed to consider material evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Blum.

 8. The Upper Tribunal issued directions dated  2nd  November  2016  making
    provision for there to be  a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FTT decision contained an error of law such  that
    it should be set aside.  Those directions indicated that if a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 was to be provided, such a response  must  be  lodged  within  one
    month of the date of directions.  No rule  24  response  was  submitted
    within that timeframe.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. At the commencement of the hearing a rule 24 response was submitted.

10. Mrs Aboni in making oral submissions relied upon the grounds  contained
    with the application for permission to  appeal.   Mrs  Aboni  submitted
    that there was evidence specific to the Claimant, that  being  the  ETS
    spreadsheet, which had not been considered by the FTT.   This  amounted
    to a material error of law, and the FTT failed  to  consider  that  the
    evidential burden upon the Secretary of State had been discharged.

11. Mr Ahmed relied upon the rule 24 response dated 22nd May 2017.   I  was
    asked to find that the FTT decision did not contain an  error  of  law.
    The FTT was entitled to reach the  conclusion  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not discharged the legal burden of proof.  The fact that  the
    Secretary of State had not been represented was a matter of choice.

12.  It  was  contended  that  the  Claimant  had  provided   an   innocent
    explanation, and the Claimant's evidence had been accepted by the FTT.

13. Mr Ahmed submitted that even if the evidential burden  was  discharged,
    the Secretary of State had failed to discharge the  legal  burden.   Mr
    Ahmed  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

14. By way of response Mrs Aboni reiterated that evidence specific  to  the
    Claimant had been submitted and had not been  considered  by  the  FTT.
    The case law referred to  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  in  granting
    permission, indicated that such evidence was  sufficient  to  discharge
    the evidential burden, thereby placing an evidential  burden  upon  the
    Claimant.

15. I indicated that in my view the FTT had  erred  in  law  and  explained
    orally my reasons for reaching that conclusion, which I confirmed would
    be put into writing and submitted to the parties.

16. I then asked the representatives to express their views as to  how  the
    decision should be re-made.

17. Mr Ahmed submitted that I should remake the  decision,  and  allow  the
    Claimant's appeal, based upon the FTT's acceptance  of  the  Claimant's
    evidence.  I indicated that I did not accept that I was  bound  by  any
    findings made by the FTT, because the FTT had taken a legally incorrect
    approach, and failed to take into account material evidence.

18. Mr Ahmed, although clearly reluctant to accept  this  conclusion,  then
    suggested that it would be appropriate if no findings  were  preserved,
    for the appeal to be remitted to the FTT to be considered afresh.

19. Mrs Aboni indicated that the decision could  be  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

20. I indicated, that in my view it was appropriate, in the  circumstances,
    to remit this appeal back to the FTT for a fresh hearing and again gave
    my reasons orally which would  be  confirmed  in  writing.   Mrs  Aboni
    indicated to the Tribunal and Mr Ahmed, that  the  Secretary  of  State
    intended to adduce further evidence.  Mr Ahmed mentioned that he  would
    be seeking some directions, and I advised that if that was the case, it
    would be appropriate to make any request for directions to the FTT once
    my written decision had been published.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. I now provide my written reasons for setting aside the decision of  the
    FTT, and remitting the appeal back to the FTT to be considered  afresh.



22. The FTT, when deciding this appeal, did not have  the  benefit  of  the
    guidance contained in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and  Shehzad
    and Chowdhury  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615,  as  these  decisions  were  not
    published when the FTT decision was promulgated.  The case law referred
    to above sets out the correct approach to be adopted  when  considering
    appeals such as this.  It is made clear that  there  is  an  evidential
    burden upon the Secretary of State, and that this evidential burden  is
    discharged by the generic witness statements of  Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collings both dated 23rd  June  2014,  together  with  evidence
    specific to the Appellant, which I shall refer as the  ETS  spreadsheet
    showing the tests taken to be invalid.  I set out below paragraph 68 of
    SM and Qadir:

         "68. As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
             section make clear, we have substantial reservations about the
             strength and quality of the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.
             Its shortcomings are  manifest.   On  the  other  hand,  while
             bearing in mind that the context is one of alleged  deception,
             we must be mindful of the comparatively modest threshold which
             an evidential burden entails.  This calls  for  an  evaluative
             assessment on the part of  the  Tribunal.   By  an  admittedly
             narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has
             discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is a
             burden, again an evidential one, on the Appellants of  raising
             an innocent explanation."

23. I also set out the first paragraph of the headnote to SM and Qadir;

         "(i) The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
             evidence particular  to  these  two  appellants,  sufficed  to
             discharge the evidential burden of proving  that  their  TOEIC
             certificates had been procured by dishonesty."

24. The above  was  confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Shehzad  and
    Chowdhury.  At paragraphs 24 and 25  of  that  decision  the  Court  of
    Appeal made reference to the FTT misunderstanding  the  nature  of  the
    Secretary of State's evidence, and in particular  misunderstanding  the
    significance of the ETS spreadsheet confirming that  tests  taken  were
    invalid.

25. The evidence considered by the FTT in the appeal now  being  considered
    by me, was the generic statements of Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings,
    together with the ETS spreadsheet showing that  the  tests  claimed  to
    have been undertaken by the Claimant on 27th  February  2013  had  been
    declared  invalid.   That  evidence  was  sufficient  to  satisfy   the
    evidential burden upon the Secretary of State, and the FTT erred in law
    in not appreciating this.

26. The FTT erred in law by failing  to  consider  material  evidence.   At
    paragraph 13 the FTT described the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  as
    follows;

         "The evidence relied upon in that assertion is in the form  of  two
         witness statements, not specific to this case,  that  make  general
         observations as to the process of obtaining such certificates  from
         ETS.  The evidence in my judgment does not address this Appellant's
         particular case and is not specific to  the  circumstances  of  his
         assessment, and shows no sufficient examination of  his  individual
         results.  It does not discharge the legal  burden  of  establishing
         that  the  Appellant   procured   his   language   certificate   by
         dishonesty."

27. The above is evidence that the FTT was  not  aware  of  the  evidential
    burden upon the Secretary  of  State,  which  if  satisfied  thereafter
    placed an evidential burden upon the Claimant.   It  also  demonstrates
    that the FTT did not consider the ETS spreadsheet showing the tests  to
    have been invalidated.  Failure to analyse material evidence amounts to
    an error of law.

28. Having explained why I found an error of law, I now  turn  to  consider
    the re-making of the decision.  I did not accept Mr Ahmed's  submission
    that I was bound to follow the FTT conclusion  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to discharge the burden of proof.  This is because the
    FTT adopted a legally  incorrect  approach  to  considering  the  case,
    although no blame attaches to the FTT for that, as  authoritative  case
    law had not been published at the time  of  the  FTT  decision  and  in
    addition, the FTT had not considered material evidence, that being  the
    ETS spreadsheet.  For those reasons I found the findings  made  by  the
    FTT to be unsafe and reliance should not be placed upon them.

29. I therefore decided, having taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements, that because credibility is  in
    issue, and no findings of fact are preserved, it would  be  appropriate
    to remit this appeal back to the FTT  to  be  heard  afresh.   This  is
    because the nature of the judicial fact-finding involved, means that it
    is more appropriate that this be carried out by the FTT rather than the
    Upper Tribunal.

30. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FTT  judge  other  than  Judge
    Matthews.  An interpreter will not be  provided,  unless  the  Claimant
    specifically requests otherwise.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             8th June 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             8th June 2017
