
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27149/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 March 2015                      |On 13 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Henry Kwaku Nifah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Sayeed, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Russell whereby he allowed the appeal of  the  appellant  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State that he together with  his  wife
    and child should be removed to Ghana.

2.    The  immigration  history  of  both  parents  is   exceedingly   poor.
    Essentially most of the time that they have been in  this  country,  in
    the father's case since May 2001 and in the mother's  case  since  June
    2003, has been without leave as overstayers and so  in  breach  of  the
    law.

3.   There  was  an  initial  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  an
    application made in 2011.  However, there  was  an  application  for  a
    review, indeed for a  reconsideration  and  the  request  was  made  in
    November 2011.  That was in the mother's case.  The Secretary of  State
    delayed until June 2014 before making a decision.

4.   The child involved in this case is a daughter who was born  on  10  May
    2007.  The result of the Secretary of State's delay in dealing with the
    matter has meant that by the time the decision was eventually  made  in
    respect of the family, if we can put it that way, the child had reached
    the age of 7, and that is  important  for  reasons  which  will  become
    apparent.  It is, to say the least, unfortunate that the  Secretary  of
    State has acted in what can only be said to be a thoroughly incompetent
    way in allowing time to pass.

5.   Now there can be no question, and the contrary  has  not  been  argued,
    that if the parents stood alone in the sense that there  was  no  child
    there could be no conceivable suggestion that removal was  unjustified,
    indeed removal clearly was appropriate.  The question that  the  First-
    tier Judge had and we have to consider is whether the position  of  the
    child means that the family must be allowed to remain.

6.   The issue  has  been  to  an  extent  dealt  with  in  the  sense  that
    Parliament has legislated in the 2014 Act by way  of  amendment  adding
    additional Sections in the 2002 Act.  What Parliament has  done  is  to
    seek to  identify  the  factors  which  the  Tribunal  and  indeed  the
    Secretary of State would  have  to  take  into  account  and  apply  in
    deciding whether in terms of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights it would be proportionate in any given case  to  remove  a
    particular individual or family.

7.   Section 117A provides by Subsection (1):

         '(1) This part [that is part 5A of the Act] applies where  a  court
             or Tribunal is required to determine whether a  decision  made
             under the Immigration Acts

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             Tribunal must (in particular) have regard

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  Section
                  117B.

         (3)  In subsection (2) 'the public  interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2)',

    and that of course is the  proportionality  test  that  is  applied  in
    relation to any interference with private or family life.

8.   The crucial Section for our purposes is 117B.  Subsections (1)  to  (5)
    deal with the approach that  is  applicable  in  relation  to  deciding
    whether individuals should be removed.

         '(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who speak English are able to integrate.'

    That is not directly relevant in this case.   (3),  again,  relates  to
    economic wellbeing and is not material but (4) provides that:

         '(4) Little weight should be given to

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.'

    Of course both those provisions relate to individuals and their private
    lives.  It is not directly referable to family life.

9.   The key Subsection is 6, and this provides:

         '(6) In the case of a person  who  is  not  liable  to  deportation
             [pausing there, that  simply  distinguishes  deportation  from
             removal, this is a removal case] the public interest does  not
             require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom',

    A qualifying child is defined in Section 117D as meaning

         '... a person who is under the age of 18 and who

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more',

    Hence the importance, as we indicated at the outset, of the  fact  that
    by the time the decision was made  and  indeed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and before us the child had attained the age of 7.

10.  Now it is to be noted that Subsection (6) of 117B does not say that  it
    is not in the public interest to remove.  What  it  says  is  that  the
    public interest still  exists  but  it  does  not  require  removal  in
    circumstances set out in paragraphs (a) and (b).

11.  That is the legal background and before  Section  117B(6)  was  enacted
    the Supreme Court had made clear in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 that in accordance  with  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the United Kingdom was
    of fundamental importance.  The approach was that  this  was  sometimes
    said to be a primary consideration, not the primary consideration,  but
    the best interests was the best way of  looking  at  it  and  the  best
    interests of the child would be a matter which had  to  be  taken  into
    account and had to be applied in any given decision.

12.  However, it must be borne in mind, and this follows from  the  case  of
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department where  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge indicated that there was no  irrationality  in  the
    conclusion that it was in the children's  best  interests  to  go  with
    their parents to the Republic of Congo.  The quotation goes on:

         "No doubt it would have been possible to have  stated  that,  other
         things being equal, it was in the best interests  of  the  children
         that they and their parents stayed in the United  Kingdom  so  that
         they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and  education  which
         the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard  than
         would be available in the Congo.  But other things were not  equal.
         They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to  future
         education and health care in this country.  They  were  part  of  a
         close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an  age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit.   Such  integration  as  had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of  that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision-maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of  their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to  their
         wellbeing."

    We have not been informed as to the age of the children in the case  of
    Zoumbas but these observations suggest that they must have  been  young
    children at that time.

13.  The correct approach was considered by this Tribunal in  E-A  (Nigeria)
    [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) and the Tribunal there decided that:

         "(i) The correct starting point in considering the welfare and best
             interests of a young child would be that it  is  in  the  best
             interests of a child to live with and be brought up by his  or
             her parents, subject to  any  very  strong  contra-indication.
             Where it is in the best interests of a child to live with  and
             be brought up by his or her parents, then the child's  removal
             with his parents does not involve  any  separation  of  family
             life.

         (ii) Absent other factors, the reason why a period  of  substantial
             residence as a child may become a weighty consideration in the
             balance of competing considerations is that in the  course  of
             such  time  roots  are  put  down,  personal  identities   are
             developed, friendships are formed and links are made with  the
             community outside the family unit.  The degree to which  these
             elements of private life are forged and therefore  the  weight
             to be given to the passage of time will depend upon the  facts
             in each case.

         (iii)    During a child's very early  years,  he  or  she  will  be
             primarily focused on self and the caring parents or  guardian.
             Long residence once the child is likely to  have  formed  ties
             outside the family is likely to have greater impact on his  or
             her wellbeing.

         (v)  The Supreme Court in ZH was not ruling that the ability  of  a
             young child to readily adapt to life in a new country  was  an
             irrelevant factor, rather that the adaptability of  the  child
             in each  case  must  be  assessed  and  is  not  a  conclusive
             consideration on its own."

14.  It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that the best interests  of
    the child have to be looked at in isolation as it were and it  is  not,
    having regard to the way Section 117B(6) is  set  out,  appropriate  to
    look to see the faults, if there are any, of  the  parents.   What  the
    court has to consider in approaching reasonableness is solely  what  in
    any given case will be the  best  interests  of  the  child.   That  is
    consistent with the approach suggested in paragraph 7.106 of the latest
    edition  of  Macdonald  where  it  is  said:  "Where   Parliament   has
    unambiguously and expressly declared what the public interest  requires
    the respondent's view of the public interest has no  relevance",  which
    means that the Secretary of State's view should be disregarded  if  she
    contends that a person should be expelled  notwithstanding  that  those
    circumstances are present.  The reference to "reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the UK" is we think reference to the best  interests  of
    the child only and not to all considerations that might have a  bearing
    on proportionality.

15.  We do not believe that that is a  correct  approach.   If  in  a  given
    case, as is the case here, the removal of the parents is in  accordance
    with the law and indeed is in the public interest, as  it  clearly  is,
    then the interests of the child prima facie would lie in remaining with
    her parents.  It is only if the child's best interests in a given case,
    provided the child has been in this country for over  seven  years,  is
    such as shows that the child's interests in remaining with the  parents
    is outweighed by the  interests  in  remaining  in  this  country  that
    removal should not take place.  There must be  in  a  given  case  that
    balancing exercise carried out because, as we said, the public interest
    consideration remains in being, it simply via  Subsection  (6)  is  not
    applied in a given case if, but only if it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

16.  So consideration must be given in every case  to  the  tension  perhaps
    that exists between the interests of the child in remaining with his or
    her parents and the interests of the child  because  of  the  situation
    that has been built up in this country in remaining here.   That  will,
    as we  say,  depend  upon  the  facts  of  the  given  case  but  those
    considerations must be borne in mind.

17.  One goes back then to the findings of the  First-tier  Judge  in  those
    respects.  He noted, as indeed was stated in a further decision of this
    Tribunal, Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) that seven years from  age
    4 was likely to be more significant to a child  that  the  first  seven
    years of life.  Very young  children  were  focused  on  their  parents
    rather than their peers and were adaptable, and  we  bear  in  mind  of
    course that we are here concerned with a child who  has  just  attained
    the age of 7.

18.  The key findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are in  paragraph  35
    of his decision, where he says this:

         "There is no suggestion that the girl will be  separated  from  her
         parents if they are removed to Ghana; the family will be removed as
         a unit.  The appellant has been raised in a Ghanaian family and  is
         a citizen of Ghana.  She has family ties in Ghana.  In summary, her
         social and cultural links remain, substantially, Ghanaian: that  is
         not to say that she requires a high degree of assimilation in order
         to succeed on her appeal but is relevant to an  enquiry  about  the
         reasonableness of removing her to Ghana."

    Pausing there, the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  although  it
    is headed in the name of the father, but it does not actually make  any
    difference to the approach, so back to the citation:

         "I reject the evidence that the disruption of her  education  would
         be 'traumatic' as a well-meaning but gross  exaggeration.   On  the
         other hand, I  accept  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  will
         represent some disruption to  her  education,  which  has  recently
         started, and her wellbeing, by severing friendships and attachments
         to the wider community in the UK, which she has now begun to  form.
         A period of seven years' residence is identified in the Immigration
         Rules as the minimum that can be considered and  the  decisions  of
         the Tribunal referred to above identify seven years as a  guideline
         but not a rule when  considering  whether  a  child  has  begun  to
         integrate into  the  UK,  with  seven  years  after  infancy  being
         identified as more significant."

19.  Then in the next paragraph the judge said this:

         "In light of the foregoing, I find that the best interests  of  the
         appellant's daughter lie on balance in remaining in the UK and that
         it would not be reasonable to expect her to remove to Ghana."

20.  It seems to us that there has  been  in  that  approach  a  failure  to
    consider  properly  the  countervailing  interests  for  the  child  in
    remaining with her parents, who do not deserve to be able to remain  in
    this country.  Of course we recognise that, looked at in isolation,  it
    might well be said that it was in the child's interests,  perhaps  even
    in the child's best interests if one looks at it in a certain  way,  to
    remain where she is.  She has  started  her  education,  she  has  made
    friends and she has begun to integrate into society  in  this  country.
    On the other hand, as the judge made clear, this  was  not  a  case  in
    which there would be more than some disruption of  her  wellbeing.   It
    seems to us in the circumstances that that failure to  have  regard  to
    the other factors which are material in  deciding  whether  removal  is
    proportionate, because that after all  is  the  test  that  has  to  be
    applied in relation to Article 8, is made out.

21.  In our judgment, on the facts of this case it cannot be  said  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom
    because, as we say, in deciding what it reasonable regard has to be had
    to the test on proportionality which lies  behind  all  decisions  that
    have to be made in accordance with Article 8, and  we  do  not  believe
    that Section 117B(6) was intended to or does provide a lesser test than
    that which is required through the authorities that have  been  decided
    in relation to the assessment of  proportionality  in  accordance  with
    Article 8, and, as we say, where it is clear, as it is here,  that  the
    parents have no right whatever to remain in this country it would  take
    a strong case in our judgment to show that it was not reasonable for  a
    child, even a child who had been here  for  the  qualifying  period  of
    seven years, to tip the balance, as it were, to  allow  the  family  to
    remain here.

22.  We appreciate that in an individual case, and no  doubt  in  this  case
    too, that may appear to be a harsh  decision  but  it  is  a  state  of
    affairs that has been brought about by the failure of the appellant  to
    comply with the immigration law of this country,  albeit,  as  we  have
    said, it is most unfortunate that the Secretary of  State's  delay  has
    created a more difficult situation for the child.

23.  In those circumstances we  shall  allow  this  appeal  and  accordingly
    dismiss the appellant's appeal from the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Mr Justice Collins

