
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27267/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2017                           |On 21 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  GRACE [F]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.   Miss [F] appeared in  person  and  confirmed  that  she  was  happy  to
    proceed unrepresented.  She was assisted by her husband, [EC].

3.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom in March 2002  as  a  visitor.
    On 11 March 2014 she applied for leave to remain  under  the  ten  year
    private/family life route.  This was refused on 10 April 2014  with  no
    right of appeal and she  was  subsequently  served  with  a  notice  of
    removal and later submitted a Statement of Additional Grounds  and  her
    application was considered and refused in the decision under challenge.



4.   The case was considered under  EX.1(b)  and  the  respondent  concluded
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    in Zimbabwe where the appellant had spent her formative years and where
    her husband [EC] had also lived.  It was noted that since she had  only
    lived in the United Kingdom for thirteen years she  did  not  meet  the
    long residence requirement of twenty years under paragraph 276ADE.   It
    was not accepted that there would be very significant obstacles to  her
    integration into Zimbabwe if she were  required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Nor did the respondent find that there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules.  The appellant is married to [EC] who has  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  She was awaiting surgery  for  uterine  fibroids.   It  was
    considered that her husband would be able  to  accompany  her  back  to
    Zimbabwe and the evidence did  not  show  that  her  medical  condition
    amounted to an exceptional circumstance.

5.   These matters were all considered by the judge, before whom again  Miss
    [F] appeared in  person.   I  mention  in  passing  the  fact  that  at
    paragraph 16 when referring to the appellant's sister and mother,  both
    of whom live in the United Kingdom, the judge said that the appellant's
    mother suffers from dementia.  This was clarified by the  appellant  in
    her grounds and in submissions before me to the fact that her mother in
    fact suffers from leukaemia and hepatitis B and has  significant  sight
    problems but does not suffer from dementia.  It was true,  however,  as
    set out by the judge that the appellant and her sister take it in turns
    to look after their mother.

6.   The judge considered the  case  under  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule
    which is EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.  This provides for leave to remain  to
    be granted in circumstances where  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United Kingdom and
    is a British citizen, settled in the United Kingdom or  in  the  United
    Kingdom with refugee leave or humanitarian protection and  where  there
    are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that   partner
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The judge noted the high hurdle
    involved in relation to insurmountable obstacles, referring to what was
    said by the Court of Appeal in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  The  judge
    noted that the appellant and [EC] had both spent their formative  years
    in Zimbabwe.  He noted that [EC] is well  qualified  and  also  heavily
    involved with the African Apostolic Church in the United Kingdom.   The
    judge considered he would be able to seek employment in  Zimbabwe,  and
    though relocation might be difficult  for  them  both,  and  there  was
    rising inflation  in  Zimbabwe,  and  it  was  said  that  the  medical
    treatment was substandard and quality  of  life  not  good,  the  judge
    concluded that the requirements of the Rules were not met.

7.   He went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  He concluded  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances  tipping  the  balance  in  the
    appellant's favour.  He had regard to  relevant  case  law  authorities
    including Agyarko and also Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  He  bore  in
    mind the public interest  considerations  under  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He noted with regard  to
    the appellant's mother and sister that she would be  able  to  maintain
    contact with them from abroad via telephone or other  modern  means  of
    communication and overall that there were no exceptional  circumstances
    warranting  a  finding  that  removal  would  be   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8  rights,  bearing  in  mind
    also her health problems and the contact [EC] would be able to maintain
    with his children in the United Kingdom.

8.   Permission to appeal this decision was refused in  the  First-tier  but
    was granted in the Upper Tribunal on the following basis:

         "1.  It is arguable  that  in  assessing  proportionality  for  the
             purposes of Article 8  the  First-tier  Tribunal  irrationally
             found that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  maintain  her
             relationship with her mother by telephone or  other  means  of
             modern communication.


         2.   This is arguably inconsistent with the  evidence  recorded  at
             [16] that the appellant's mother suffers from dementia and her
             sister (who has three children) and herself take it in turn to
             look after her".


9.   In her Rule 24  response  the  Secretary  of  State  pointed  out  that
    permission had been granted on an issue on  which  permission  had  not
    been sought, and contended that the judge  had  correctly  applied  the
    Immigration Rules and considered matters properly outside the Rules.

10.  With Miss [F]'s agreement I heard  first  from  Mr  Jarvis,  so  as  to
    enable her to know the points against which she would need to argue.

11.  Mr Jarvis relied on the Rule 24 response.  He  argued  that  the  judge
    had apparently misunderstood the health condition  of  the  appellant's
    mother, but those findings did not go to the core of the insurmountable
    obstacles issue.  He argued that the judge's decision was  properly  in
    line with the authorities such as Agyarko, and  though  it  was  not  a
    question of obstacles  which  were  literally  insurmountable,  it  was
    nevertheless a very  demanding  test  and  was  derived  from  European
    authority.  The decision in Agyarko, taking into account also what  had
    been said by the European Court of  Human  Rights  in  Jeunesse  v  the
    Netherlands [2014] ECHR 1036, on facts in many ways similar to those in
    the instant case, concluded that Article 8 rights  were  not  breached.
    Clearly each case depended upon  its  own  facts,  but  the  judge  had
    demonstrably understood the test and considered the matter both  within
    and outside the Rules.

12.  In her submissions Miss [F] asked that a visa be granted  so  that  she
    could live with her husband and enjoy family life and have a chance  to
    bear children and be around her family and look after her mother.   She
    wanted to be with her husband as he saw his children grew.  Her husband
    was settled in the United Kingdom and there are a lot of hardships  now
    in Zimbabwe and she personally was under medical review.   With  regard
    to her sister, she like their mother lived in Buckinghamshire, and  had
    three children and worked full-time as a social worker  so  they  would
    take turns, sometimes she, Miss [F], would go to stay with her  mother,
    and at other times her mother would come to her  in  Southampton.   Her
    husband was in the church and she helped him to do his job.   They  had
    been in the United Kingdom for a long time, there was the work  in  the
    church and she had no criminal record.  She helped in  particular  with
    the girls and the women in the church and mentored them to be  good  in
    society.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  Permission to appeal in this case  was  restricted  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission to the issue in respect of  proportionality  of  the
    Article 8 decision  of  the  abilities  the  judge  found  it  for  the
    appellant to be able to maintain her relationship with  her  mother  by
    telephone or other  means  of  modern  communication.   The  judge  who
    granted permission, as did the judge who heard the appeal, erred as  to
    the appellant's mother's health condition, which is as set  out  above.
    As Mr Jarvis pointed out however, the situation  would  be  essentially
    the same in that regard in that her mother has ongoing health  problems
    and clearly it would be much more difficult for her sister to cope with
    the care she provides for her if she did not have the  support  of  the
    appellant.

15.  This does not  however  identify  any  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  It was properly open to him to conclude  that  the  kind  of
    contact to which he referred  could  be  maintained  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  It appears from what Miss [F] said to  me  today  that
    her mother is able to travel  from  Buckinghamshire  to  visit  her  in
    Southampton, and the  medical  evidence  that  I  have  seen  does  not
    evidence a state of acuteness in her health problems at the  time  that
    documentation was written.  That documentation was  before  the  judge,
    and I consider that it has not been shown that he erred in any  respect
    in his  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  Article  8  issue  and  the
    appellant's ongoing contact  possibilities  with  her  mother  and  her
    sister.

16.  Technically that is an end of the matter, but I think that  as  it  was
    the focus of Miss [F]'s submissions, I should say something  about  the
    judge's decision with regard to family life with her  husband  and  the
    other issues.

17.  Again I agree with Mr Jarvis on this.  It is  clearly  problematic  for
    the appellant either to have to leave the United Kingdom without  [EC],
    or for him to leave the family and work  that  he  has  in  the  United
    Kingdom and go with her to Zimbabwe.  There are the problems  with  the
    Zimbabwean economy and healthcare there and the difficulties they might
    experience in getting  jobs.   But,  as  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out,  the
    threshold is a very steep one.  Though insurmountable obstacles are not
    ones that have to be literally insurmountable,  they  are  nevertheless
    obstacles which it would be very difficult to surmount, and I  consider
    it was properly open to the  judge  to  conclude  that  there  are  not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with [EC]  continuing  for  the
    appellant outside the United Kingdom, bearing in  mind,  as  the  judge
    noted, the fact that he spent his formative years in  Zimbabwe  and  is
    well qualified.  The judge was fully aware both of the correct test and
    the evidence to be considered in the context of applying that test, and
    came to conclusions which were properly open  to  him.   In  particular
    paragraph 20 of the decision with regard to  the  situation  under  the
    Rules and paragraphs 21 to 23 with regard to the position  outside  the
    Rules are sound evaluations of the  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
    relevant legal provisions.  It is not irrelevant, for example, to  note
    as the judge did at paragraph 22 that he is  required  to  give  little
    weight to a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at the time when the person is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully, and that was the case  for  the  appellant,  as  it
    would seem from paragraph 15 of the  judgment,  from  fairly  early  in
    March 2002.  The judge noted she has been in the United Kingdom without
    leave for fourteen years and her family  and  private  life  have  been
    formed under conditions of unlawful residence.

18.  This is clearly a sympathetic case.  The appellant and  [EC]  presented
    themselves as entirely honest people who are going to face difficulties
    whether  they  return  to  Zimbabwe  together  or  the  appellant  goes
    separately.  But my task is to decide whether or not there is an  error
    of law in the judge's decision, and in my conclusion the judge  clearly
    applied the correct legal  Rules  to  the  situation  on  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant, and that decision  cannot  be  faulted  as  a
    matter of law.

19.  Accordingly the judge's decision refusing this appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 20 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

