
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/27291/2014
                                                               IA/27297/2014
                                                               IA/27300/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 March 2016                    |On 31 March 2016                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                           NICHOLAS RAYMOND LEWIS
                            SINEON SONJA SAUNDERS
                         PATRICK JUNIOR WOOLMINGTON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr Aslam on behalf of Manchester Associates
For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey promulgated on 22  December
   2014 which allowed the Appellants' appeals against the  decision  of  the
   Respondent to remove the Appellant from the UK following the decision  to
   refuse the Appellants' claim for leave to remain on the  basis  of  their
   family and private life.

Background


4. The Appellants are three brothers with  the  same  mother  but  different
   fathers. They were born on 22.5.90, 3.10.93 and 14.8.95  respectively  so
   they are now 24, 21 and 19 years old. They are all nationals of Jamaica.
5. The Appellants came to the UK with visit visas on 12 December  2007  when
   they were respectively 17, 14 and 12 years old. They came  to  see  their
   mother who was settled in the UK married to a British citizen. They  made
   applications on 12 April 2007 for indefinite leave  to  remain  based  on
   their  dependency  on  their  mother  and  these  were  rejected.   Fresh
   applications were made on 11 May  2007  but  refused  on  23  July  2007.
   Appeals were made against the  refusals  on  3  October  2007  and  on  6
   November 2007 they became appeal rights exhausted.
6. On 11 May 2014 the Appellants applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis
   of their family and private life. On 10 June 2014 the Secretary of  State
   refused the applications  by  reference  to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
   276ADE(1). The refusal letters gave a number of reasons:
   (a) The Appellants could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.
   (b) The only provision of paragraph 276ADE(1) that might reasonably apply
   was subsection (vi) but the Appellants could not meet the test that  they
   had 'no ties' to Jamaica given that they were brought up there, had spent
   the majority of their life there, they have family  there  in  that  they
   have their grandmother and aunt there and their mother could support them
   from the UK until they re-established themselves.
   (c) There were no other circumstances that warranted  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Pacey ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision by reference to paragraph 276ADE (1) of the  Immigration  Rules.
   The Judge found:
   a)  The three Appellants and their mother were credible witnesses.
   b)  The relevant case  law  was  Ogundimu  [2013]  UKUT  00060  in  which
      guidance was given in  respect  of  the  concept  of  'ties'  and  the
      requirement for a rounded assessment of the circumstances.
   c)  They had significant private life established in  the  UK  given  the
      length of time they had been here.
   d)  They had only intermittent contact with their grandmother.
   e)  There was no evidence to suggest they were in contact with  an  uncle
      who may or may not be living there.
   f)  They have severed all meaningful links with Jamaica.
   g)  Given the cultural, educational and social links they had in  the  UK
      they would be strangers in Jamaica.
   h)  The fact that they were Jamaican nationals, speak  the  language  and
      had a grandmother there were not determinative.
   i)  The second and third Appellants had undergone all of their  secondary
      education in the UK.
   j)  They had spent the majority or some of their teenage years in the UK.
   k)  There was no evidence that they had friends in Jamaica or exposure to
      the current cultural  norms  there  and  their  meaningful  ties  were
      minimal.


8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  Judge  had  applied  the
   wrong test under paragraph 276ADE(vi) in that he should have applied  the
   test if 'very significant obstacles' rather than the loss of  ties;  thee
   assessment of them having no ties was flawed  as  they  had  spent  their
   formative ties in  Jamaica;  in  asserting  there  was  no  evidence  the
   Appellants were in contact with their uncle  or  anyone  else  there  the
   Judge had shifted the burden of proof from the Appellants.
9.  On 18 May 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy gave permission to appeal.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a)  He would only be pursuing grounds 2 and 3 as he accepted that  ground
      1 was misconceived: the Judge was correct to apply the version of  the
      Rules that was set out and applied  in  the  refusal  letter  not  the
      version that came into force after the decision was made

   b)  The Judge had referred to Ogundimu but had misapplied  it.  Factually
      Ogundimu was very different in that the appeal was allowed  against  a
      factual basis in which the Appellant had never been to his country  of
      origin. This case was very different in that the Appellants had  spent
      over half their life in Jamaica and therefore it was perverse  to  say
      they had no ties.

   c)  Paragraphs 123-125 of  Ogundimu  give  guidance  on  what  should  be
      considered in determining whether an Appellant had no ties.

   d)  In relation to the challenge of how the Judge had applied the  burden
      of proof he relied on the grounds of appeal: the Judge erred in saying
      there was no evidence that there was no contact with the uncle.

11.  On behalf of the Respondent Mr Aslam submitted that :

   a)  The Appellants came here when they were all under 16.

   b)  They were now very well integrated into  UK  society  and  the  Judge
      found that they would return to a very different Jamaica.

Legal Framework

12. Both parties relied on Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
   UKUT 60 (IAC) where the Tribunal  said  that  the  natural  and  ordinary
   meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
   (HC194) imports a concept involving something more than merely remote  or
   abstract links to the country of  proposed  deportation  or  removal.  It
   involves there being a connection to life in that country.  Consideration
   of whether a person has 'no ties'  to  such  a  country  must  involve  a
   rounded assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is not to  be
   limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances.
Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. The three Appellants  are  brothers  whose  applications  for  leave  to
   remain in the UK were based on private life  considerations  because,  in
   essence, at the time of the decision in June 2014 they had lived  in  the
   UK for nearly 7 years and the only relative they had in Jamaica was their
   78 year old grandmother as their mother lived in the  UK.  It  has  never
   been in dispute that the Appellants appeals stood or fell together.

15. I am satisfied that the  Judge  properly  directed  himself  as  to  the
   guidance in Ogundimu having heard the evidence of the  three  Appellants,
   their mother and a Ms  Adler  who  he  found  to  be  credible  witnesses
   (paragraph 18). I am satisfied that the Judge  carried  out  the  rounded
   assessment suggested in Ogundimu at paragraphs 18-20 and was entitled  to
   examine whether the connections that the Appellants had to their  country
   of origin were meaningful and effective given that the court in  Ogundimu
   rejected the suggestion that 'even the  most  minimal  of  links  to  the
   country of proposed' were enough to constitute 'ties'.

16.  The  Judge  therefore  carefully   examined   all   of   the   relevant
   circumstances. He was required to take into account not only  the  length
   of time the Appellants had been in the UK but that  in  this  case  those
   years were formative years both  socially  and  educationally  (paragraph
   20). He examined what family members there were in Jamaica who  might  be
   able  to  provide  assistance  to  the  Appellants   in   re-establishing
   themselves. He  found  the  Appellants  and  their  mother  credible  and
   accepted that their grandmother was elderly (in fact she is  78)  and  in
   poor health and indeed heard oral evidence that her health problems  were
   such that she was bed bound and unable to lead an independent  life.  She
   was cared for by a distant  relative  that  these  Appellants  and  their
   mother had never met. The Judge accepted this evidence. The relevance  of
   family in the country of origin is whether they could result  in  support
   to an Appellant in the event of his return: in this case  the  Judge  was
   entitled to conclude that a 78 year old bed bound  grandmother  would  be
   unable to provide meaningful support to the Appellants. The Judge set out
   the reasons at paragraph 6 why he did not accept that the Appellants  had
   an aunt in Jamaica and this finding was well reasoned and open to him.

17. The Appellants had asserted that the uncle who had played some  part  in
   their upbringing in Jamaica 7 years before was no longer living there and
   produced a witness statement from him in which it was asserted  he  lived
   in the UK. The Judge described the evidence as 'unsatisfactory'  and  did
   not accept that the uncle was not living in Jamaica. Therefore I  do  not
   accept that the Judge misapplied the burden of proof in relation to  this
   issue given that finding but it clear from  reading  the  decision  as  a
   whole that the Judge accepted that any relationship that  the  Appellants
   might have had with this uncle did not amount to a  meaningful  one  that
   would constitute ties for the purpose of the Rule.

18. The  Judge  also  heard  evidence  from  a  Ms  Adler  about  the  first
   Appellants engagement with the wider community which is set  out  in  her
   witness statement at page 105 and he found her to be a credible witness.

19. It might be argued that the conclusion drawn by the  Judge  given  their
   ages on arrival in the UK was a generous one but I am satisfied  that  in
   the light of his careful consideration of the evidence before  him  based
   on the relevant guidance in  Ogundimu  he  gave  sufficient  reasons  for
   finding that the length of  the  Appellants  residence  during  formative
   years of their life taken together with the lack of  meaningful  ties  in
   Jamaica meant they were entitled to succeed under the Rules.

20. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

21. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
20.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
