
IAC-AH-SAR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27601/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 3rd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MS PRIYA RAMJI BHANDERI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Seychelles born  on  6th  June  1985.
    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18th July 2004 with a valid
    student visa and it is not contested  that  since  that  date  she  has
    remained lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  was  last
    granted  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as   a   Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant prior to expiry of her  PSW  visa  and  she  was
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 1st April  2014  which
    was  to  remain  valid  until  1st  April  2017.   The  Appellant   has
    established a marketing and management consultancy business.   On  13th
    June 2014 the Appellant travelled to the Seychelles for a holiday.  She
    returned to the United Kingdom on  2nd  July  and  was  interviewed  on
    arrival and it is contended that she admitted to  having  worked  full-
    time purportedly in breach of her visa although I understand  that  the
    interview  record  has  never  been  disclosed   to   the   Appellant's
    solicitors.  The Appellant found herself served and faced with  removal
    directions due to be implemented on 18th July 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed,  it  being  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse her leave to enter was unlawful on the basis
    firstly that she met all the requirements  for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules and secondly that her removal  would
    breach her protected rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    of Human Rights.

 3. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ferguson
    sitting at Birmingham on  19th  September  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 8th October 2014 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant appealed on 30th October 2014 to the Upper Tribunal.   On
    22nd December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Deans  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Deans noted  that  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal contended that the judge was wrong to dismiss the  appeal  under
    the long residence provisions in  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because the Appellant's case fell under the  general  Grounds  of
    Refusal.  Her leave was curtailed under paragraph  321A  because  of  a
    change of circumstances and this did not fall within  the  Respondent's
    guidance on general Grounds of Refusal.  It was further submitted  that
    Article 8 was not properly considered.  Judge Deans  noted  that  there
    did not appear to have been any finding made of deception on  the  part
    of the Appellant although  the  judge  had  stated  that  the  evidence
    suggested  that  the  Appellant  knew  she  should  no  longer  be   in
    employment.  He concluded that in the absence of a specific finding  of
    deception it was arguable that the general Grounds of Refusal  did  not
    apply.

 5. On 2nd January 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds contended that the judge had  made
    a clearly explained finding at paragraph 15 regarding  the  Appellant's
    refusal under paragraph 321A and that  it  was  clear  that  the  judge
    believed the Appellant would have been aware of the conditions  of  her
    leave and knew that she should not be in paid employment.  Further, the
    Secretary of State submitted that the  judge's  Article  8  assessments
    were adequate and that the judge had  observed  in  paragraph  19  that
    there were no particulars given in the written Article  8  grounds  and
    that the Appellant had not attempted to show  that  she  could  succeed
    under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and that therefore  it  would  be
    necessary for the Appellant to demonstrate arguably  good  grounds  for
    consideration outside the Rules.

 6. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me  for  consideration
    as to whether or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  Mr  Paul
    Turner of Counsel.  Mr Turner is familiar with this matter,  being  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Kandola.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. I am very gratefully assisted in this matter by a series of concessions
    made by Mr Kandola on behalf of the Secretary of State,  all  of  which
    constitute material errors of law.  The issues are set out  hereinafter
    but they are all conceded by the Secretary of State and acknowledged by
    Mr Turner.  Mr Turner points out that it is important to note  (and  to
    be noted by any further First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  rehearing)  that
    the Immigration Officer did not find the Appellant dishonest, just that
    there had been a change of circumstances relating  to  her  employment.
    He also submits that no adverse findings should  be  made  against  the
    Appellant pursuant to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which came into force on 28th July 2014.  He points out
    that the Appellant meets the maintenance requirements of  the  statute,
    that she speaks perfect English and that she has always abided  by  the
    terms of her visa  despite  the  concerns  raised  by  the  Immigration
    Officer on her detention on re-entry from holiday  in  the  Seychelles.
    He agrees that the correct approach is to remit the matter back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Material Error of Law

10. Having heard the submissions I am satisfied  that  there  are  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  for  all  the
    reasons set out in the  questions  posed  and  raised  hereinafter.   I
    address it in this manner on the basis that those questions and answers
    are ones that the advocates will concentrate their minds upon when  the
    matter comes back before the First-tier Tribunal  and  it  is  best  to
    recite them as points to be considered on the rehearing rather than  to
    recite them both within the submissions and the findings.

Facts and Questions to be Considered Going Forward

     11. (1)  Did the Appellant's leave continue after it had been cancelled
         by the Immigration Officer  on  her  return  from  holiday  in  the
         Seychelles?

      2) Did the Appellant have lawful leave in the United  Kingdom  for  in
         excess of ten years applying Section 3C to her case by way  of  the
         fact that it is accepted that she had  been  in  the  UK  for  nine
         years, eleven months and two weeks  without  the  3C  period  being
         included.

      3) Is a breach of condition under paragraph 320 a bar to the Appellant
         succeeding under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules?

      4) To what extent, if any, bearing in the mind the finding that  there
         is a material error of law in the judge's application of  paragraph
         321A of the Immigration Rules, can the Secretary of State  rely  on
         paragraph 321A bearing in mind that the general Grounds for Refusal
         that the Immigration Rules refer to are to be found  and  contained
         within paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules?

      5) Is a breach of the condition of that nature/finding of deception  a
         public interest bar to the Appellant succeeding under the ten  year
         Rule?

12. I emphasised to the parties that whilst  I  was  not  determining  this
    issue and that that was a matter for further consideration by a freshly
    constituted court in the First-tier Tribunal, my initial thoughts  were
    that a positive direction should be given with regard to including  the
    time within the 3C period but that it would remain to be argued  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as to whether that could properly be  included.
    Further, it occurred to me that by the time this matter is reheard  the
    Appellant will without doubt or argument have met the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules albeit that I acknowledge that the  only  way  in
    which she could currently reapply would be to withdraw the  appeal  and
    make a fresh application which bearing in mind her current  immigration
    status and the position regarding the current appeal  might  constitute
    difficulties.  What however does need to be  considered  is  firstly  a
    properly  made  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in   the
    alternative a properly made and reasoned decision under Article 8.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  are  to  stand  albeit  that
concessions can be made by either party.  The matter is  to  be  reheard  at
Taylor House on 3rd July 2015 with an ELH of two hours.  No  interpreter  is
required.  Leave is given to either party to file at  the  Tribunal  and  to
exchange  up-to-date  evidence  upon  which  they  seek  to  rely  including
skeleton arguments and authorities at least seven days pre-hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 23rd January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 23rd January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

