
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27100/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 28th August  2015                 |On 8th October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  Mr M.N.U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Nasher of J. Stifford, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I make the order because there is a child involved.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing  for  convenience  I
         will continue to refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal

      2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born in 1994. He came to
         the United Kingdom as a student in  December  2012.  He  had  leave
         until May 2014. In March 2014 he entered into an arranged  marriage
         with Miss S. B.  She was born  in  1984.  She  is  originally  from
         Bangladesh; has lived in the United Kingdom for 15 years;  and  has
         British nationality.

      3. On 17 April 2014 he made application for leave  to  remain  as  her
         partner.  That  application  was  refused  on  13  June  2014.  The
         respondent accepted  that  he  and  his  wife  were  in  a  genuine
         relationship. His wife worked part time  and  could  not  meet  the
         financial requirements under appendix FM.  Reference  was  made  to
         section EX1 which provides exceptions to certain of the eligibility
         requirements. The  issue  was  whether  there  were  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life  with  his  wife  continuing  outside  the
         United Kingdom (EX.1. (b)) His wife spoke Bengali and was aware  of
         the culture in Bangladesh. The conclusion was  that  insurmountable
         obstacles did not exist. Regard was also had to paragraph 276  ADE.
         The appellant had only been in the United Kingdom a short time  and
         so did not meet the rule unless he could demonstrate a lack of ties
         to his home country. The respondent concluded he retained ties.

    The First tier Tribunal

      4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Miles on 24 February 2015.
          In a decision promulgated on 9 March 2015 the appeal  was  allowed
         under appendix FM on the basis that EX1(a) applied. The appellant's
         wife had given birth to their daughter on 5 November 2014. She  was
         entitled to British nationality. The judge concluded that it  would
         not be reasonable to expect his child or indeed his wife  to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

      5. The judge based this  conclusion  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal in Sanade and others (British children -  Zambrano-Dereci)
         [2012] UKUT 00048. At  paragraph  20  of  the  decision  the  judge
         stated:

             "In my judgement the decision of Sanade makes it  very  clear,
             and  irrespective  of  the  practical  considerations  in  the
             particular circumstances of any case, that expecting a British
             citizen spouse or child to leave this country in order to live
             in a third country which was not in the European Union is,  as
             a matter of law, unreasonable and on that basis therefore that
             decision determines  that  question  under  paragraph  EX1  of
             appendix FM. It follows therefore that I find  that  it  would
             not be reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter to  leave
             the United Kingdom and accordingly therefore  his  application
             satisfies the requirements of paragraph EX1 (a) of appendix FM
             and his appeal therefore succeeds on that basis."

      6. The judge went on to say that it was  not  necessary  therefore  to
         consider paragraph EX1 (b) in relation to his wife or rule 276 ADE.
         The judge did find the appellant's evidence  that  his  family  had
         disowned him because of his marriage was untrue and did not  accept
         his claimed lack of ties with his home country.

    The Upper Tribunal.

      7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
         it was arguable the judge did not properly apply Sanade and  others
         (British  children  -  Zambrano-Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT   00048   and
         consequently the judge materially erred in law in the consideration
         of appendix FM.

      8. Mr. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer, relied upon  the  grounds
         on which leave was granted.  These  said  that  the  facts  in  the
         present case differed significantly from that in Sanade and  others
         (British children - Zambrano-Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048.  It  was
         pointed out that the appellant's wife  and  child  were  not  being
         required to leave either the United Kingdom or the European  Union.
         It is for his wife to choose whether she returns to Bangladesh with
         the appellant.

      9. Whether the decision interferes with family  life  will  depend  on
         whether it is reasonable to expect the spouse or child to join  the
         appellant. There can be cases, as here, were both  parties  to  the
         marriage are from the same country and familiar  with  the  way  of
         life. There will be  other  cases  were  it  would  be  practically
         impossible to enjoy family life in another country.

     10. Mr. Nath emphasised that  the  respondent  was  not  requiring  the
         appellant's wife and child to leave. Mr. Nasher provided me with  a
         copy  of  the  decision  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others   (decisions
         affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 which held as
         a starting point is in the best interests of children  to  be  with
         both parents and to have stability and continuity. It  was  pointed
         out that seven years spent in the United Kingdom from  the  age  of
         four will be more significant than the first  years  of  life  when
         children are focused on  their  parents.  He  emphasised  that  the
         appellant's daughter was entitled, a British nationality  and  that
         this was referred to by the judge at paragraph 16 of the decision.

     11. Both representatives agreed that there was  no  dispute  about  the
         background facts and that if I found a material error of law  there
         was no reason why I could  not  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal
         without further evidence.

    Error of law.

     12. I find that paragraph 20  of  the  decision  indicates  a  material
         misdirection by the judge in relation to the law. It  follows  from
         what the judge said that paragraph EX1 of appendix FM  would  apply
         to all cases were  a  third  country  national  was  in  a  genuine
         relationship either of partnership with a British  national  or  as
         the parent of  a British child. This is not a correct statement  of
         the law. The judge has taken more out of Sanade and others (British
         children  -  Zambrano-Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  than  the  case
         decided. The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011] UKSC 4,
         particularly  the  judgement  of   Lord   Kerr,   highlighted   the
         significance  of  British  nationality.   However,   it   was   not
         necessarily determinative as First-tier Judge Miles suggested.

     13. First-tier Judge Miles refers to the 5th head note  of  Sanade  and
         others (British children - Zambrano-Dereci) [2012] UKUT  00048  and
         the decision in C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano.  However, paragraph 6  which
         is relevant was not quoted :

             "6. Where in  the  context  of  Article  8  one  parent  ("the
             remaining parent") of  a  British  citizen  child  is  also  a
             British citizen (or cannot be removed as a family member or in
             their on right), the removal of the other parent does not mean
             that either the child or the remaining parent will be required
             to leave, thereby infringing the Zambrano principal, CC-256/11
             Murant Dereci. The critical question is whether the  child  is
             dependent on the parent being removed for the exercise of  his
             Union right of residence and whether  removal  of  the  parent
             will deprive the child of the effective exercise of  residence
             in the United Kingdom or elsewhere in the Union."

     14. In the present appeal neither the appellant's wife nor child can be
         removed against their will. His  wife  can  care  for  their  child
         should she decide to stay in the United Kingdom. Consequently there
         is no breach of her rights as a European citizen.

Remaking the decision

     15. Having found a material error of law and  there  being  no  factual
         dispute I re-make the decision and dismiss MNU's appeal.

     16. He has not been here  long  enough  to  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276 ADE. First-tier Judge Miles found as a fact  that  he
         retained ties with his home country. I would  retain  this  factual
         finding.

     17. He does not meet the requirements  of  appendix  FM.  It  has  been
         accepted that  his  wife's  income  does  not  meet  the  financial
         requirements. I do not find he is  assisted  by  EX1  either  as  a
         partner or a parent. I do  not  find  insurmountable  obstacles  to
         family life continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  This  is  a
         choice, his wife will have to make. She could  reasonably  go  with
         him to Bangladesh  where  she  spent  her  formative  years.  Their
         daughter  is  an  infant  who  will  have  no  awareness   of   her
         surroundings and her  focus  will  be  upon  her  parents.  In  the
         circumstance I  find  this  is  a  situation  where  there  is  the
         practical option of the entire family going to Bangladesh.

     18. In the case of Sanade and  others  (British  children  -  Zambrano-
         Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 there were three appellants, each of whom
         was married to a British citizen and had minor  children  who  were
         British citizens. The appeals  were  concerned  was  the  automatic
         deportation provisions in relation to article 8.  At  paragraph  56
         onwards the court referred to  the  jurisprudence  in  relation  to
         whether immigration action constituted  an  interference  with  the
         right to respect for family life and whether it was  reasonable  to
         expect the spouse or child to follow the claimant. It referred to a
         wide  spectrum  of  situations  and  ties  with  the   country   of
         destination.

     19. Paragraph 59 onwards refers to the interests of children  affected.
         Reference is made to Lady Hale's judgement  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  -v-
         SSHD [2011] UKSC 4  where  at  paragraph  25  to  33  her  Ladyship
         referred to the  best  interests  of  the  child  being  a  primary
         consideration. Paragraph 29 refers to the level of  integration  in
         the place of residence. At paragraph 30 it  was  pointed  out  that
         nationality is not a trump card but is of particular importance  in
         assessing the best interests of any child.

     20. In the case of Mr Sanade the various interests  were  referred  to;
         the fact he had been granted indefinite leave to  remain;  and  was
         not perceived as posing a future risk.  In  the  circumstances  his
         deportation was not considered to be  proportionate.  However,  the
         appeals of the other two defendants were  dismissed.  The  decision
         illustrates the fact sensitive nature of the evaluation rather than
         the blanket cover First-tier Judge Miles applied.

     21. In summary, in  the  present  case  the  appellant  does  not  meet
         appendix FM and is not assisted  by  EX1.  I  have  considered  the
         situation outside of the rules. I have borne in  mind  his  child's
         best interests and that this question does not  form  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment. It  is  generally  in  a  child's  best
         interest to be with both parents. It is accepted  the  relationship
         with his wife and child is genuine. I am influenced by the relative
         short-term the appellant has been in  this  country;  the  fact  he
         married when his immigration status was precarious, with his  leave
         about to expire. I am also influenced by the fact that his child is
         only  an  infant.  The  appellant  does  have  family  members   in
         Bangladesh and his claim estrangement was not accepted. Looking  at
         all of the circumstances and bearing in mind the considerations  in
         section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  it
         is my conclusion that the respondent's decision is proportionate.

Decision

     22. First-tier Judge Miles materially erred in law and the decision  is
         set aside.

     23. I remake the decision dismissing the appeal of MNU


Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


Anonymity.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity. I now  make  an
Order for anonymity because there is a child involved.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

