
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th February 2016                        |On 24th March 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               miss huma altaf
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent, Ms Altaf is a citizen of Pakistan whose date  of  birth
    is recorded as 20th June 1987.  She made an application for a Residence
    Card as an extended family member having regard to Regulation 8 of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations").  On  13th  June
    2014 a decision was made to refuse the application and so she appealed.
     Her appeal was heard on 13th August 2015 by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Birk sitting at Hatton Cross.

 2. In every material particular Judge Birk found the case advanced  by  Ms
    Altaf credible and made positive findings but then went on to allow the
    appeal outright.

 3. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 11th September 2015 the
    Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal having regard to the guidance in  the  case  of  Ihemedu
    (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).  The point  in  issue
    is that because the Regulations which mirror Directive 2004/38/EC gives
    the Secretary of State a discretion in these circumstances it  was  not
    open to the judge to allow the appeal outright.

 4. Mr Solomon sought to persuade me that there was no  error  because  the
    judge had not allowed the  appeal  under  Regulation  17(4)  but  under
    Regulation 8(2).

 5. I find, with respect to Mr Solomon that the distinction  is  without  a
    difference.  The reality is that it was not for the  Tribunal  to  make
    the ultimate decision. It is for the Secretary of  State.  However  she
    should take into account the findings now made.

Notice of Decision

In the circumstances I find that there was a material error of  law  in  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal which I now set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision without interfering with any of the  findings,  all  of  which  are
preserved and allow the appeal so that it is now for the Secretary of  State
to exercise her discretion.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

