
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27465/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 10 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               PRISCILLA JLAY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hawden-Beale who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  25  March  2014
    allowed the respondent's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  her  a
    residence permit as the family member of an EEA national.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent  and to Ms  Jlay  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant is  married  to  an
    EEA national but the couple have separated. They are not divorced.  The
    appellant applied for a residence  permit  as  a  family  member  under
    Regulation 7 of the  EEA  Regulations  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The appellant maintains that domestic violence played  a  part  in  the
    separation.  As part of her application for a  residence  permit  as  a
    family member  under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) she submitted evidence  of
    domestic violence, in particular police logs, GP records and  a  report
    dated 11 January 2013 from Narthex,  a  domestic  violence  counselling
    charity.

 5. The respondent does not dispute that those materials were before her at
    the date of the decision and that she did not take them  into  account.
    She maintains that even though that is so they were  not  material  and
    could not have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal.

 6. At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, set out at [11] and  [12]
    of the decision, Judge Hawden-Beale adjourned a hearing  in  order  for
    the respondent to make enquiries under her European Operational  Policy
    Notice 10/2011 (the 'Pragmatic Policy'). It is not in dispute that  the
    respondent did not do so; see [13].

 7. The Pragmatic Policy was relied upon by the appellant  as  it  can,  in
    certain circumstances, lead to the respondent  making  enquiries  about
    whether an EEA national is a qualified person  in  circumstances  where
    the applicant cannot be expected to or simply cannot  do  so.  In  this
    appeal the appellant maintains that she cannot contact her husband  for
    information about his situation because of the  domestic  violence  she
    claims she suffered.

 8. I accept that Judge Hawden-Beale was not in a position  to  direct  the
    respondent to apply the Pragmatic Policy but she was in a  position  to
    direct the respondent to consider  whether  to  do  so  where  she  had
    entirely failed in that regard despite being specifically requested  to
    do so by the appellant. The material before the respondent clearly  had
    the  potential  to  engage  the  policy.  This  was  accepted  by   the
    respondent's representative at the first hearing before  Judge  Hawden-
    Beale; see [12].

 9. As [13] and [14] show, the respondent's approach to the direction given
    by the First-tier Tribunal to consider the policy appears to have  been
    misconceived. The terms of the Pragmatic Policy do not require  someone
    to have been found to be a victim of domestic violence. It is  for  the
    respondent to consider whether there is evidence of  domestic  violence
    sufficient to indicate that she should seek  to  ascertain  information
    about the EEA partner rather than an applicant having to do so.  As  at
    [14], the respondent also referred to the wrong information  about  the
    appellant when refusing to address the Pragmatic Policy.

10. Where the respondent did  not  consider  the  Pragmatic  Policy,  Judge
    Hawden-Beale went on to allow the appeal at [15].

11. The respondent's grounds of appeal challenge the decision as there were
    no findings made in relation to the applicability of the policy or  the
    EEA Regulations. Mr Hibbs argued  that  the  failure  to  consider  the
    Pragmatic Policy could not be material as there was  no  evidence  that
    could have led to the respondent making enquiries about the appellant's
    husband.

12. It was my view that there was material before the respondent  that  was
    capable of leading her to applying her Pragmatic Policy, that  material
    being the policy logs, GP records, hospital records and Narthex report.
    Her failure to consider whether those  materials  should  lead  her  to
    follow the Pragmatic Policy and seek information about  the  status  of
    the appellant's husband was unlawful and amounted to a  material  error
    of law in this matter.

13. To the extent that this was also the conclusion of Judge Hawden-Beal at
    [15], no error arises. The difficulty is that she  allowed  the  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.  This may  have  been  an  oversight  but  I
    cannot be certain that is so and do not feel sufficiently confident  in
    so finding where the outcome of the appeal as stated by  Judge  Hawden-
    Beal would lead to the respondent having to issue the appellant with  a
    residence permit rather than re-making the decision.

14. Allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations was, in my judgement,  an
    obvious and material error in the determination such that it had to  be
    set aside to the extent of the correct disposal was made.

15. I  therefore  found  that  the  appeal  being  allowed  under  the  EEA
    Regulations amounted to an error on a point of law that should  be  set
    aside and the decision re-made.

16. Following the  reasoning  above,  the  appeal  is  allowed  as  not  in
    accordance with the law.  It is now for the respondent to make a  fresh
    decision  on  the  application,  that  decision  including   a   proper
    assessment of whether the Pragmatic Policy applies  here  and,  if  the
    answer  is  affirmative,  the  outcome  of  any  enquiries  about   the
    appellant's husband.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside as regards the final disposal only.

18. I re-make the appeal by allowing it as not in accordance with the law.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 9 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
