
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27249/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 October 2017                            |On 17 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                RASHEL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                              Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated on 27 January 2017  dismissing  his
    appeal on  both  immigration  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 16 July 2015 refusing his application for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.



Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  26  June  1983.  He
    claims to have made an unlawful entry into the UK in December 1992 as a
    minor. He did not seek to  regularise  his  status  until  he  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  continuous
    residence (14 years) under what was paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395) on 20 February 2007. I shall refer  to  the  Immigration
    Rules as they stood up  to  8 July  2012  as  "the  old  Rules".  This
    application was refused on 16 July 2015.

3.    The reasons for the decision are set out in a decision letter  of  the
    same date. While the respondent noted that with effect from 9 July 2012
    and the implementation of HC 194 ("the new Rules"),  the  provision  to
    grant indefinite leave to remain on the basis of 14 years residence had
    been removed from the Immigration  Rules,  she  proceeded  to  consider
    whether the appellant met the requirements of  the  old  Rules  as  his
    application was submitted prior to the implementation date  of  9  July
    2012. The respondent referred to the old Rules and noted that paragraph
    276B(i) provided inter alia as follows:

         "(b) he has had at least  14  years  continuous  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom, excluding any period spent in  the  United  Kingdom
         following service of notice of liability to removal or notice of  a
         decision to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to  10A,
         or 12 to 14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971  or  section
         10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  or  of  a  notice  of
         intention to deport him from the United Kingdom; and.."

4.    By reference to the above provision the  respondent  stated  that  her
    records did not indicate that the appellant had been  served  with  any
    Notice(s) as defined within the old  Rules.  The  respondent  concluded
    that while she was satisfied of the appellant's  residence  from  2007,
    there was  insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  been
    resident in the UK continuously since December 1992.

5.    The respondent then proceeded to consider the new rules and  concluded
    that the appellant did not satisfy the requirements for leave to remain
    under Appendix FM as there was no evidence to suggest that he qualified
    thereunder in any category. As for the provisions of paragraph  276ADE,
    setting out the requirements for leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private life based on residence in the UK, she was not  satisfied  that
    the appellant could meet any of those  requirements  either.  She  also
    considered whether there were exceptional circumstances that would make
    it appropriate to allow the appellant to remain in the UK  outside  the
    Rules, but was not satisfied that removal would result in  sufficiently
    harsh consequences to make removal disproportionate.

6.    On 29 July 2015 the appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the grounds that he met  the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain  for
    continuous residence and that his removal would be contrary to  Article
    8 of the ECHR.

7.    While the appeal was pending the appellant married a  British  citizen
    on 4 June 2016. In  consequence,  additional  grounds  of  appeal  were
    lodged by the appellant's representatives on 28 June 2016  in  reliance
    on paragraph of EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

8.    The appeal was first listed for  substantive  hearing  on  18  October
    2016 before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brown.  At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing the appellant's representative  brought  to  the  attention  of
    Judge Brown the Appellant's relationship with a  British  citizen.  The
    record of proceedings is not clear, but the appellant's representatives
    state in their written submissions to this tribunal  that  Judge  Brown
    acceded to a joint application by the parties  for  an  adjournment  to
    enable the respondent to consider this issue.

9.    The appeal next came before Judge Cockrill (hereinafter  "the  judge")
    on 19 January 2017. The judge noted the history of the proceedings  and
    records at [24] that at the previous hearing the  respondent  "did  not
    give consent for that new matter to be considered." The  judge  however
    noted at [25] that, "Nonetheless, it would  appear  that  there  was  a
    joint application for an adjournment to enable that  new  issue  to  be
    considered by the Respondent." The judge proceeded  to  note  that  the
    respondent had failed to take any action since the last hearing and  he
    accordingly decided to proceed restricting the  issues  before  him  to
    that of long residence [27].  While  the  decision  is  silent  on  the
    applicable statutory framework, the appeal proceeded on the basis  that
    the old rules applied.

10.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant. The judge  was  satisfied
    of the appellant's residence in the UK from 1 January 2002  onwards  as
    this was confirmed by his medical records, and the issue boiled down to
    whether the appellant had established his residence from 1992 to  2002.
    While the judge observed the appellant was a minor when he  claimed  to
    have entered the UK in 1992, he concluded at [58]  that  the  "complete
    absence of satisfactory  evidence  from  anyone  to  confirm  that  the
    Appellant has been here does fundamentally undermine the credibility of
    the  Appellant's  case"  and  found  that   supporting   letters   were
    insufficient to prove his residence from 1992 to 2002 at [59].

11.   Accordingly, the judge found that the appellant  had  not  established
    that he had lived in the UK for a continuous period  of  14  years  and
    thus concluded that the requirements of paragraph 276B of the old Rules
    were not met. The judge  briefly  considered  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave on private life grounds pursuant to
    paragraph 276ADE of the new Rules or outside of the Rules  contrary  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

12.   In the grounds of appeal,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in
    excluding consideration of  the  appellant's  claim  under  EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM. It was further argued that the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    evidence was inadequate in relation to his claim under  paragraph  276B
    of the old Rules, and that, he failed to assess the  interference  with
    the  appellant's  family  life  with  his  British  citizen  spouse  in
    considering Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.   Permission to argue  these  grounds  was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 2 August 2017.

14.   The respondent was unable to file a Rule 24 response as  she  was  not
    in possession of the decision of the judge.

Consideration of the Issues

15.   I heard submissions from both representatives the detail of  which  is
    recorded in my record of proceedings. I have  taken  those  submissions
    into account together with the written submissions lodged by Mr Shah on
    behalf of the appellant. I consider that the judge  erred  in  law  and
    that his decision must  be  set  aside.  I  have  tarried  somewhat  in
    reaching a decision due to the troubling features of  this  case  which
    the parties have not addressed either before the judge or before me. In
    consequence, I consider the appropriate course is to remit  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on all issues. I reach  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.

16.   First, I consider the contention that the judge's decision to  proceed
    with the hearing involved  a  procedural  impropriety  giving  rise  to
    unfairness. I consider  this  ground  first  as  it  affects  all  that
    follows.

17.   As I stated earlier, by the time the appeal  was  listed  for  hearing
    the appellant's circumstances had changed in  that  he  had  married  a
    British citizen and the respondent and the tribunal  were  notified  of
    this change in the appellant's additional grounds  lodged  on  28  June
    2016. Mr Shah submitted that this  issue  was  highlighted  as  a  "new
    issue" before Judge Brown. There appears to be no dispute  between  the
    parties that this indeed was a "new issue" and that  consent  would  be
    required pursuant to section 85(5)  of  the  2002  Act  as  amended  by
    section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014 introduced on 20 October 2014.

18.   The question of whether the respondent did give consent for  this  new
    issue to be considered is, however, contradictory and unclear.

19.   Mr Shah submits that the respondent gave consent  before  Judge  Brown
    and the hearing was adjourned for the respondent to consider the issue.
    Mr Tufan referring to his file minutes submitted that consent  was  not
    given and this appears to accord with what the judge  (Judge  Cockrill)
    stated at [24], but this does not sit comfortably with what  he  stated
    with reference to the position before  Judge  Brown  at  [25],  namely,
    "that there was a joint application for an adjournment to  enable  that
    new issue to be considered by the Respondent."

20.   While the position before me is therefore unsatisfactory,  it  appears
    from what the judge stated at [25] that the mutual understanding of the
    parties was that consent was given and the appeal was adjourned for the
    respondent to consider the appellant's change in  circumstances.  Given
    the ambiguous references in the Decision as to whether or  not  consent
    was granted and the representations made before me,  I  cannot  exclude
    that as a possibility. That possibility feeds into two  errors.  First,
    the judge's decision to proceed with the hearing failed to consider the
    principles of fairness. While  the  judge  was  entitled  to  note  the
    respondent's lack of progress in considering this issue,  his  decision
    does not demonstrate that he considered whether it was fair to  proceed
    with the hearing when it appears that the respondent gave  consent,  or
    that any enquiry was made from the respondent to explain  her  lack  of
    progress.  In  the  circumstances,  I   consider   that   the   judge's
    consideration of whether it was appropriate to proceed was inadequate.

21.   Second, I consider  that  if  consent  had  been  given  the  lack  of
    progress did not preclude the judge from considering the issue  and  he
    erred in failing to do so. That failure, in turn, infects  the  judge's
    consideration under the new Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

22.   I further agree  with  Mr  Shah  that  the  judge's  consideration  of
    Article 8  was  inadequate  in  that  he  failed  to  factor  into  his
    assessment of proportionality the Respondent's delay  in  deciding  the
    application from 2007 to 2015. The delay is considerable and  I  cannot
    exclude the possibility that this may have made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome.

23.   I do not, however, accept Mr Shah's submissions that the  judge  erred
    in his consideration of the old Rules  in  the  manner  contended.  The
    grounds argue that the judge applied a higher standard of proof than  a
    balance of probabilities by requiring witness testimony to confirm  the
    appellant's residence prior to 2002. I consider that this submission is
    without merit. The judge was clearly aware of and applied  the  correct
    standard of proof. He was entitled  to  take  notice  of  the  lack  of
    witness testimony considering the letters  of  support  that  had  been
    adduced, which he considered, and the contention in the grounds that he
    did  not  to  do  so  is  incorrect.  I  consider  that  there  was  no
    irrationality in the judge's  approach  in  this  regard.  The  grounds
    further contend that the  judge  in  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    established his residence from 2002 and thereby had accrued 13 years, 6
    months and 15 days residence, erred in failing to apply the "near miss"
    principle. This challenge is also without merit as there  is  no  "near
    miss" principle under the Rules

24.   However, as I observed at the hearing, and following  some  discussion
    between the parties, it was agreed there was an obvious error  in  that
    if as the judge found the "clock started  in  2002",  by  the  date  of
    hearing the appellant had accrued 14 years under the old  Rules,  which
    the judge failed to acknowledge. If that was so, the parties  canvassed
    the view that the tribunal may be able to remake  the  decision  as  no
    public policy ground was taken by the respondent but, on reflection,  I
    am not satisfied that I should do so without  further  enquiry  as  the
    position is again unclear and contradictory. While Mr Tufan stated that
    there was no evidence that a Notice of liability for Removal  had  been
    served on the appellant, which would have the effect  of  stopping  the
    clock, he indicated that the respondent records  do  refer  to  such  a
    document. In contrast, the appellant's grounds and written  submissions
    clearly state that a Notice of liability for Removal was served on  the
    appellant on 16 July 2015. If that is the case, the effect would be  to
    stop the clock and the appellant would not have  accrued  14  years  by
    that date.

25.   In summary, I accept that the judge's decision is  vitiated  by  error
    of law for the reasons asseverated above  and  the  appeal  requires  a
    rehearing.

Decision

26.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
    error of law and is set aside. The judge's finding that  the  appellant
    has proved his residence from 2002 is preserved. The appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on all issues by a different
    judge.

Directions

(i)   The respondent is directed to clarify in writing  within  21  days  of
    receipt of this decision whether the appellant's marriage to a  British
    citizen constitutes a "new issue" and, if so, whether she gives consent
    to the new issue  being  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  If
    consent is not given she is to provide written reasons.

(ii)  If the respondent does consent she has a further 21 days to  file  and
    serve her response setting out her position on the new issue.

(iii)       The parties are to confirm whether a  notice  of  liability  for
    removal was served on/received by  the  appellant  within  21  days  of
    receipt of this Decision.

(iv)  Any further evidence relied upon by the parties  shall  be  filed  and
    served with the other side no later than 7 days prior to  the  date  of
    the hearing.

(v)   The appellant is to inform the  tribunal  whether  an  interpreter  is
    required for the rehearing within 21 days of receipt of this  Decision.



No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date: 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
