
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/27736/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 October 2017                     |     On 30 October 2017              |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                             Sibghatullah Hasmi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Iqbal of Counsel, Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Sibghatullah Hasmi is a citizen of Afghanistan.   He  was
    born on 10 February 1987.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse his application for further leave to remain.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal was allowed  on
    human rights grounds by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  (the  FTTJ)
    in a decision promulgated on 12 January 2017.  The grounds claimed  the
    FTTJ did not adequately reason why the decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law.  Further, that there is no authority for the  proposition
    that a decision which  the  FTTJ  believed  should  have  been  decided
    differently was made illegally, such that  the  FTTJ  made  a  material
    error of law.

 3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered the grounds of appeal and
    found that at [36]-[38] of her decision, the  FTTJ  was  "......  quite
    clearly referring to the respondent's failure to follow her own policy"
    such that the FTTJ adequately explained why the  respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

 4. A renewed  application  for  leave  to  appeal  was  submitted  by  the
    respondent and a decision made by an Upper Tribunal Judge on 29  August
    2017.  He observed that the FTTJ found that the  respondent's  decision
    should have been made differently, such that it was "not in  accordance
    with the law" and that  the  FTTJ  considered  that  nothing  else  was
    required.  The Upper Tribunal Judge found that the approach of the FTTJ
    was infected by unarguable legal error, material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds such that permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted on all grounds.

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Ms Iqbal submitted that the FTTJ considered the relevant policy at [27]-
    [28] of her decision.  Where the criminality thresholds did not  apply,
    a further period of discretionary leave ought  to  have  been  granted.
    The judge accepted at [29] that given the six month sentence, it  could
    not be classed as "particularly  serious".   At  [36]  -[37]  the  FTTJ
    concluded that the respondent failed to apply the policy.  Further, the
    only material change to the appellant's circumstances since  his  grant
    of leave was the index conviction.  The offence did not come within the
    restricted leave policy and the criminal threshold was not met  because
    the conviction was not of a particularly serious nature.

 6. Ms Iqbal submitted that the FTTJ's approach  was  correct.  Whilst  the
    grant of permission referred to the refusal  letter  having  considered
    the application on a discretionary basis, the refusal  failed  to  take
    into account the applicable policy to  the  appellant's  circumstances.
    [42] -[52] of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  appeared  to  consider
    paragraph 353B in force from 13 February 2012, however,  the  appellant
    in fact fell to be considered under the transitional  provisions,  that
    is, paragraph  395C which was in force at the time.

 7. Taking into account the case law, SC (Article 8 -  in  accordance  with
    the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056, AG and others (Policies; executive
    discretions; Tribunal powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082 and  R  (P  and
    others) [2017] EWCA Civ 321, the FTTJ was entitled  to  find  that  the
    decision  was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law",  sufficient   for
    demonstrating a breach of the appellant's Article  8  rights.   In  any
    case, the FTTJ went on to consider the correct policy and then analysed
    the appellant's circumstances including the impact of  his  criminality
    in relation to a further grant of leave.

 8. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds.  He submitted that the  FTTJ  failed
    to engage with part 5A of the 2002 Act.  Although she referred to S.117
    at [34] she failed to meaningfully engage  with  the  different  public
    interest considerations.  The FTTJ did not adequately  reason  why  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  There  was  no  authority
    for the proposition that a decision which the FTTJ believed should have
    been decided differently was made illegally.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9.  The  respondent  considered   the   appellant's   application   on   a
    discretionary basis.  It  was  concluded  that  no  single  factor  was
    considered favourable to the appellant's case.  That  was  due  to  his
    criminality and non-compliance in the United Kingdom.  See refusal [44]-
    [50].   Although  he  had  the  benefit  of  a  period  of   3   years'
    discretionary leave under paragraph 395C his  criminality  fell  to  be
    taken into account.

10. See Khanum (paragraph 353B) [2013] UKUT 00311 (IAC). See Headnote:

    "Paragraph 353B of HC395 is not designed to replace paragraph 395C.  In
    a case where there are no outstanding further  submissions  and  appeal
    rights are exhausted, the decision whether or not to carry out a review
    (within the scope of para 353B) is entirely a matter of  discretion  of
    the Secretary of State and is not justiciable."

11. The  FTTJ  erred  in  finding  the  respondent  did  not  consider  the
    application under the relevant policy.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to consider the application on a discretionary basis. This was
    not a situation where the FTTJ was entitled to find  the  decision  was
    "not in accordance with the law" pursuant to Article 8(2) and to  allow
    the appeal solely on that basis.

12. I do not accept Ms Iqbal's submission  that  the  FTTJ's  findings  and
    reasons  were  sufficient  to  satisfy  S.117B.   The  FTTJ  failed  to
    adequately reason why the decision was not in accordance with the  law.
    There is no authority for the proposition that  a  decision  which  the
    FTTJ believed should have been decided differently was made  illegally.



13. The judge fell into error  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds without proceeding to consider Razgar and S.117.   Contrary  to
    Ms Iqbal's submissions, the FTTJ did not meaningfully engage  with  the
    public interest considerations.  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC) does not assist the appellant in these circumstances.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and will be reheard de novo in the First-tier by a judge other than the
    FTTJ.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 23 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




