
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27810/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 3 August 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         Miss Ekta Kamleshbhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett sent  on  26  July  2016
    discussing her appeal against a decision made by the respondent  on  20
    July 2015 refusing her application for leave to remain.

2.   No one appeared for or on behalf of the appellant but a  fax  was  sent
    by her solicitors on 28 July 2017 stating that the appellant would  not
    be represented and was unable to  represent  herself.   They  requested
    that the case be dealt with  on  the  papers.   Having  considered  the
    circumstances I decided to proceed to hear the appeal in the absence of
    one of the parties.  I heard brief submissions from Mr Duffy.

3.   The appellant's ground is a singular one.  She contends that the  judge
    acted  unfairly  since  despite  the  appellant  sending  a  bundle  of
    documents including a witness statement,  the  judge  in  her  decision
    stated at paragraph 4 that "she did not submit a witness statement or a
    bundle of documents in support of her appeal".

4.    I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  has  suffered  procedural
    unfairness.  The appellant notified the Tribunal on 11  July  that  she
    did not want an oral hearing.  She did not  at  this  time  submit  any
    appellant's bundle.  In the event the  judge  did  not  deal  with  the
    appellant's case until the date it had originally been fixed  for  oral
    hearing, 12 July 2016, and the appellant's bundle was not forwarded  to
    the Tribunal until the day before, 11 July.  Production of  her  bundle
    was thus not in accordance with FtT directions for  the  submission  of
    further evidence or submissions.  Not only can the judge not be  blamed
    for determining  the  appeal  without  reference  to  a  late-submitted
    bundle, but I cannot discern any unfairness in the process.

5.   If I had found procedural unfairness I would have  found  an  error  of
    law regardless  of  the  materiality  of  the  evidence  on  which  the
    appellant sought to rely.  For completeness, however, I  shall  briefly
    consider the appellant's ground as regards whether the contents of  the
    appellant's bundle could have had any material impact  on  the  judge's
    decision.   In  my  judgment,  their  contents  do  not   advance   the
    appellant's case.  Her appeal was made on human rights grounds  and  to
    succeed she would have had to show that  the  decision  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate interference in her Article 8  rights.   However,  the
    judge's decision addressed the appellant's Article 8 circumstance  both
    within and outside the Immigration Rules.  The grounds wholly  fail  to
    identify any  error  in  that  assessment.   To  the  extent  that  the
    appellant's bundle raised an  issue  concerning  the  fairness  of  the
    respondent's earlier decision to curtail  her  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student, the appellant has provided no evidence to show that  she  ever
    received such a letter or that her leave was curtailed.  The  appellant
    contends in her witness statement that the respondent wrongly failed to
    send her a letter giving her 60 days in which to find a new educational
    provider.  The problem with that contention is that it was a matter for
    her to apply for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  with  the
    permitted period of her leave.  The only application  she  made  within
    that period was for leave to remain on the basis of family and  private
    life on Form FLR(O).  In such circumstances there was no obligation  on
    the respondent to consider extending her leave to remain as a student.

6.   For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge did not err in  law  and  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 2 August 2017
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








