
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27774/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Directions Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                       MRS Soreya Mohamed Ali RAMADAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Haji, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who  appealed  against  a  decision
    made on 20 June 2014 to refuse a variation of her leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  She subsequently appealed and following a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross and in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2015 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wylie dismissed her appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  basis  that,  amongst  other
    things, the judge failed to give proper adequate reasons  for  refusing
    to grant an adjournment.  The position is dealt with  at  paragraphs  3
    and 4 of the judge's decision which state:-

         "3.  The appellant attended the hearing.  She was not  represented.
             She stated that she had thought that she was attending a  Home
             Office interview and it was only  yesterday  that  the  person
             helping her had told her  the  appointment  was  the  Tribunal
             hearing.  She asked that the hearing be adjourned.  She wanted
             to lodge additional papers.

         4.   It was not clear what these additional  papers  would  be.   I
             considered that it would be  fair  and  in  the  interests  of
             justice that the hearing proceed, but that if it appeared that
             further documents were available and would assist the process,
             the case could  be  adjourned  part-heard.   In  the  event  I
             considered there were no  documents  which  would  assist  the
             court further in reaching a decision on the appeal."

 3. On 3 July 2015 Judge P J M Hollingworth gave his reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal.  They state:-

         "1.  An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to  the  scope
             of the consideration of whether there would  be  a  breach  of
             Article 8.  It is arguable that the Judge has not set  out  an
             adequate analysis of the criteria to  be  considered  and  the
             application of  Section  117  given  that  the  child  of  the
             Appellant and her husband are both British citizens.

         2.   An arguable error of law has also arisen in  relation  to  the
             refusal of the adjournment. The Appellant  was  unrepresented.
             The circumstances are set out by the Judge at paragraph 3.  At
             paragraph 4 the Judge refers to it not being  clear  what  the
             additional papers would be.  At the conclusion of paragraph  4
             the Judge states that in the event he considered there were no
             documents which would assist the Court further in  reaching  a
             decision on the appeal.  This is  a  clear  reference  to  not
             adjourning the case part-heard. The reasoning of the Judge  as
             to whether or not any documents of potential relevance existed
             remains unclear in the decision.  An  arguable  error  of  law
             arises in this respect given the need for fairness."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me this afternoon.

 5. I took account of the totality of the  material  including  a  skeleton
    argument prepared by Ms Haji for the purpose of  today's  hearing.   So
    far as the first ground is concerned, namely the failure  to  grant  an
    adjournment, she argued that this brought about a procedural unfairness
    and was unreasonable in all the circumstances.  It was necessary in the
    interests of justice that the appellant  be  able  to  file  additional
    documentary evidence and witness statements to rebut  the  reasons  for
    refusal and instruct a legal representative to appear  on  her  behalf.
    She relied on the authority of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 6. In responding to this first ground Ms Savage argued that at paragraph 4
    the  judge  had  properly  given  consideration  to   the   adjournment
    application and having considered that she was unable to grant  it  she
    rightly indicated that she was able, if necessary, to "go  part-heard".
    In so doing she had taken account of the "speculative"  nature  of  the
    appellant's application and the overriding objective  contained  within
    the Procedure Rules.   She  also  relied  on  guidance  issued  by  the
    President of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
    adjournments.

 7. It is important to emphasise that before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant was unrepresented.  Also that she appears to  have  initially
    laboured under the misapprehension that she was attending a Home Office
    interview and it was only the previous day  to  the  hearing  that  the
    "person helping her" had told her that the appointment was the Tribunal
    hearing.  In those circumstances I find that the judge  has  materially
    erred in the refusal of the  adjournment  application  she  made.   Any
    party's right, here the appellant's, to a fair hearing is paramount and
    here, albeit that the judge took into account the overriding objective,
    she has erred in her application of it to the situation that  prevailed
    before  her.   The  appellant's  right  to  a  fair  hearing  has  been
    prejudiced by the fettering of her  ability  to  provide  documentation
    that was pertinent to it and which may have  been  persuasive  when  it
    came for the judge to assess the evidence.  In the circumstances  there
    has been a procedural unfairness which amounts to a material  error  of
    law.

 8. Having indicated my view on the first ground the consideration  of  the
    other ground became a redundant  exercise  and  both  parties  were  in
    agreement that where the appellant had been deprived of a fair  hearing
    the appropriate course would be for me to find that a material error of
    law exists within the judge's decision and that it should be set  aside
    in its entirety.  All parties were agreed that, in  the  circumstances,
    it was appropriate for the appeal to  be  considered  and  all  matters
    determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any other judge aside from Judge Wylie.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26 August 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal is to be heard at Hatton Cross hearing centre.

 2. The time estimate is two hours.

 3. The Tribunal is to provide an Arabic (Egyptian/Sudanese) interpreter.


Signed   Date 26 August 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

