
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th  March 2016                           |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR MUHAMMAD TABISH IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    ("the Secretary of State")  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which allowed the appeal of Mr Iqbal  ("the  claimant").   The
    claimant had appealed against the respondent's  decision  taken  on  19
    June 2014 to refuse to vary his leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student and
    to remove him by directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.  The Secretary of State had  considered  that
    the claimant did  not  meet  the  requirements  for  30  points  for  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS) because the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn by the sponsor.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The claimant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 September 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Roopnarine-
    Davies allowed the claimant's appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the claimant did not know that the college's licence was suspended
    and did not have an opportunity of enrolling at another college by  the
    date of the decision.  The judge found that the claimant's case was  on
    fours with the case of Patel (Revocation of Sponsor Licence - Fairness)
    India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) ("Patel").   The  judge  found  that  the
    claimant was in possession of valid CAS from an approved sponsor at the
    time of the application in April 2014 and that fairness  required  that
    the claimant be given  an  opportunity  to  apply  to  another  sponsor
    college.  The judge allowed the appeal to the limited extent  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.   The
    judge directed that any fresh decision was not to be made for a  period
    of 60 days from the date of the decision.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 3. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in finding that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  acted
    fairly. It is asserted that  the  claimant  was  not  disadvantaged  by
    matters of fairness falling within the remit of the case of  Patel  and
    was not therefore entitled to 60 days' leave.  On 28 January 2016 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted the Secretary of State permission to
    appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of Submissions

The Secretary of State's Submissions

 4. The Secretary of State asserts that the claimant did not submit a valid
    CAS with his application and therefore did not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 117 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of
    State asserts that  the  CAS  had  been  withdrawn  by  the  claimant's
    sponsor. The Home Office had not suspended  or  revoked  the  sponsor's
    licence and then not informed the claimant.  It is not clear  therefore
    what issues of fairness apply. It is asserted that the circumstances in
    this case do not fall within the remit of the case of  Patel  and  that
    the Tribunal therefore erred in law by finding that the respondent  had
    not acted fairly.

 5. Mr Tufan submitted that when the CAS was checked by  the  Secretary  of
    State it had already been withdrawn and that  this  was  prior  to  any
    suspension or revocation of the sponsor college's licence.   He  relied
    on the case of EK (Ivory Coast) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 and the case of  Kaur  v  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  13  ("Kaur").   He
    submitted that the EK case was determinative of  the  issue.   In  that
    case the claimant's CAS had been withdrawn  by  the  college  and  even
    though that withdrawal was an  administrative  error  the  court  still
    dismissed the appeal.  The Secretary of State was not a party  to  what
    had happened.  He relied on paragraphs 25, 28 and 32 and submitted that
    the PBS system's integrity should not be disturbed by  matters  outside
    the Secretary of State's control.  He asserted that the case of Naved v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  UKUT  14  (IAC)  is
    often relied upon by appellants. However, at paragraphs 39 and  40  the
    court in EK disagreed with the Naved case.  He submitted that the  case
    of Kaur at paragraphs 40 and 42 sets out that in the  case  of  EK  the
    matter was correctly decided.



 6. In reply Mr Tufan  submitted  that  there  was  no  nexus  between  the
    suspension and the withdrawal of the CAS.  Therefore,  whether  or  not
    the subsequent  suspension  occurred  around  the  same  time  was  not
    material.  He submitted that in EK it was concluded that the Naved case
    was wrongly decided.




 7. Mr Tufan submitted that if there was no valid CAS  the  claimant  could
    not have made an application.  The fact was that  before  the  decision
    was made by the Secretary of State the CAS had been  withdrawn  by  the
    college.

Submissions of the Claimant

 8. Mr Bellara submitted that although it may appear  that  the  judge  has
    misapplied Patel the judge did in fact make a  correct  application  of
    the case.  He referred to paragraph 4 where, he  submitted,  the  judge
    considered all the evidence.  He submitted that we do not know the date
    when the college was first under suspension.  We know that the  college
    lost its licence in February. However,  the  college  would  have  been
    under suspension prior to that time.  At  paragraph  6  the  judge  was
    entitled to make the inference from the  evidence  that  the  college's
    suspension was taken by the respondent at the same time as the  refusal
    decision.  On that basis the claimant's case did fall within Patel.  He
    submitted that the inference was open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    to make from the evidence.  He submitted that it was very unclear  when
    the suspension came into force.  He submitted that it was open  to  the
    respondent to make a further decision and that  the  judge  had  simply
    remitted the matter for a properly reasoned decision to  be  made.   He
    asserted that the claimant was simply unaware that  the  CAS  had  been
    suspended.  He submitted  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  have
    adjourned the matter but, by directing that any fresh  decision  should
    not be made for a period of 60 days, in essence the Tribunal has  asked
    the Secretary of State to re-make the decision.

 9. Mr Bellara submitted that at paragraph 6 the Tribunal Judge found  that
    the claimant was in possession of a  valid  CAS  at  the  time  of  the
    application.  It was only when the Secretary  of  State  conducted  the
    checking service on 19 June 2014 that it was ascertained that  the  CAS
    had been withdrawn.

Discussion

10. The First-tier Tribunal judge appears to have proceeded by  considering
    the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  sponsor  college's  licence  was
    suspended "from the list of approved sponsors by the respondent  during
    the time it was considering the application" or "at the  same  time  as
    the refusal decision".  The judge also appears to have considered  that
    the claimant "first learnt that the college's licence  was  (sic)  from
    the refusal letter was not challenged".

11. The judge considered that the facts of this case were on all fours with
    the case of Patel.

12. The Secretary of State was unable to confirm at the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  the  date  on  which  the  college's  licence  was
    suspended. The licence was revoked on 6 February  2015  some  8  months
    after the date of the Secretary of State's decision.  The Secretary  of
    State was not able to confirm at the hearing before me  the  date  that
    the college's licence was suspended.  Mr  Bellara  submitted  that  the
    judge entitled to  make  the  inference  from  the  evidence  that  the
    college's suspension was taken by the respondent at the  same  time  as
    the refusal decision. The judge has not indicated why the evidence  led
    to such an inference. Although it logically follows  that  the  licence
    would have been suspended at some  time  prior  to  the  licence  being
    revoked there is nothing in the evidence that would  indicate  that  it
    was at the same time or during the time  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    considering the claimant's application. The evidence would suggest that
    the college's licence had not been suspended as  at  the  date  of  the
    decision as there is no mention in the reasons for  refusal  letter  of
    the College's licence having being suspended. Further,  the  judge  was
    incorrect to conclude that the claimant first learnt of the  suspension
    from the refusal letter as clearly there was no mention in that  letter
    of a suspension of the college's licence. The  evidence  was  that  the
    claimant first learnt of the  suspension  was  after  he  received  the
    refusal letter when he spoke to the college administration  (claimant's
    witness statement dated 27/8/15 paragraph 4).

13. The judge has failed to engage at all with the fact that the claimant's
    CAS was withdrawn by the college and that this was the sole reason  for
    the refusal of his application.

14. The reasons for refusal letter sets out:

         "The Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  Checking  Service  was
         checked on 19 June  2014  and  it  confirmed  that  the  CAS,  with
         reference number  E4G2PY8D16JOM6,  that  you  submitted  with  your
         application has been withdrawn by the sponsor. As such you fail  to
         meet the requirements of paragraph 117(b)  of  appendix  A  to  the
         Immigration Rules and therefore you are  not  in  possession  of  a
         valid CAS."

15. The sole reason for refusing the application was on the  basis  of  the
    withdrawal of the CAS by the college. The withdrawal  of  the  CAS  was
    initiated by the college. It was  not  argued  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's was incorrect in her assertion that the CAS  was  withdrawn  by
    the college. Whether or not the Secretary of  State  was  investigating
    the college at that time, I accept Mr Tufan's submission that there was
    no nexus  between  any  investigation  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  The decision was based on the withdrawal of the CAS  by  the
    college, not as a result of anything done by the  Secretary  of  State.
    Any unfairness to the claimant could only have arisen as  a  result  of
    the college's actions. The instant case is not therefore on  all  fours
    with the case of Patel.  The judge did not consider the case of EK.  In
    EK the claimant's CAS had been withdrawn by the college by mistake.  It
    is not known in this case whether or not  the  claimant's  college  had
    mistakenly withdrawn the CAS or had done so for good  reason.  Even  if
    the CAS had been withdrawn by mistake as held in EK  the  Secretary  of
    State is not responsible for  any  ensuing  unfairness.  The  Court  of
    Appeal held:

         "25. However, in my judgment, there was no breach by the  Secretary
         of State of her public law duty to act fairly  in  considering  the
         Appellant's application for leave to remain. The Secretary of State
         is not responsible for the general unfairness which  the  Appellant
         has suffered. That is the result of actions  and  omissions  by  St
         Stephen's. There is no basis on which any of the decisions  of  the
         Secretary of State, the FTT and the Upper Tribunal can be  impugned
         as unlawful...

         56. But the question whether the Secretary of  State  breached  her
         common law duty to act fairly  depends  critically  upon  what  her
         officials might be supposed to have known or considered likely,  at
         the time when, probably shortly before  making  the  decision,  the
         withdrawal of the CAS letter became apparent. At that stage neither
         they nor, probably, anyone at the College itself was aware  that  a
         mistake had been  made.  As  Sales  LJ  points  out,  the  ordinary
         expectation of the Secretary of State  on  becoming  aware  of  the
         withdrawal of a CAS letter would be that the sponsoring college had
         done so for good  reason  and,  I  would  add,  duly  informed  the
         applicant student of its decision  to  do  so.  A  cancellation  by
         mistake, coupled with a failure to  inform  the  applicant  student
         would, I would  have  thought,  reasonably  be  regarded  by  those
         charged with the operation of the PBS scheme as a rare occurrence."

16. The judge has erred by failing to approach the case on the  basis  that
    the reason for the decision was solely  based  on  the  fact  that  the
    college had withdrawn the claimant's CAS.  There was no  nexus  between
    the Secretary of State's decision and any  suspension  of  the  sponsor
    college's licence. The judge therfore  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    decision was on all fours with the case of Patel. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained material errors of  law.  I  re-make  the
    decision. For the reasons set out above there was no unfairness on  the
    part of the Secretary of State in refusing the claimant's  application.
    The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State stands.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision  of  the  Secretary
of State stands.

I  have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.  Having
considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
necessary to make an anonymity direction.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

