
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/27013/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2017                   |       On 11 October 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                        mr MD NAZRUL ISLAM CHOWDHURY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Harrington promulgated on 5 December 2016 against  the  decision
      of the respondent dated 26 June  2015  refusing  his  application  for
      further leave to  remain  as  a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
      immigration rules and under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
      Hollingworth stating  that  it  is  arguable  that  in  light  of  the
      credibility findings made by the Judge that  insufficient  weight  was
      attached to the matrix of factors derived from the  evidence  provided
      by the appellant. It is arguable that the Judge attached  insufficient
      weight to the availability or otherwise of family support on return to
      Bangladesh. It is arguable that  the  proportionality  assessment  has
      been affected given the juxtaposition  between  the  contents  of  the
      immigration rules and consideration of whether there would be a breach
      of Article 8 outside the rules. It is arguable  that  the  Judge  fell
      into error in construing the question of leave in the context  of  the
      effect of the service or otherwise of a notice of curtailment.


   3. Judge Harrington in his decision, made the following findings which  I
      summarise. The issues in this appeal are EX 1  and,  276  ADE  of  the
      immigration rules and Article 8 outside them. The  appellant's  course
      of study in the United Kingdom was hospitality and tourism.  His  visa
      was extended to study business management but his course  was  revoked
      in around October 2014.  The  appellant  tried  to  find  a  different
      college but did not get the 60-day  letter  from  the  respondent.  He
      tried other universities but  they  were  too  expensive.  He  stopped
      studying and has spent time with his wife and continues  to  study  on
      his own using books that he  has  bought  and  on  the  Internet.  His
      parents were upset and angry that his college had closed.


   4. The appellant's parents do not accept his marriage as they had a  plan
      for him to marry someone else. He spoke to them when he had his  civil
      marriage and tried again a few days later  but  they  have  refuse  to
      forgive him. He has not  spoken  to  his  parents  since  the  end  of
      December 2014. He met his wife on 7 November at a birthday party. They
      could not live together before marriage due to their religion so  they
      married on 12 November.


   5. The appellant has family in the United Kingdom, his maternal uncle and
      cousin. They have been helping him with his living  costs  because  he
      has been unemployed. His wife and his friends also help him  with  his
      living costs. He does not have anywhere to  live  in  Bangladesh.  His
      father will not accept him with his wife. If given permission to  live
      in the United Kingdom he could easily get a job but if he goes back to
      Bangladesh after seven years, he has nowhere to go.


   6. In this case there  are  none  of  the  cultural,  language  or  other
      difficulties caused by relocating to an unfamiliar country.  Both  the
      appellant and the sponsor grew up in Bangladesh,  speak  the  language
      and have a familiarity with the culture. The appellant and his sponsor
      both allege that they no longer have  meaningful  contact  with  their
      family in Bangladesh and that their families including  the  sponsor's
      family in the United Kingdom would not assist them to  integrate  into
      Bangladesh.


   7. It is not accepted that if the appellant and his sponsor  will  return
      to Bangladesh their entire families would simply stand  by  and  watch
      them fall into destitution. It is noted that the sponsor claims to  be
      very close to her family in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  appellant
      claims to be financially assisted by his family in the United Kingdom.
      Therefore, there would be no reason why the support  from  the  family
      would not continue.


   8. The Judge however  was  far  from  convinced  that  support  would  be
      necessary to the appellant and his  sponsor.  The  appellant  and  his
      sponsor are both young fit and able to work. The  appellant  has  been
      able  to  relocate  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  his  own  and   find
      accommodation and, when he was permitted to do so, to find employment.
      He can use the same skills together with the  education  that  he  has
      received this country to establish himself  in  Bangladesh.  That  may
      cause some disruption but  it  cannot  be  considered  close  to  very
      significant obstacles or significant hardship.


   9. For the appellant not to have face  to  come  face  contact  with  his
      friends and family in the United  Kingdom  does  not  amount  to  very
      significant difficulties of very  significant  hardship.  The  medical
      issues of the sponsor also cannot be characterised as very significant
      difficulties or very significant hardship. The  information  available
      does not give details of treatment that the sponsor  is  receiving  in
      the United Kingdom. There is also no evidence as to the  prospects  of
      success or the availability of treatment in Bangladesh and  there  are
      too many uncertainties to conclude that relocating to Bangladesh would
      make  a  significant  difference  to  the  prospects  of  the  sponsor
      conceiving the child. It is accepted that there would be a  disruption
      and some difficulties for the appellant and his sponsor in  relocating
      to Bangladesh but they would not amount to insurmountable obstacles.


  10. In respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  it
      is accepted that the appellant has family life in the  United  Kingdom
      with the sponsor and a private life encompassing his friendships build
      up during his time in the United Kingdom.  It  is  accepted  that  the
      decision of the respondent does interfere with the appellant's private
      and family life and that the  interference  is  arguably  sufficiently
      serious to potentially engage Article 8. However, the interference  is
      a  consequence  of  a  lawful  decision  and  accordingly,  it  is  in
      accordance with the law. The question to be answered  is  whether  the
      interference is proportionate.


  11. On the issue of proportionality, the entirety of the circumstances  of
      the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  been   considered   including
      provisions of section 117A of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002. In all the circumstances of the appellant  and  his  sponsor
      the decision is proportionate.


  12. The respondent's public interest in maintaining effective  immigration
      control and the economic well-being  of  the  country  must  be  given
      weight. The appellant's private life was established at a time he  was
      in the United Kingdom precariously. The appellant's family  life  with
      his sponsor was establish at a time when he only had limited leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom and he knew his leave was  liable  to  be
      curtailed.


  13. The appellant and  his  sponsor  chose  to  marry  incredibly  quickly
      knowing that they may not be able  to  live  together  in  the  United
      Kingdom and they must bear some responsibility for the consequences of
      their actions. The appellant would not have significant difficulty  in
      integrating into Bangladesh. The  sponsor  can  choose  to  return  to
      Bangladesh with the appellant and if she did, the  parties  would  not
      face very significant difficulties of very significant hardship  doing
      so.


  14. The sponsor could also return to  the  United  Kingdom  to  visit  her
      family and friends. If the sponsor  chose  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom, she could  communicate  with  him  through  modern  means  of
      communication and family visits to Bangladesh. The appellant's friends
      and wider family in the United Kingdom can keep in touch with  him  by
      telephone and other modern means of communication. The  appellant  can
      speak English and  has  been  largely  financially  independent  since
      arriving in the United Kingdom, albeit slightly precariously as he  is
      reliant on others to  survive,  but  these  factors  do  not  tip  the
      balance.


  15. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant states the following  which  I
      summarise. By way of background, it was EX  1  and  Article  8  appeal
      before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  determine.  The  respondent
      accepted  that  the  appellant  is  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with his  settled  spouse  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      respondent refused the application on the  bases  there  would  be  no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  United
      Kingdom. Therefore, there were two legal  issues  for  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge to consider  and  he  made  an  error  in  his  initial
      approach when recording issues under appeal at paragraph 2-4 where  it
      is stated that it was an appeal under Article 8 alone.


  16. At paragraph 24 the Judge made a further error  when  concluding  that
      the respondent refused the appeal based on Article 8 alone.  This  was
      not the case as can be seen in the respondent's refusal letter.  Since
      the introduction of Appendix FM on 9 July 2012 including EX  1,  there
      has been many guideline cases which makes it clear  that  firstly  the
      decision maker must consider the immigration rules which in this  case
      is EX1 and if not satisfied as endorsed  in  the  case  of   SS  Congo
      [2015] EWCA Civ 387 where the Court  of  Appeal  said  that  that  the
      appeal must be first heard under the immigration rules and then go  to
      the  second  ground  under  Article  8  to  see  whether   there   are
      compassionate grounds to succeed.


  17. At paragraph 25, the Judge made  adverse  credibility  findings.  With
      respect, this is not based on correct recording  of  the  evidence  in
      relation to if the  appellant  worked.  At  paragraph  26,  the  Judge
      considered if the appellant could work on return  to  Bangladesh.  The
      finding was not based on detailed reasons that the appellant gave.  It
      was the Judge who asked many direct questions to the appellant. In one
      such question as to whether he could do a labour job on his return  to
      Bangladesh which is when  his  inability  to  lift  heavy  things  was
      mentioned. The appellant gave evidence that  if  given  permission  to
      stay in the United Kingdom, he could undertake a job as a waiter in  a
      restaurant of which there is a high demand in the United Kingdom.


  18. At paragraph 27, in terms of his teaching job on return to  Bangladesh
      the Judge ignored this evidence  that  in  the  last  nine  years  the
      curriculum has changed and a new government new job  is  not  possible
      after the age of 30 years.


  19. At paragraph 28 the Judge failed to balance  reasons  with  other  key
      evidence given by the appellant. This was that his mother is aged  and
      suffering from illness diagnosed with cancer  which  was  one  of  the
      reasons they travelled to Bangladesh to see his  mother.  His  sponsor
      came to the United Kingdom as a spouse in 1986  and  ever  since  that
      time, the United Kingdom has been her home country. Her  two  children
      do not go to Bangladesh as they were born in the  United  Kingdom  and
      work here. They do not have a family  home  in  Bangladesh  and  their
      relatives are not able or willing to help them on return.


  20. If the Judge had applied the test in EX 1, a different decision  would
      have been made. The  Judge  at  paragraph  30  explained  the  correct
      approach in law but at paragraph 28 applied  paragraph  276  ADE  (iv)
      test which was not identified as an issue to be considered.  In  terms
      of section 117 A and B the Judge took a correct approach. He failed to
      consider the fact that the appellant demonstrated knowledge of English
      and since his marriage  his  wife  has  been  supporting  him  without
      recourse to public funds. On the evidence, he was able and willing  to
      undertake employment.


  21. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  as  to  whether
      there is an error of law in her decision.

Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the decision

  22. The complaint against the Judge  is  that  he  did  not  consider  the
      appellant's appeal under the right immigration rules. At paragraph  24
      the judge stated that the appeal was based on the  appellant's  family
      and private life in the United Kingdom under Article 8 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights even though the respondent in  her  reasons
      for refusal letter  considered  the  claim  under  EX  1  (b).  It  is
      suggested that had the Judge considered the appellant's  appeal  under
      the EX 1 of the immigration rules,  it  would  have  made  a  material
      difference to the outcome of the appeal.  However,  I  note  that  the
      Judge stated that the issues in this appeal are EX 1 and, 276  ADE  of
      the immigration rules and Article 8 outside them. Therefore, the Judge
      was aware that he must apply EX 1 to the appeal.


  23. The judge in his decision stated that he does not find that there  are
      insurmountable obstacles in the way of  the  appellant  and  his  wife
      resettling in Bangladesh and found that the appellant  does  not  meet
      the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (vi) of the  immigration  rules.
      It is argued by the appellant that the Judge  should  have  considered
      his appeal  under  EX  1  which  requires  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with a British citizen sponsor  the  respondent  has  not
      disputed.


  24. It is correct that the respondent did not deny that the  appellant  is
      in the genuine and subsisting relationship with a  partner  who  is  a
      British citizen and settled in the United Kingdom. Therefore, for  the
      purposes  of  EX  1  (b),  the   Judge   should   have   applied   the
      "insurmountable obstacles test  which  means,  "the  very  significant
      difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner in
      continuing their family life together outside the United  Kingdom  and
      which could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for
      the applicant or their partner."


  25. Throughout the decision, this is the test applied by the Judge to  the
      facts of the case. The  Judge  gave  proper  and  cogent  reasons  for
      finding that the appellant's return to Bangladesh with his wife  would
      not amount to insurmountable obstacles or as he said very  significant
      difficulties or very significant hardship. The Judge did consider  the
      appellant's evidence in its entirety before  reaching  his  conclusion
      that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
      in Bangladesh.


  26. The Judge did consider that the appellant has been in this country for
      nine years but said that does  not  mean  that  the  appellant  cannot
      return to Bangladesh, the country of his origin. He also said that the
      appellant's wife originates from Bangladesh and therefore there  would
      be no problems of culture and language. He also  considered  that  the
      appellant does not have  a  home  to  return  to  but  said  that  the
      appellant has used a great deal of resourcefulness and settled in  the
      United Kingdom and he can  find  a  job  in  Bangladesh  even  without
      assistance from relatives.


  27. He also considered the  appellant's  wives  relatives  and  two  adult
      children in the United Kingdom but said that the children were  adults
      and her relationship with her children and family  can  continue  from
      outside the United Kingdom. He also considered the  appellant's  wives
      uterine fibroids for which she underwent an operation. The Judge  said
      that there was not sufficient evidence to  show  that  she  could  not
      continue with her treatment, if any, in  Bangladesh.  The  appellant's
      grounds of appeal merely amount to a quarrel with the decision made by
      the Judge.


  28. In  respect  of  Article  8,  the  Judge  correctly  stated  that  the
      respondent's public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
      control and the economic well-being  of  the  country  must  be  given
      weight. The appellant's private life was established at a time he  was
      in the United Kingdom precariously. The appellant's family  life  with
      his sponsor was establish at a time when he only had limited leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom and he knew his leave was  liable  to  be
      curtailed. Even if his leave was not due to be curtailed,  he  was  in
      this country as a student and did not leave the country when he was no
      longer studying. He disingenuously claims that he continued  to  study
      by buying his own books. The Judge correctly noted that the  appellant
      and his wife married very quickly when they knew  that  the  appellant
      had no immigration status and  must  be  held  responsible  for  their
      actions. The appellant's presence  in  the  country  has  always  been
      precarious because he is subject to immigration control the Judge  was
      entitled to give it limited weight.


  29. Even if there has been a confusion as to the correct immigration  rule
      as to whether it was 276 ADE or EX 1, the Judge  applied  the  correct
      test,  gave  correct  reasons  and  ultimately  came  to   the   right
      conclusion. I find a differently constituted Tribunal will not come to
      a different result. Any perceived error is not a material error in the
      circumstances of this appeal. I find no perversity in the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal such as it should be set aside.


  30. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant states that his  wife  is  not
      working due to the operation that she had for fibroids  which  is  why
      she is not able to support his application to return to Bangladesh  as
      her spouse. That is not reason enough for the appellant to be  granted
      leave to remain in this country because it is open for the appellant's
      wife to join him in Bangladesh or remain in the  United  Kingdom.  His
      wife also has the choice to find employment such as to enable  her  to
      sponsor the appellant from Bangladesh, as her spouse.


  31. The Judge considered all the evidence in this appeal and was  entitled
      to find that the appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules or any exceptions  therein  and  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed by                         Dated this 8th day of October 2017

A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appellant's appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no  fee
award.




