
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27670/2013
                                                               IA/27679/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th October 2014                        |On 20th November 2014          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                MR DANUSHKA RUWAN KUMARA PERERA KIRULAPANAGE
               MRS IMALSHI DHAMSARA SAKALASURIYA APPUHAMILAGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Professor W Rees (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants' appeals against  decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave and to remove them by way of directions under section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 were dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe in  a  determination  promulgated  on  26th
    February  2014.   That  decision  was  set  aside  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 28th August 2014.  On 7th October this year, the appeals
    were remade by the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellants relied upon Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  first
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in 2004.  His wife
    arrived in September that year and a son was born here to the couple in
    the summer of 2011.  All three  family  members  are  citizens  of  Sri
    Lanka.  The Secretary of State refused to vary  the  first  appellant's
    leave in the light of his conviction, on 28th October 2011, for driving
    with excess  alcohol  in  his  blood.   This  led  to  refusal  of  his
    application under paragraph 245CD(a) of the  rules  and  to  a  similar
    decision in relation to his  wife,  the  second  appellant.   Paragraph
    245CD  was  deleted  from  the  rules  after  the  appellant  made  his
    application in May 2012.  By the date of the adverse decisions on  17th
    June 2013, paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of the rules was engaged.   The  first
    appellant's conviction was unspent and the rules provided that leave to
    remain was to be refused where a person had, within the 24 months prior
    to the date on which the application was decided, been convicted of  an
    offence for which he or she received a non-custodial sentence or  other
    out of court disposal.

3.   The appellants relied upon the bundle of  documents  prepared  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  This included witness statements made  by
    them.  The first appellant, Mr  Kirulapanage,  drew  attention  to  his
    immigration history.  He and his  wife  were  employed  and  the  first
    appellant had been lawfully present  as  a  student  and  as  a  highly
    skilled migrant.  The application he made in 2012  was  for  indefinite
    leave and he was, by then, employed as a Customer Service Manager.   He
    also derived an income from self-employment.  The only basis  on  which
    his application was refused was his unspent conviction.  The  appellant
    declared the conviction in his application and had at no time sought to
    hide anything from the Secretary of State.  He regretted  the  offence,
    which was totally out of character.  In the more than nine hears  since
    his arrival in the United Kingdom, he and his wife established  private
    and family life here, completing degrees from  recognised  universities
    and paying taxes and National Insurance contributions  while  employed.
    Not only is the first appellant a qualified engineer, he also  provides
    private tuition in mathematics for GCSE and A Level students.

4.    The  second  appellant's   witness   statement   was   similar.    Mrs
    Appuhamilage has worked part-time since her son's birth.

The Hearing

5.   The first appellant gave evidence and adopted  his  witness  statement.
    In answer to questions from Ms Vidyadharan, he said that he arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 17th September 2004.  Initially,  he  planned  to
    return after completing his degree studies.  He then decided to seek to
    remain here.  He  completed  his  degree  in  2005  and  found  a  work
    placement.  He was able to obtain a work permit and became eligible  to
    settle after five years in that capacity.  He established himself as  a
    teacher and private tutor and wished to remain to develop  his  career.
    His father remained in Sri Lanka but he was not  sure  precisely  where
    his brother and sister were.  He had a sister in  Dubai.   His  brother
    was planning to go abroad.  He was last in touch about  eight  or  nine
    months ago as he was busy with the appeal and with his job and  family.
    His father lived alone in Sri Lanka.

6.   The first appellant said that his wife's parents remained in Sri  Lanka
    and she had a sister there and another sister studying  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His conviction for drink driving was on  20th  October  2011.
    Their son was now 3 years and 2 months old and at nursery.   The  first
    appellant said that he worked about 90 percent of his time as  a  tutor
    and the remainder in Ladbrokes, working part-time.  There  was  no  re-
    examination.

7.   The second appellant gave evidence and adopted her  witness  statement.
    In cross-examination, she said that her parents remained in Sri  Lanka.
    Her sister was in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  husband  worked  as  an
    electrical engineer and also taught A Level Maths.   There was no  re-
    examination.

8.   In submissions,  Ms  Vidyadharan  said  that  the  appellant  had  been
    present in the United Kingdom for over ten years, following his arrival
    on 17th September 2004.  However, he could not rely on  paragraph  276B
    because of the unspent conviction, engaging  sub-paragraph  (iii).   It
    was also clear that neither appellant could succeed under  Appendix  FM
    and although  it  appeared  from  the  skeleton  argument  prepared  by
    Professor Rees that reliance was placed upon paragraph 276ADE,  it  was
    clear that neither appellant could show no ties to Sri Lanka, as family
    members lived there.  The Secretary of State did not accept that  their
    ties have been severed.  The family could re-adjust on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Their son, now 3 years old, would be  returned  with  them,  so
    that the family unit would remain intact.

9.   Ms Vidyadharan said that the correct approach was set out  in  Gulshan.
    There were no arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
    rules and no insurmountable obstacles to the  family's  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  The  appellants  had  been  present  here  with  limited  leave
    throughout, initially as a  student  in  the  first  appellant's  case.
    There  were  no  unjustifiably  harsh   or   compelling   circumstances
    preventing return to Sri Lanka.

10.  Professor Rees said that the  first  appellant  would  clearly  qualify
    under paragraph 276B, were it not for the  conviction,  which  was  not
    spent yet.  It was sub-paragraph (iii) that was the  problem.   It  was
    clear from decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  and  MM  that  an
    Article 8 assessment ought to be made outside the immigration rules, in
    particular cases.  The appellants had a  child,  whose  best  interests
    fell to be assessed.  Professor Rees accepted that  the  absence  of  a
    removal decision made in relation to the appellants'  son  did  not  in
    fact amount to a barrier to removal of the entire family.  Relevant  in
    the Article 8 assessment was the family's presence here  for  over  ten
    years now.  It was excessive to  expect  the  ties  built  here  to  be
    abandoned on the basis of the first appellant's conviction.

11.  In considering the position if  the  appellants  were  to  apply  today
    under  the  settlement  route,  Professor  Rees  said  that   paragraph
    322(1C)(iv) would apply, this being the only barrier to success in  the
    application.  Ms Vidyadharan agreed with this proposition, saying  that
    the conviction would be relevant in this context.  She said  that  also
    relevant would be the Secretary  of  State's  guidance.   Case  workers
    should refuse an application for indefinite leave to remain made on  or
    after 13th December 2012, where the applicant has, within the 24 months
    preceding the date on  which  it  is  decided,  been  convicted  of  or
    admitted to an offence and received a non-custodial sentence  or  other
    out of court disposal recorded on a criminal record.  As the conviction
    in October 2011 would fall outside the period of  24  months  preceding
    the date of decision in relation to an application made now,  it  would
    not be a barrier and would not lead to refusal.  Of course, this  would
    be a matter for the Secretary of State.

12.  Professor Rees said that the principle shown in Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL
    40 was relevant.  The Secretary of State's case that the entire  family
    should be  removed  was  capable  of  being  weakened  if  a  route  to
    settlement was available, as here.

Findings and Conclusions

13.  In this appeal, the appellants rely upon Article 8 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.  The burden lies with them to prove the facts  and  matters
    they rely upon and the standard of  proof  is  that  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities.

14.  The appellants have been lawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    over ten years and married in 2007.  At that point, the first appellant
    had leave as a highly skilled migrant and his wife was given  leave  as
    his dependant.  Their son was born in the United Kingdom on 20th August
    2011.  It is  accepted  by  both  parties  that,  in  relation  to  the
    decisions to refuse to  vary  their  leave  and  to  remove  them,  the
    appellants are unable to show that the requirements  of  the  rules  in
    Appendix FM and, so far as the fist appellant is  concerned,  paragraph
    276B are met.  His conviction, which resulted in a fine,  represents  a
    barrier to success in that context.

15.  So far as Article 8  is  concerned,  there  is  no  issue  between  the
    parties regarding the facts.  Ms Vidyadharan submitted on behalf of the
    Secretary of State that the proper approach was identified by the Upper
    Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 and so the appellant  was  required
    to show that they were arguably good grounds for granting leave outside
    the rules, in order to show that it is necessary for Article 8 purposes
    to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently
    recognised under them.  In response to the  appellants'  reliance  upon
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA  Civ  985,  she
    said that any view expressed by the Court of  Appeal  on  the  "Gulshan
    approach" was obiter.  However, even if that is technically so,  it  is
    clear that the Court of Appeal in MM carried out a review  of  all  the
    recent cases and so even obiter remarks have considerable  weight.   In
    fact, the judgment in that case  can  be  read  consistently  with  the
    judgments given in  MF  and  Halimudeen.   The  broad  principle  which
    emerges from all three cases is  that  where  the  rules  amount  to  a
    complete code (as in deportation) the entire assessment should be  made
    within the rules and not elsewhere.  If "exceptional circumstances" are
    required  to  be  considered,  this  will  require  a   proportionality
    assessment.  Where the rules do not amount  to  a  complete  code,  the
    proportionality assessment is "more at large"  (paragraph  128  of  the
    judgment in MM).

16.  In the present appeals,  there  is  really  no  difference  in  outcome
    because even adopting the "Gulshan approach" there clearly are arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to remain and for  considering  whether
    there are compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under
    the rules.  The rules do not make provision for this particular family,
    where removal is proposed of all three members  in  the  light  of  the
    first appellant's conviction and fine.  Legally relevant in the Article
    8 context are the years the second appellant has  spent  here  lawfully
    and the best interests of the couple's son.  In view of his young  age,
    his best interests are clearly to remain  with  both  parents,  whether
    they remain in the United Kingdom or return to Sri Lanka).  He will not
    have established any independent ties of substance (and  this  was  not
    suggested in or emerged from the evidence).

17.  Also relevant, I find, is the evolution of the relevant rule  regarding
    convictions.  The rule in place when the  applications  were  made  has
    been deleted.  There was a delay of some thirteen months, which amounts
    to a substantial delay, before the Secretary of State made  a  decision
    and, by then, paragraph 322 acted as a barrier to success in the  light
    of the conviction.   If  the  application  were  made  today,  however,
    paragraph 322(1C)(iv) would  be  no  barrier  at  all  as  the  unspent
    conviction  is  now  three  years  old.   I  accept  Professor   Rees's
    submission that in this context, the principle identified in  Chikwamba
    and developed in MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953  is  relevant.   The
    family  and  private  life  ties  established  by  the  appellants  are
    substantial, and they deepened in the period of delay  following  their
    application.   Removal  to  Sri  Lanka  of  the   family   unit   would
    substantially  disrupt  the  ties  established  by   them   here.    An
    application would  not  be  met  with  failure  in  the  light  of  the
    conviction which forms the basis of the present refusal.

18.  I have taken into account Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  and  the  public
    interest considerations in section 117B.  Overall, these considerations
    add weight to the appellants' case.  They can speak  English  and  have
    not been a burden on tax payers.   Far  from  it,  they  have  been  in
    gainful employment in the years they have been lawfully  present  here.
    The evidence shows substantial integration into  society.   It  is  not
    controversial to suggest that the first appellant's role as mathematics
    teacher is one that  is  likely  to  continue  to  benefit  the  United
    Kingdom.  This is not a case where little weight  should  be  given  to
    private life ties or relationships as they have been established during
    lawful presence here, over many years.  The first appellant  is  not  a
    "foreign criminal".

19.  Overall, I conclude that arguably good grounds for granting leave  have
    been shown and  that  the  rules  do  not  sufficiently  recognise  the
    compelling circumstances in the case.  These circumstances include  the
    substantial ties established in  a  period  of  lawful  residence  that
    exceeds ten years and the reduced significance of the conviction  which
    led to refusal of the applications.  There is no question  of  a  "near
    miss".  My focus is on the private and family life ties themselves  and
    the extent to which the rules recognise and give weight to those  ties.
    Weighing the competing interests, and for the reasons set  out  in  the
    paragraphs above, I conclude that the balance falls in  favour  of  the
    appellants.  The decisions to refuse to vary their leave and to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom amount to a disproportionate response,  in
    the particular circumstances of  their  case.   Should  the  appellants
    apply once again for indefinite leave, it will be for the Secretary  of
    State to assess their circumstances and to apply the current rules.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows:

Appeals allowed.



ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.




Signed        Date 20th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



FEE AWARD

The appeals have been allowed but this followed  a  decision  on  the  rules
which was open to the Secretary of State at the time.  On  the  other  hand,
there was a substantial delay in  deciding  the  applications.   Both  sides
assisted the Tribunal in tracing the development of the particular  rule  in
issue.  In these circumstances, I make a fee award of half of the  fee  paid
or payable in these proceedings.



Signed        Date 20th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
