

                                          [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27357/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On June 24, 2014                |On July 23. 2014         |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR SABBIRBHAI NALBANDH SAJID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Holt, Counsel, instructed by MA
      Consultants

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as  the  respondent  and  Mr
    Sabbirbhai Nalbandh Sajid as the appellant.

 2. The appellant, born September 9, 1984, is a citizen of  the  India.  On
    September 15, 2007 the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  holding
    a working holidaymaker visa that was valid until September 6, 2009.  On
    August 11, 2009 he applied for further leave to remain as the spouse of
    a settled person and he was granted a visa until January  5,  2012.  On
    July 27, 2012 he was invited to attend an  interview  on  September  4,
    2012 in connection with his application but  he  failed  to  attend  or
    provide a reasonable explanation for this.

 3. The respondent refused his application on June 17, 2013 and at the same
    time a decision was taken to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and nationality Act 2006.

 4. On July 2, 2013 the appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on January 13, 2014.  Following
    the hearing he gave directions for service of additional  evidence  and
    in a determination promulgated on  February  2,  2014  he  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on April 14, 2014. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Appleyard on May 13, 2014 who found it was arguable the FtTJ  may  have
    erred by not engaging with the  issue  of  his  non-attendance  at  his
    interview.

 7. The matter was listed  before  me  on  the  above  date  and  both  the
    appellant and sponsor were in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Johnstone relied on the grounds of appeal. She  submitted  the  FtTJ
    had heard the evidence and then invited  written  representations  from
    both parties on an outstanding matter. The determination suggested that
    he had considered the appellant's additional papers but had  failed  to
    have regard to the respondent's fax dated January 17,  2014.  The  FtTJ
    had accepted the appellant did not have  a  reasonable  excuse  and  he
    should therefore not have allowed the appeal and he should have  upheld
    the respondent's decision under paragraph 322(10) HC 395. His  findings
    in paragraph [24] are inconsistent. At paragraph [25]  the  FtTJ  again
    accepted  his  explanation  was  not  a  reasonable   excuse   and   in
    substituting  his  assessment  of  the  evidence  he   overlooked   the
    respondent had been denied an opportunity to interview the appellant.

 9. Mr Holt accepted the FtTJ had found the appellant's explanation was not
    a reasonable explanation. In those circumstances it was a  red  herring
    to revisit that issue because paragraph  322(10)  states  leave  should
    normally be refused where there has been a "failure, without  providing
    a reasonable explanation, to comply with a request made  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State to attend for  interview".   Mr  Holt  submitted
    that the FtTJ found there was no  reasonable  excuse  but  nevertheless
    concluded having considered all of the evidence that the appeal  should
    not be refused under that paragraph. He gave his reasons  in  paragraph
    [25] of his determination.

10. Both parties agreed that in the event of there being an error in law  I
    would be able to conclude the case  without  taking  any  further  oral
    evidence.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The FtTJ took oral evidence when he heard  the  case  and  subsequently
    issued directions in relation to evidence that was not  before  him.  I
    accept Ms Johnstone's submission that he did not appear to  have  taken
    into account the respondent's response  to  the  appellant's  evidence.
    However, I also accept Mr Holt's submission that the FtTJ's failure  to
    see that evidence would not have altered the issue that  the  documents
    referred to.


12. The appellant's solicitors submitted a letter that they said  had  been
    submitted to the respondent's office on  the  day  of  the  appellant's
    interview. The respondent's  response  noted  it  was  sent  after  the
    interview time and the letter had not  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
    interview. The respondent's letter would not have  altered  the  FtTJ's
    finding that the appellant did not have a reasonable excuse.

13. The FtTJ found at paragraph [24] that the appellant's  explanation  was
    not a reasonable explanation and the fact  the  appellant  had  marital
    difficulties at the time and was uncertain about his future was  not  a
    good reason for failing to attend the interview.

14. The FtTJ therefore agreed with the respondent.

15. However, paragraph 322(10) HC 395 is not a mandatory ground of refusal.
    The Rule makes clear that leave to remain should  normally  be  refused
    unless a good explanation has been provided.

16. I take on board Mr Holt's submission and I agree  with  his  submission
    that  unless  the  appellant  provided  a  good  explanation  then  his
    application should normally (emphasis added by me) be refused.

17. If the FtTJ had failed to give  any  reason  for  departing  from  this
    position then Ms Johnstone would have a valid submission.

18. However, the FtTJ did go on to consider whether the  normal  course  of
    action should  follow.  In  paragraph  [25]  of  his  determination  he
    balanced against this  starting  position  the  fact  he  accepted  the
    marriage was subsisting and the couple's intentions. He concluded  that
    refusing the application was only a disciplinary action and would  mean
    the  appellant  would  have  to  leave  and  make  an  entry  clearance
    application. He took on board the fact the respondent had not been able
    to interview the appellant but concluded as a  judge  he  was  able  to
    assess their relationship and intentions. He concluded  the  discretion
    in respect of paragraph 322(10) HC 395 should  be  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

19. I am satisfied the FtTJ  approached  this  issue  correctly.  Paragraph
    322(10) is not  an  absolute  bar  when  someone  fails  to  attend  an
    interview. If an applicant had a good  excuse  then  paragraph  322(10)
    would not apply, as it would not have been  refused  under  this  Rule.
    This appellant did not have a good reason but the FtTJ was satisfied on
    the evidence before him that the respondent had wrongly  exercised  his
    discretion.

20. I therefore find there has been no error in law.

    DECISION

21. There is no material error of law. The original decision shall stand.

22. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the fee award decision made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:                                 Dated:






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

