

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/27817/2014
                                                               IA/27819/2014
                                                               IA/27821/2014
                                                             & IA/27822/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14th April 2015                   |On 17th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   LTG (1)
                                   LJG (2)
                                   LAG (3)
                                   LBG (4)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS




  Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The first appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  born  on  12th
       April  1972.  The  other  appellants  are  also   citizens   of   the
       Philippines. The second appellant is her dependent  husband  born  on
       15th October 1971, the third appellant is her dependent son  born  on
       3rd March 2000, and the fourth appellant is her dependent son born on
       25th March 2002. The second, third and fourth appellants have been in
       the UK as dependents of the first appellant since 19th June 2010.

    3. The first appellant came to the UK on 18th September 2008 with  leave
       to enter as a student, she remained in this capacity and  then  as  a
       Tier 4 student migrant until 31st July 2011.  She  was  then  granted
       further leave to remain as a Tier 1  post-study  work  migrant  until
       24th August 2013. She was then  given  leave  as  a  Tier  2  general
       migrant until 14th May 2014.

    4. On 13th May 2014 she made an application to extend  her  leave  as  a
       Tier 2 general migrant, but this application was refused on 20th June
       2014 as she was not awarded full points under Appendix A as she could
       not satisfy the requirement that the resident labour market test  had
       been met. Her appeal against the decision to refuse was allowed under
       the Immigration Rules by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 18th December 2014.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Ransley on the 10th February 2015 on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in finding that the  first
       appellant did not have to meet the resident labour test on the  basis
       that she had been last given leave as a post-study work migrant  when
       in fact this was not the case  as  the  last  leave  granted  to  the
       appellant was as a Tier 2 general migrant.

    6. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

  Submissions - Error of Law

    7. Ms Miszkiel had not been  provided  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
       grounds of appeal so at the start of the hearing she was given  these
       and time to read them. She requested anonymity for the appellants. Ms
       Isherwood did not object to this so I agreed to this request.

    8. Ms Isherwood relied upon the grounds of appeal. It was clear that the
       first appellant had last been granted  leave  as  a  Tier  2  general
       migrant and thus it was an error  of  law  to  find  that  the  first
       appellant was exempt from  the  resident  labour  market  test  under
       paragraph 78B of Appendix A on the basis of having last been  granted
       leave as a Tier 1 post study work migrant.

    9. Ms Miszkiel argued that the Judge Robinson  had  been  aware  of  the
       appellant's immigration history and had none the  less  decided  that
       the appellant qualified for an exemption  from  the  resident  labour
       market test.

   10. I informed the parties that I found that Judge Robinson had erred  in
       law and that the decision would be set aside in its entirety for  the
       reasons set out below. The  parties  were  both  content  to  proceed
       immediately with the remaking of the appeal.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law as a reading of the findings  at
       paragraphs 21 to 29 of the determination appears to conclude that the
       appellant was exempt from the resident labour market test because she
       had last been granted leave on the basis of post-study work which  it
       is agreed by all was not the case.  Whilst  it  is  true  that  Judge
       Robinson sets out the correct immigration history for  the  appellant
       at paragraph 4 of his determination and thus seems to be fully  aware
       that she had last been granted leave as a Tier 2 general migrant, and
       refers to this at paragraph 26, there is no reasoning in paragraph 26
       to enable the reader to understand why he  therefore  concluded  that
       the appellant qualified for the exemption from  the  resident  labour
       market test which was based on a past grant as a  Tier  1  post-study
       work migrant.

  Evidence and Submissions - Re-making

   12.  The first appellant gave evidence.

   13. She confirmed her two  statements  were  true  and  correct  and  her
       evidence to the Tribunal. In brief summary in  these  statements  she
       says she came to the UK as a student and completed a  Masters  degree
       in business administration at the University of Wales. She  was  then
       granted leave as a post-study work migrant. She worked as a marketing
       officer for Glyndwr University from January 2012.  They  applied  for
       her to remain as a Tier 2 general migrant. However Glyndwr University
       only provided her with the COS number and not  full  details  of  the
       application they made on her behalf. She was shocked when she got her
       permission to stay back and it was only for  nine  months.  Her  boss
       explained that her job was in  fact  just  a  maternity  cover  post.
       Although initially he assured that her work would  be  extended  this
       turned out not  to  be  the  case,  and  her  contract  with  Glyndwr
       University was terminated to end on 30th April 2014 by  notice  given
       on 10th April 2014.

   14. The first appellant found another institution, Opal College, needed a
       marketing officer so she applied immediately and they issued her with
       a COS. Opal College decided that she did not need to meet the Tier  2
       resident labour market test and  she  trusted  them.   In  her  first
       application as a Tier 2 general  migrant  she  was  exempt  from  the
       resident labour market test. She therefore did not understand why  it
       had been applied and used  as  the  basis  of  her  refusal  in  this
       instance.

   15. Both Glyndwr University and Opal College have since had their Tier  4
       sponsor licences suspended.

   16. The first appellant had been lawfully resident throughout her stay in
       the UK and the refusal had  cost  her  loss  of  earnings  and  legal
       expenses.  The  refusal  has  also  affected  the  third  and  fourth
       appellants (her children) who are in full time education.

   17. In oral evidence, in summary she added that the second appellant (her
       husband) is working in the UK but has  not  been  able  to  accept  a
       promotion because of  their  immigration  difficulties.  She  had  no
       evidence for the Tribunal about his earnings however. She thought she
       would need at least a month to find a new sponsor if her appeal  were
       allowed. She clarified that the Home Office had granted the length of
       leave  Glyndwr  University  had  requested  for  her.  She  was  very
       frustrated by the fact she was only given 9 months however as she had
       believed it would  be  for  3  years.  She  had  worked  for  Glyndwr
       University for two years and had a nice position and thought it would
       continue. She had understood  she  was  in  the  UK  in  a  temporary
       capacity but also knew if she had  five  years  leave  as  a  Tier  2
       migrant she could qualify for indefinite leave to remain.

   18. The first appellant explained that the third  and  fourth  appellants
       (her children) were very anxious because of the immigration situation
       of the family. It would be difficult for the family to return to  the
       Philippines as they had no house and she and the second appellant had
       left their jobs there to come to the UK. Her parents were retired and
       could not financially support them, and it would not be easy  to  get
       jobs in the Philippines.

   19. Ms Isherwood submitted that she relied upon the reasons  for  refusal
       letters. The refusal letter awarded the first appellant no points for
       sponsorship under Appendix A as the appellant had moved employer from
       Glyndwr University to Opal College and  therefore  had  to  meet  the
       resident labour market test under Appendix A. This had not  been  met
       in the way required by Appendix A (advertising in Jobcentre Plus etc)
       and so no points could be awarded for sponsorship. All  other  points
       were awarded under Appendix A, B and C. The second, third and  fourth
       appellants were refused as dependents as the first appellant had  not
       been granted leave as a Tier 2 general migrant.

   20. Ms Isherwood also submitted that the COS is clear that  advertisement
       of the job had not taken place: the first appellant was  simply  said
       to pass the resident labour market test because  she  had  a  Masters
       degree.  She also took me to the relevant Immigration Rules regarding
       points under Appendix A and the resident labour market test, and  its
       exemptions.  She  argued  that  the  appellant  failed  therefore  at
       paragraph 245HD (f) and therefore  any  issue  of  the  ambiguity  of
       paragraph 245HD (k) or with respect to appropriate salary rates at 14
       of Appendix J was irrelevant as  the  appellant  had  already  failed
       under the Rules at an earlier  stage.  The  Immigration  Rules  under
       which the appellant failed were not unclear or ambiguous.

   21. In relation to Article 8 ECHR the appellants could not succeed  under
       the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE as they had ties  with  the
       Philippines with relatives still living there. This was not a  family
       life case as all members of the family  would  be  removed  together.
       Further when looked at outside of the Immigration Rules there was  no
       "historic injustice"  to  the  appellant  by  the  Home  Office:  her
       employer Glyndwr University had asked for permission for nine  months
       for the appellant and this had been granted. There was no good reason
       to look at this matter outside of the Rules. However when  s.117B  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  was  examined  the
       appellants simply had precarious private life which should  be  given
       little weight and had not shown that they could  financially  support
       themselves.  The appellants had  all  previously  had  accommodation,
       jobs and education in the Philippines and this could happen again.

   22. Ms Mizskiel submitted that she relied upon her skeleton argument  and
       made oral submissions. In summary she submitted, in what she accepted
       was a complex submission, that paragraph 245HD (b) of the Immigration
       Rules regarding those with previous leave  as  Tier  2  migrants  was
       internally inconsistent with paragraph 245HD (k), and  that  (k)  was
       ambiguous. She submitted that because of  this  the  resident  labour
       test should not be applied to the first appellant even though she had
       previous leave as a Tier 2 general migrant. It was notable  that  the
       appellant's previous Tier  1  post-study  work  status  continued  to
       regulate her ability to satisfy the Rules with a new  entrant  salary
       for 3 years and one month of her time with leave as Tier 2 migrant in
       accordance with paragraph 14(d) of  Appendix  J  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. It was illogical if the lower salary rate continued  to  apply
       to the first appellant on this application a she was within this time
       band that a resident labour market test should  be  applied.  It  had
       been Opal College's view that such a test did not apply to the  first
       appellant because of her Master's degree and this was evidence of the
       Rules being impossible to understand; and in accordance with Ferrer (
       limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 it was right  not  to
       apply such a test.

   23. Ms Mizskiel also argued that the  appellants  should  be  allowed  to
       remain under Article 8 ECHR. She accepted that the  appellants  could
       not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph
       276ADE or Appendix FM. She said that the  first  appellant  had  been
       treated unjustly by both Glyndwr University and by Opal College. This
       historic injustice and the best interests of the children to continue
       with their education in the  UK  meant  that  the  family  should  be
       allowed to remain. She  relied  upon  Ferrer,  Patel  (revocation  of
       sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211  and  R  (on  the
       application of) New College London v SSHD [2011] EWHC 856 (Admin)  in
       holding that the system of sponsorship should  not  be  brought  into
       disrepute,  and  that  the  misleading  behaviour/  advice  of   both
       sponsoring colleges was therefore relevant  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
       consideration of this matter. She maintained that the appellants  had
       not been precariously in the UK as Tier 2 migrant leave can  lead  to
       settlement after five years, and that the second appellant had a  job
       and  potential  promotion  so  the  family  were  financially   self-
       sufficient.

   24. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination on remaking.

  Conclusions - Remaking

   25. The case of Ferrer is authority for the principle that if  provisions
       of the  Immigration  Rules  are  ambiguous  or  obscure  then  it  is
       legitimate to interpret those Rules as not treating a  limited  class
       of persons unfairly unless there are  policy  reasons  disclosed  for
       that  unfairness.  However  it  is  also  clear  that  the   ordinary
       principles of statutory interpretation  are  not  displaced.  If  the
       plain and ordinary meaning of the Rules is clear then  considerations
       of fairness cannot produce a  different  interpretative  result,  see
       paragraph 55 of the determination.

   26. I accept that aspects of the Immigration Rules  relating  to  Tier  2
       migrants differ in the impact of a past grant of  Tier  1  post-study
       work leave. This past grant has an effect on salary under Appendix  J
       which lasts for a period of 3  years  and  one  month  as  a  Tier  2
       migrant, and thus continued to benefit this appellant in  her  second
       application for leave as a Tier 2  (general  migrant)  as  her  first
       grant had only been for  nine  months.  In  contrast  the  provisions
       regarding exemption from the resident labour market test at paragraph
       78B of Appendix A cease to apply once a second application for Tier 2
       general migrant leave is made, as a current or last grant of leave as
       a Tier 2 migrant does not appear on the list at paragraph 78B (b)  of
       Appendix A to the Immigration Rules.

   27. It is not clear to me why this situation should be considered unfair.
       I do not find it ambiguous. It may be complex, and it may  have  been
       what confused Opel College, but I do not see that on fairness grounds
       it is open to challenge.

   28. The provisions for a grant of leave as a Tier 2 general  migrant  are
       set out at paragraph 245HD. The first appellant is  able  to  satisfy
       245HD (a) and (b) which it is accepted are clear. Provisions at  (c),
       (d) and (e) are not relevant to the first appellant. 245HD (f) is the
       provision that states the first appellant must have a minimum  of  50
       points under paragraphs 76 to 79D of Appendix A, which is  where  the
       resident labour market test and its exemptions are set out, and where
       the respondent argues she fails.  Provisions at (g) and  (h)  do  not
       apply to  the  appellant,  and  (i)  and  (j)  concern  points  under
       Appendices B and C which she is awarded and satisfies.

   29. It is true that the wording of  245HD  (k)  is  odd  saying  that  an
       applicant must not have had leave as a Tier 2 migrant during  the  12
       months before the date of application unless, and then one option is,
       the last grant was as a Tier 2 migrant. It seems to suggest it  would
       not fulfil this provision if an applicant  had  leave  as  a  Tier  2
       migrant and then afterwards in some other  capacity  all  within  the
       past twelve months. However this arguably obscure  provision  is  not
       one in which the first appellant is  caught  up.  She  clearly  falls
       within 245KH (k)(i) and so is able to satisfy the  provision  without
       any confusion. I see no reason to think that any obscurity for  other
       applicants under this provision  aids  an  argument  that  the  first
       appellant does not need to satisfy the resident labour market test as
       set out in Appendix A.

   30. I  therefore  find  that  the  first  appellant  does  not  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules as she was required to meet the
       resident labour test at paragraph 78 of Appendix A  as  none  of  the
       exemptions applied at paragraphs 78A, 78B and  78C  and  because  the
       methods of satisfying the test set out in paragraph 78 had  not  been
       carried out by Opal College. She  therefore  failed  to  acquire  the
       necessary 50 points needed and was correctly refused for  failing  to
       meet paragraph 245HD(f) of the Immigration Rules. The  second,  third
       and fourth  appellants  were  therefore  also  correctly  refused  as
       dependents under paragraph 319 of the Immigration Rules.

   31. It is accepted by the appellants that they cannot meet the Article  8
       ECHR Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE and in Appendix FM.

   32. It is argued that I should look at Article 8 ECHR  outside  of  these
       Rules as not all aspects of their case are considered under the Rules
       so I have done this.

   33. I am satisfied that the appellants have private life in  the  UK  and
       that removal from the UK would interfere with that private life:  the
       first appellant has lived in the UK for six and a half years and  the
       other  appellants  for  almost  five  years.  The  first  and  second
       appellants have worked in this  country  and  the  third  and  fourth
       appellants attended school. As none of the appellants  can  meet  the
       Immigration Rules the interference with their right  to  respect  for
       private life would be in accordance  with  the  law.  The  respondent
       justifies this interference with the Article 8  ECHR  rights  of  the
       appellants as in the economic interests of the UK through application
       of a consistent policy of immigration control.

   34. I must finally consider whether the  interference  with  the  private
       life rights of the appellants which will result on their  removal  is
       proportionate given the public interest in their removal. I must have
       regard  to  all  the  provisions  of  s.117B  of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  in   determining   whether   the
       respondent's decision  is  proportionate.  I  note  that  immigration
       control is in the public interest. I do not find that the  status  of
       the appellants until the refusal in June 2014 was precarious. I  thus
       conclude that the majority of their time in the  UK  has  been  spent
       with non-precarious status. I am also satisfied that they have  been,
       and if they  were  allowed  to  remain  they  would  be,  financially
       independent and all speak good English and thus would not be a burden
       on taxpayers and would be able to integrate in the UK.

   35. I accept that the third and fourth appellants are doing  well  at  St
       Marks Academy as I have read letters from  their  schools.  I  accept
       that the first appellant was poorly treated by Glyndwr University and
       badly advised by Opal College, however  I  do  not  find  that  these
       experiences strengthen her private life ties to  the  UK  or  provide
       reason why she should be allowed to  remain  here.  As  Ms  Isherwood
       submitted the Secretary of State is not at fault in providing a  poor
       service to the appellants in this case.  Ultimately I find  that  all
       the appellants can reasonably be expected  to  resume  their  private
       lives in the Philippines where they lived  together  accessing  work,
       accommodation and schools until 2008. The information  before  me  is
       that the first, third and fourth appellants are all very  intelligent
       people. The second appellant is said by the first appellant  to  have
       recently acquired a promotion  at  work  and  thus  I  assume  he  is
       likewise normally able  and  adaptable.  I  accept  that  it  may  be
       unsettling, disappointing and disruptive in the short term to have to
       relocate to their country of nationality but I was provided  with  no
       reason to believe that they would not successfully re-establish their
       private lives in the Philippines.

       Decision:

        1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
           the making of an error on a point of law.

        2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

        3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it under  the
           Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid
       a possibility of serious prejudice arising  to  the  first  appellant
       should she seek further employment in the UK in the future.


Signed:     Date: 15th April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination.


       There can be no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Date: 15th April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

