
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/27335/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 13th July  2016                                                    On
the 26th July 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:

                               MRS EVELYN IGWE
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:  Ms Bustani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:  Mr Norton (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Liddington promulgated on the 16th September  2015,  in
      which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      refusal of her application for a Residence Card, as the spouse  of  an
      EEA National exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   Within
      the Grounds of Appeal it is argued by the Appellant, inter alia,  that
      there was procedural unfairness in the case in that the Appellant  had
      not been provided with a copy of the  marriage  interview  record,  in
      breach of the basic principles of fairness and the  Respondent's  duty
      of full disclosure under the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules.   It
      was argued that the Respondent and the Judge was not entitled to  rely
      upon the interview in circumstances where a copy of the same  had  not
      been provided and that the interviewing officer's comments are no more
      than the views of the interviewer.

   2. It was further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that  the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is wrong in his  application  of  the
      burden of proof and it is argued that following the case of Papajorgji
      (EEA Spouse - Marriage of Convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC),
      that there is no burden at the outset of an application on a  Claimant
      to demonstrate that a marriage to  an  EEA  National  is  not  one  of
      convenience, and that there  is  only  an  evidential  burden  on  the
      Claimant to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that  the
      marriage is entered into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing
      residence rights.  It is  argued  that  the  Respondent  had  to  have
      grounds  for  suspecting  the  genuineness  of  the  marriage   before
      conducting an interview and thereafter in treating the comments of the
      interviewing officer as evidence.

   3. Although within the Respondent's  Rule  24  reply,  it  was  initially
      conceded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  materially  erred  in
      respect of material not having been provided, that  the  Judge  relied
      upon to form the view that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  and
      that the Judge further misdirected herself in law in  suggesting  that
      the only matters appertaining as at the  date  of  the  decision  were
      relevant rather than the date of the hearing, and that the case should
      be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo,  Mr
      Norton on behalf of the Respondent at the  appeal  hearing,  initially
      withdrew that Rule 24 notice.  However, Mr Norton did then concede  on
      behalf of the Respondent  that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  in
      respect of her consideration of the burden of proof in the  case.   Mr
      Norton conceded that following the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  the
      case of Rosa v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 14, that the legal burden lies on the Secretary of  State  to
      provide that an otherwise valid marriage is a marriage of convenience,
      so as to justify the refusal of an application for  a  Residence  Card
      under the EEA Regulations [24].  The Court of Appeal  found  that  the
      legal burden of proof relied on the Secretary of State throughout, but
      the evidential burden can shift, as  was  explained  in  the  case  of
      Papajorgji and endorsed by the Court of Appeal in the case of  Agho  v
      The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  1198.
      In the Agho case, Underhill Lord Justice, said that:

      "13...What it comes down to is that as a matter of principle a  spouse
      establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of an
      EEA National by providing the marriage certificate  and  the  spouse's
      passport; that the legal burden is on the Secretary of State  to  show
      that any marriage thus proved is a marriage of  convenience;  and  the
      burden is not discharged merely by showing "reasonable suspicion".  Of
      course in the usual  way  the  evidential  burden  may  shift  to  the
      applicant by proof of facts  which  justify  the  inference  that  the
      marriage is not genuine, and the facts giving rise  to  the  inference
      may include a failure to answer a request for documentary proof of the
      genuineness of the marriage  where  grounds  of  suspicion  have  been
      raised.  Although, as I say the point was not argued before  us,  that
      approach seems to me to be correct...".

   4. On that basis, Mr  Norton  conceded  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Liddington did materially err at [10] of her decision, when she stated
      that "in immigration appeals, the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
      and the standard of proof required is the balance  of  probabilities".
      He accepted that in EEA, marriage  of  convenience  cases,  the  legal
      burden of proof remains on the Respondent at all  times  to  establish
      that the marriage is  one  of  convenience,  although  the  evidential
      burden may shift.  He accepted that as a result of  the  Judge  having
      misapplied the burden of proof, this did amount to a material error of
      law, and that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Liddington
      should thereby be set aside and the case remitted back to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for a hearing de  novo  before  a  different  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge.

   5. In light of that concession by Mr Norton regarding the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge containing a material error of law, I do not
      need to address the arguments raised by the  Appellant  in  her  other
      grounds of appeal, and I do not do so.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Liddington, containing a  material
error of law, the same is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de  novo,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Liddington.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McGinty
Dated 16th July 2016
