
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/27081/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 5th June 2017                      |         On 20th June 2017            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                           TIRUMBE CHIMANGO NGWIRA
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Tobin of Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Ford  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th September 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Zimbabwean citizen born 26th January 1983.  His
    immigration history is set out below.

 3. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  11th  October
    2002.  He overstayed and remained without leave.  He was encountered by
    the authorities  on  29th  June  2009  when  his  lack  of  status  was
    discovered, and he then made an asylum claim.  This was refused on 23rd
    July 2009, and the Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  FtT  in
    September 2009.

 4. The Appellant continued to remain in this country without leave, making
    further submissions in relation to his asylum claim, which were refused
    by the Respondent.

 5. The Appellant married a  British  citizen,  Adelaide  Ngwira,  on  15th
    November 2014.  On 28th May 2015 the Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain based upon his family and private life.

 6. This application was refused on 17th July 2015, and a  letter  of  that
    date from the Home Office contains the reasons for  refusal  which  are
    summarised below.

 7.  The  Respondent  considered  the  requirements  of  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)  of
    Appendix  FM.   It  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    suitability requirements in S-LTR, and the requirements of  E-LTRP.1.2-
    1.12 and 2.1.  However the Respondent did not accept that  EX.1(b)  was
    satisfied.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his British partner.  It was  acknowledged
    that the Sponsor had lived in the UK all her life (this  is  incorrect,
    it is accepted by the Appellant that the Sponsor arrived in the UK when
    aged 9 from Burundi).  The Respondent accepted  that  the  Sponsor  has
    employment, and the couple relocating together may cause  a  degree  of
    hardship for her, but  it  was  not  accepted  that  this  amounted  to
    insurmountable obstacles as defined by EX.2.

 8. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) not accepting that the Appellant had  proved
    that there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
    Zimbabwe.

 9.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, and decided  that  there  were
    not.

10. The Appellant appealed and the FtT hearing took place on 2nd  September
    2016 and was dismissed.

11. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are summarised below.

12. It was contended that the FtT materially erred in failing to allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds, having  accepted  (paragraph  23)  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life abroad.

13. It was noted that the Respondent's sole basis for refusal  pursuant  to
    the ten year partner route,  was  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles.

14. It was contended that the FtT erred at paragraph 42 in finding that the
    Appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules.   It  was  clear  from
    paragraph 23 that the FtT had found that the Immigration Rules were  in
    fact satisfied.

15. The FtT erred in concluding  that  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
    Appellant, notwithstanding that the Immigration Rules  were  satisfied,
    to leave the United Kingdom and make  an  entry  clearance  application
    from Zimbabwe.  It was contended that the FtT  had  not  explained  how
    this would be in the public interest, and it was clearly the  intention
    of parliament that those who face insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing in another country, can apply for and be granted  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  Reference was made to  GEN.1.1  which
    sets out the purpose of the rules within Appendix FM, and it

         "sets  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,   in   considering
         applications under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8  of
         the Human Rights Convention, the balance will be struck between the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims  of  protecting  national  security,  public  safety  and  the
         economic wellbeing of the UK".

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro of the FtT  and  I  set
    out below the grant of permission in part;

         2.   The grounds assert that the judge erred in  failing  to  allow
             the appeal on human  rights  grounds  having  found  that  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

         3.   The judge clearly found that EX.2 was met [23]  which  appears
             to have been the only  issue  under  the  rules.   It  appears
             inconsistent and unexplained why the judge stated later in the
             decision that the rules were not met [42].

         4.   The grounds disclose an  arguable  error  of  law  capable  of
             affecting the outcome.

17. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FtT directed  itself  appropriately.   It  was
    contended  that  the  FtT  was  entitled  to  consider  whether  it  is
    appropriate for the Appellant to obtain the  correct  entry  clearance.
    The FtT had  not  accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning  his
    circumstances in Zimbabwe.

18. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

19. Miss Tobin relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and the grant of permission.  I was asked to  find
    that the FtT  had  clearly  found  in  paragraph  23  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom, and the FtT had thereafter erred in considering it appropriate
    for the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom alone, and make an  entry
    clearance application from abroad.  I was referred to Chen (IJR) [2015]
    UKUT 00189 (IAC) which confirms  that  Appendix  FM  does  not  include
    consideration of the question of whether it would  be  disproportionate
    to expect an individual to return to his home country to make an  entry
    clearance application.  Miss Tobin submitted that leaving  to  make  an
    entry clearance application from abroad should only  be  considered  if
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside
    the United Kingdom.

20. Mrs Aboni argued that the FtT decision should stand,  and  relied  upon
    the rule 24 response.  Mrs Aboni argued that the FtT  was  entitled  to
    take into account the public interest considerations in section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

21. By way of response  Miss  Tobin  submitted  that  there  is  no  public
    interest in removal,  if  the  Immigration  Rules  which  set  out  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner, are satisfied.

22. I indicated at the hearing, that in my  view  the  FtT  had  materially
    erred in law and the decision was set aside.  I gave my reasons orally,
    and confirmed that these would be put into writing.

23. I then asked for the  views  of  the  representatives  as  to  how  the
    decision should be re-made.  Both  representatives  were  in  agreement
    that the decision should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal,  based  upon
    the evidence that was before the FtT, without a further hearing.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. My reasons for finding a material error of law are as follows.

25. The Respondent's sole reason for refusing the  Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain based upon his marriage to a British  citizen,  was
    that EX.1(b) was  not  satisfied  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and Sponsor continuing family
    life with each other outside the United Kingdom.  For ease of reference
    I set out below EX.1(b) (EX.1(a) is not relevant as the couple  do  not
    have children).  I also set out EX.2;
         EX.1  (b)       the  applicant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
                  relationship with a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a
                  British citizen, settled in the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with
                  refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and  there  are
                  insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
                  continuing outside the UK.
         EX.2  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
                  obstacles" means the very significant  difficulties  which
                  would be faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                  continuing their family life together outside the  UK  and
                  which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
                  hardship for the applicant or their partner.

26. If the Respondent had found insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom, then the  Appellant  would  have
    been granted leave to remain under the ten year partner  route,  as  R-
    LTRP.1.1.(d)  would  be  satisfied.    There   would   have   been   no
    consideration of whether it was appropriate for the couple to separate,
    and for the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom and apply  for  entry
    clearance from abroad.  There would be no point in  this,  because  the
    Respondent's own rules would be satisfied if there were  insurmountable
    obstacles.

27. The FtT at paragraph 21  expresses  agreement  with  the  Secretary  of
    State's conclusion on the issue of whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles, to the continuation of the Appellant's relationship with the
    Sponsor should he be obliged to return to Zimbabwe, and in paragraph 22
    considers whether the Appellant could return to Zimbabwe on his own  in
    order to make an entry clearance application,  or  whether  the  couple
    could relocate to Zimbabwe together.

28. The FtT is unequivocal in  paragraph  23  in  finding  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The FtT makes reference
    to the Sponsor having been in the United Kingdom since she was 3  years
    of age, although the skeleton  argument  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant indicated that she came to the United Kingdom at 9  years  of
    age from Burundi.  It is common ground that  she  has  never  lived  in
    Zimbabwe and is a British citizen.

29. There has been no challenge by the Respondent to the FtT finding as  to
    insurmountable obstacles in paragraph 23.

30. The FtT at paragraph 24 expresses the view that the  couple  continuing
    family life in Zimbabwe is not the only option, and the Appellant could
    leave the United Kingdom and return  to  Zimbabwe  alone  and  make  an
    application  for  entry   clearance   and   this   would   not   entail
    insurmountable obstacles to family life.  This would however  mean  the
    couple could not continue the family life together that they  enjoy  in
    the United Kingdom because there would be a separation.   As  indicated
    in Chen, Appendix FM does not include consideration of whether it would
    be disproportionate to expect an individual to return alone to make  an
    application for entry  clearance  from  abroad.   The  question  to  be
    decided in EX.1.(b)  and  EX.2  is  whether  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple living together  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
    The FtT found there were insurmountable obstacles.

31. The FtT has not given adequate reasons as to why, given  that  finding,
    that the public interest meant that the Appellant's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.  The FtT does not explain the reference at paragraphs 39 and
    42 to the Appellant being unable to meet the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    finding at paragraph 23 means that the Immigration Rules, in particular
    R-LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d) are satisfied.  This is the section  within
    the Immigration Rules which sets out the requirements for limited leave
    to remain as a partner.

32. For the above reasons, I found a material error of law  and  set  aside
    the decision of the FtT.

33. As invited by both representatives I now re-make the decision.   It  is
    important to note that the FtT finding at paragraph 23 that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor continuing  in  Zimbabwe  has  not  been  the  subject  of  any
    challenge from the Respondent.  Therefore that finding must stand.

34. This means that the Immigration Rules setting out the requirements  for
    limited leave to remain as a partner  are  satisfied.   These  are  the
    rules, as explained in GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM that  reflect  how  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) the balance will be struck between the right to respect for
    private and family life and the  legitimate  aims  protecting  national
    security, public safety  and  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom,  and  which  also  reflect  the   relevant   public   interest
    considerations as set out in Part 5A of the 2002  Act  (which  includes
    section 117B).

35. There would therefore appear to be no  need  to  undertake  a  separate
    consideration of section 117B, which would be necessary  if  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules was being  considered.   I  will  however
    consider section 117B which states that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

36. It is in the public interest that persons seeking to remain  can  speak
    English and are  financially  independent.   The  Appellant  can  speak
    fluent English, and it is accepted that the financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM are satisfied, and this was found to be the case by the FtT
    (paragraph 13 of the FtT decision).  The ability to speak  English  and
    financial independence are  however  neutral  factors.   Little  weight
    should be given to a private life established when a person has  either
    a precarious immigration status or no status.  The Appellant has had no
    legal status since his leave as a visitor expired in the early part  of
    2003.  However he does not rely upon his private life.  He  is  relying
    upon his family life with the Sponsor.

37.  Section  117B  states  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to   a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner that was established when
    the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  That  would  apply  to
    the Appellant, because his relationship with the Sponsor began in  this
    country, when he was here unlawfully.

38.  However  I  find  that  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.  I find that I must  place
    very  substantial  weight  upon  the  fact  that   he   satisfies   the
    requirements set out in Appendix FM, in order  to  be  given  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as  the  partner  of  a  British  citizen.
    Because he  satisfies  the  Immigration  Rules,  I  conclude  that  the
    Respondent has not shown that there is any public interest in  removing
    the Appellant from this country.  It has not been suggested that he has
    been engaged in any criminal activity, and it is not the case  that  he
    would need to have recourse to public funds.  Therefore his appeal must
    succeed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal  on
human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.

Signed                              Date         8th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to  make  a  fee
award.  I make no award.  The appeal has been allowed  because  of  evidence
submitted to the Tribunal after the Respondent refused the application.

Signed                              Date         8th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





