
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27242/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                REHAN RASHEED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, counsel instructed by Abbey Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague promulgated on 10
    November 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of
    a residence card as conformation of his right to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights . The
    Judge allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 4 March 1985 and is a national  of  Pakistan.
    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student on 29 June
    2012 and married his wife Stanislava Kimkova a Slovakian national on  5
    December 2013.

 4. On 23 December 2013 the Appellant applied for a  residence  card  under
    hte Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5. On 19  June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application.  The basis of the refusal was the Respondent's  view  that
    this was a sham marriage. On 4 June 2014 the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    were  interviewed  by  the  Respondent  and  there  were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies  and  conflicting  answers  which  cast  doubt  on  the
    marriage and suggested it was a sham marriage.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  grounds  of
    appeal stated that in essence:

      a) The responses found in the refusal letter  are  taken  out  of  the
         context of a lengthy interview.

      b) The Appellant has never received a full copy of the interview.

      c) Explanations are given for the claimed discrepancies.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hague  ("the  Judge")  allowed  against  the
    Respondent's decision after hearing evidence from  both  the  Appellant
    and the sponsor and two witnesses. The Judge in his decision:

      a) Summarised the discrepancies  alleged  in  the  marriage  interview
         (paragraph 6)

      b) After hearing evidence from both of them about  events  since  they
         met in October 2012 concluded that they were  describing  the  same
         events albeit from different perspectives (paragraph 7).

      c) He heard evidence from the two witnesses.

      d) The fact that the Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom  for
         very long and his course had been unsuccessful as a result  of  the
         college being suspended inevitably provokes suspicion.

      e) Having observed the Sponsor he formed the view that 'at least  from
         her point of view the marriage was genuine and  she  was  therefore
         likely to be telling me the truth.'

      f) He found it notable that they were still together two years later.

      g) He found the marriage to be genuine.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis, in essence,  of  inadequate
    reasoning; and on 12 January 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    gave permission to appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Harrison on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

      a) He relied on the grounds.

      b) The decision was very brief.

      c) The reasoning was inadequate.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Holt submitted that :

      a) There was a clear credibility finding in relation to the sponsor in
         paragraph 9.

      b) In paragraph 7 he makes a finding in relation to the Appellant.

      c) The Judge acknowledged that there were discrepancies  in  paragraph
         6.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. This was an appeal against a refusal of  a  Residence  Card  where  the
    Respondent's position was that this was a sham marriage. The burden  of
    proving that a marriage is not a  "marriage  of  convenience"  for  the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations rests on the Appellant: but he  is  not
    required to  discharge  it  in  the  absence  of  evidence  of  matters
    supporting a suspicion that the marriage is one  of  convenience  (i.e.
    there is an evidential burden  on  the  Respondent).In  this  case  the
    suspicion arose out of the timing of the marriage  and  the  fact  that
    there  were  a  number  of  inconsistencies  highlighted  between   the
    Appellant and the Respondent after  a  so  called  marriage  interview.
    These inconsistencies were highlighted in the  refusal  letter  and  in
    essence relates to 10 issues.

13. The Judge summarised  those  inconsistencies  in  paragraph  6  of  the
    decision. I am satisfied that the Judge failed  to  engage  with  these
    specific challenges raised  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  claimed
    relationship and only directly addressed two of them and in relation to
    the rest simply said 'they were describing the same events albeit  from
    different perceptions and standpoints.'

14. The Judge made a very clear finding in relation to the  sponsor  as  to
    whether the marriage was genuine but this was insufficient  given  that
    it is the Appellant's appeal. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to
    address and  determine  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  from  the
    Appellant's perspective as he did for the sponsor constitutes  a  clear
    error of law. I do not accept that this can be  extrapolated  from  the
    finding at paragraph 7 that there is a common chronology. This error  I
    consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise
    the outcome could have been different. That in my view is  the  correct
    test to apply.

15. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety as there was a failure to make findings in relation to central
    issues in the case. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the there was a failure  to  make  adequate  findings  in  relation  to
    central issues in the case and in relation to the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and the two witnesses. In this case none of the  findings  of
    fact are to stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

18. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed, before me.

19. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing

    - The Respondent to provide a full transcript of the marriage interview
    5 days before the hearing.

    - If interpreters are required the court must be notified.

    List for 2 hours.



Signed      Date 7.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
