
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27880/2014
                                                               IA/27881/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                      MR MOHAMED INTHIKHAN TUAN KITCHIL
                MRS FATHIMA INTHIKA SHEERIN MOHAMEN INTHIKHAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel; instructed by Chauhan
Solicitors
For the Claimant: Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Braybrook  dismissing  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  them  further  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276A  and  276B  pursuant  to  AQ  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ  833,  and
    challenging removal directions under section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer. The grounds
    upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable  that  the  Appellants  were  entitled  to  rely  on
         statutorily extended leave under section 3C of the Immigration  Act
         1971. No wrongdoing had been alleged and any other  approach  would
         undermine the decisions in Patel v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2013] UKSC 72 and AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076.

 3.  I  was  provided  with  a  Rule  24  response  from  the   Respondent.
    Additionally, Ms Pal provided me with a copy  of  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1198 and a copy of  Rules
    A34 and 34E of the current Immigration Rules. Mr Richardson provided me
    with copies of Patel v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 72, AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1076  and  the  Long  Residence  Guidance
    (version 13.0, published 8 May 2015).

 4. I shall refer to the Appellants in the singular  form  given  that  the
    appeal turns upon the consideration of paragraph 276 of the Immigration
    Rules concerning the 1st Appellant's continuous long residence.

    Error of Law

 5. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision in relation to the treatment of the Appellant's section
    120 grounds, such that it should  be  set  aside.  My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 6. As indicated at paragraph 5 of the judge's determination, in  a  letter
    dated 30 October 2014, the Appellant's solicitors issued a section  120
    statement  of  additional  grounds  (pursuant   to   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) served upon the  Respondent  on  basis
    that the Appellant had acquired 10 years'  continuous  residence.  That
    statement set out that the Appellant entered the UK as a student on  25
    October 2004 and resided lawfully for 10  years  till  that  time.  The
    statement was accompanied by a chronology of the  Appellant's  absences
    from the UK between 22 April 2005  and  31  January  2010  and  annexed
    English language test results (dated 17 September 2014) and a  Life  in
    the UK test result (dated 21 August 2014).

 7. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 3 March 2015. By  the
    time of the appeal hearing, the  Respondent  had  not  replied  to  the
    section 120 notice and did not attend  the  appeal  hearing  either  to
    argue the point. Therefore, the section 120 additional ground would not
    have come as a surprise. At paragraph  15  of  her  determination,  the
    judge considers that AQ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 833 precludes her from considering a section
    120 notice due to the reasons given by Pill, LJ at [37] of that matter,
    which reads as follows:

         "I do not consider that  section  120  was  intended,  or  has  the
         effect, of allowing a fresh application to be made to the Tribunal,
         under the Rule, relying on events since the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision. If that were to be so, the effect of section 120 would be
         contrary to the intention of the  section  in  that  the  statutory
         scheme would provide for an application to the Secretary  of  State
         and then a fresh application to the Tribunal which could  be  based
         on events since the decision of the Secretary of State.  I  do  not
         consider that to accord with the intention of the section."

 8. The judge therefore implicitly considered the Appellant to be making  a
    "fresh application" before her as opposed to lodging additional grounds
    by way of section 120. However, it is unclear why the judge interpreted
    the section 120 notice in this manner as no reasons were given  by  her
    other than her reliance upon the above passage without qualification.

 9. The answer to this simple issue appears in many forms. The first  form,
    as Mr Richardson submitted, appears in section 85 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as it previously stood  prior  to  its
    most recent amended form via the Immigration Act 2014 and  its  various
    commencement orders).  Section  85  (prior  to  amendment  and  at  the
    relevant time) states as follows:

         Matters to be considered

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
         treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any decision
         in respect of which the appellant  has  a  right  of  appeal  under
         section 82(1).

         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
         section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in  the
         statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in
         section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.

         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
         whether the statement was made  before  or  after  the  appeal  was
         commenced.

         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or  83A(2)  against  a
         decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter  which
         it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
         evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the  date  of  the
         decision...

10. In essence, a Tribunal may consider any matter including  that  arising
    after the date of the decision, pursuant to section 85(2). The  use  of
    the word "matter" leaves the subject matter of a section 120  statement
    wide reaching enough to encompass several different meanings. The  term
    is undefined and to my view, it would be  undesirable  for  me  to  try
    defining it. However, to my mind, it clearly encompasses any new matter
    which may form a ground  of  appeal  in  section  84(1)  as  the  above
    sections reveal. Such grounds of appeal (previously)  included  that  a
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules (see  section
    84(1)(a)); much as has been contended here pursuant to paragraphs  276A
    and 276B by the Appellant's solicitors.

11. Mr Richardson relied upon AS (Afghanistan) and in  particular  referred
    my attention to [83-84] of Moore-Bick, LJ's  judgment  wherein  it  was
    stated  that  "The  whole  tenor  of  the  legislation  points  to  the
    conclusion that the purpose of section 120 is  to  flush  out  all  the
    grounds on which the applicant may seek to rely so  that  they  can  be
    considered at the same time."

12. Mr Richardson submitted that  the  substance  of  the  decision  (under
    section 84(5)) meant the effect of the decision. I was also referred to
    pp.28-29 of the Long Residence Guidance (version 13;  published  8  May
    2015) which states inter alia as follows:

         'The applicant completes 10 years continuous lawful residence while
         awaiting a decision of an appeal

         A person may complete 10 years continuous lawful  residence  whilst
         they  are  awaiting  the  outcome  of  an  appeal  and  submit   an
         application on this basis. Under sections 3C  and  3D,  it  is  not
         possible  to  submit  a  new  application  while   an   appeal   is
         outstanding. However, the applicant can submit further  grounds  to
         be considered at appeal.

         If the applicant has an outstanding appeal against  a  decision  to
         refuse leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain,  and  submits
         an application for long residence, you must void the long residence
         application and refund the fee. You must create a file or  sub-file
         and mark it 'PRIORITY'. You must send the file or sub-file  to  the
         presenting officers unit (POU) dealing with the  appeal.  You  must
         send a letter to the applicant or  their  representative  informing
         them their application  has  been  linked  with  their  outstanding
         appeal.'

13. Therefore, the guidance makes clear that  new  applications  cannot  be
    submitted under section 3C and 3D where an applicant completes 10 years
    continuous lawful residence whilst awaiting a decision  in  an  appeal,
    but further grounds can be submitted and considered at appeal.

14. For my part, the clearest answer to the issue arises at [80]  of  Pill,
    LJ's judgment wherein it is stated inter alia as follows:

         "... the  statement  provided  under  section  120  will  generally
         contain new  grounds  for  challenging  the  decision  rather  than
         additional evidence or material supporting  the  original  grounds.
         Section  96(2)   reinforces   that   interpretation,   because   it
         contemplates a decision made in respect of a new application  based
         on grounds which the applicant could have raised in response  to  a
         notice under section 120. That indicates that the matters  intended
         to be raised in response to such a notice are of a kind that  would
         be capable of supporting a fresh application and that  the  purpose
         of the notice is to impose on the appellant a duty to  put  forward
         in response to it any grounds  he  may  have  for  challenging  the
         substance of the decision made against him, rather than simply  the
         grounds on which it was made."

15. Section 120 notice is designed to 'flush out' matters that an Appellant
    could raise in the normal course of proceedings which have not  already
    been raised in the course of an application  that  has  failed  and  is
    subject to an appeal. If an  Appellant  does  not  raise  them  when  a
    reasonable  opportunity  arises,  it  might  be  that  they  fall  into
    difficulty for not relying upon them sooner. Therefore, it was  curious
    that Ms Pal  sought  to  oppose  the  appeal  by  suggesting  that  the
    Appellant's appropriate course of action would  have  been  to  make  a
    fresh application.

16. In pursuance of this submission, Ms Pal relied upon Ali v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1198 and a copy of  Rules
    A34 and 34E of the current Immigration Rules. Ms Pal submitted that the
    Respondent could not decide whether the Appellant had spent  10  years'
    continuous residence in the UK as it would require  going  through  his
    immigration history to calculate whether he was absent for in excess of
    540 cumulative days or 180 consecutive days (although the  Respondent's
    position before the judge below was that the Appellant would have spent
    approximately 10 years in the UK in October 2014 - see paragraph 16  of
    the determination). The Respondent would  also  need  to  consider  the
    English language and Life in the UK test results, and whether it  would
    be contrary to the public interest under rule 276C for the Appellant to
    remain  indefinitely.  For  my  part,  given  that   AS   (Afghanistan)
    establishes that new matters may arise by way of section 120 before the
    Tribunal, it is not a task that the Respondent is mandated to  complete
    as s Pal believed, but one which the Tribunal must complete  itself  by
    virtue of statute. As parties are encouraged to assist the Tribunal  in
    all  proceedings  in  discharging  the   overriding   objective,   such
    consideration to those matters by the Respondent may be of  benefit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in future.

17. Ms Pal prayed in aid that by virtue of paragraph 34E of the Immigration
    Rules, the Appellant was required to make an application  and  pay  the
    relevant fee.  This  was  because,  as  set  out  at  34E  and  A34  of
    Immigration Rules, a specified form and specified fee are required  for
    long residence applications. She submitted that pursuant to Ali, at [10-
    11], the Appellant was entitled to make a fresh application instead  of
    a section 120 notice.

18. I queried with Ms Pal whether her submission was open to her to  pursue
    given that it conflicted with section 3C(4) of the Immigration Act 1971
    (pursuant to 3C(2)(c)) which prevented an appellant making a  fresh  or
    further application whilst an their leave was  extended  by  virtue  of
    section 3C(2)(c) whilst  pursuing  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
    decision, which was the precise scenario the Appellant would have found
    himself in when his solicitors made the section 120 statement.  Ms  Pal
    did not have instructions in relation to  this  point,  but  maintained
    that the Appellant  was  submitting  a  fresh  application  instead  of
    further grounds.

19. I find that the submission that the Appellant could have lodged a fresh
    application  during  the  pendency  of  his  appeal  to  be  completely
    baseless. Not only is an appellant prevented from doing so by virtue of
    section 3C(4) of the  Immigration  Act  1971,  but  this  rationale  is
    reflected in the Respondent's guidance that Mr Richardson  happened  to
    refer to also.

20. To my mind, the judge has clearly misapplied the ratio of AQ (Pakistan)
    which concerns fresh applications, as opposed to further grounds, which
    the submissions concerning paragraphs 276A and 276B clearly are. At any
    rate, AQ (Pakistan) concerned a points-based appeal where the appellant
    was attempted  to  rely  upon  points-based  evidence  that  the  Rules
    specified should be  submitted  with  the  application  and  could  not
    therefore be complied with later by way of a section 120  notice.  That
    material was suitable for a fresh application as the Court  found.  The
    position in AS (Afghanistan) is binding and of  direct  application  to
    the present appeal, having been upheld by the Supreme Court in Patel  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72,  at  [34-44]
    and I find that the judge committed a material error in law in  failing
    to substantively address paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules due  to
    her misconception that the section 120 grounds were  in  fact  a  fresh
    application and precluded from consideration. The decision consequently
    must be set aside.

21. In the light of the above  findings,  I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    findings of the judge in their totality.

    Decision

22. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

    Anonymity

24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  was  not
    asked to make one and do not see reason to do so at present.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

