
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27004/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2016                      |On 17 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               BESMIR AHMETAJ
                       (anonymity direcTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  promulgated  on  10  June
    2015.  The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal was a 26  year  old
    Albanian who had entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2011.  He  was
    served with notice of his liability to removal in  2013  and  sought  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  That was refused.  He subsequently claimed to  be  a
    family member of a Romanian citizen who had been working in  Colchester
    since July 2013.  The judge considered the evidence  and  came  to  the
    conclusion that the necessary family relationship had been demonstrated
    and proceeded to allow the appeal.

2.   The matters raised in the grounds of appeal are that in  the  light  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's finding in relation to the relationship,  the
    proper course was to send the matter back to the Secretary of State  in
    order that she might exercise her discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of
    the EEA Regulations rather than  allowing  the  appeal.   The  case  of
    Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340  (IAC)  is  of
    relevance and the head note contains the following summary:

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member  a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         not being in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."


3.   Mr Lams rightly concedes that the legal basis upon which the appeal  is
    brought is sound and accordingly there is a material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  That being the case, and with
    the concurrence of both parties, I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It then falls to me to re-make that decision  and  both
    representatives agree that the proper course is to accept  the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal  (which  are  not  challenged)  and
    remit the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  her  to  exercise  the
    statutory discretion under Regulation 17(4).

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is
set aside  as  not  in  accordance  with  law.  The  findings  of  fact  are
preserved. The matter is remitted to the  Secretary  of  State  for  her  to
exercise her discretion  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
