










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27913/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 4 July 2016                    |on 29 July 2016                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Shohel Ahmed
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bhuiyan, Haque and Hausmann Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.


   2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 8 October  1985.  He
      appealed against the decision of the secretary of state dated 17  June
      2014 refusing his application to vary his leave to remain  in  the  UK
      and to remove him by way of directions.


   3. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 6 October 2015, allowing
      the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.


   4. The claimant came to the UK on 25 November 2009 with leave to enter as
      a Tier 4 (General)  Student  valid  until  28  October  2012.  He  was
      subsequently granted an extension of stay as a student until 13  April
      2014. On 11 April 2014, he applied for leave to remain as  a  partner.
      It was accepted that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
      his partner who is British.


   5. The secretary of state considered the application  under  Appendix  FM
      and paragraph 276ADE of the rules. As regards the partner route  under
      Appendix  FM,  there  were  no   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
      relationship continuing in Bangladesh. Nor were the requirements under
      paragraph 276ADE met. There were no exceptional circumstances.


   6. Prior to  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  additional
      grounds of appeal were lodged without  objection.  This  followed  the
      birth of the claimant's child in the UK 10 December 2014.   She  is  a
      British citizen.


   7. The evidence before the Tribunal was that the claimant's  sponsor  was
      born in Bangladesh and came to the UK at the  age  of  four  with  her
      family. He has not worked in Bangladesh. He has four brothers and  his
      mother lives there.


   8. In the UK he has his wife and child. Both she and the child were  born
      in the UK and are British citizens. She  will  not  go  to  Bangladesh
      because she finished her  education  in  the  UK.  In  Bangladesh  the
      culture and weather is different [10].


   9. The claimant did not think of his immigration status when he 'saw' his
      wife here. He "liked and loved her" and wanted to marry  her.  If  his
      application is refused, the judge stated that she will  go  back  with
      him if she can go with his children [10]


  10. During cross examination the claimant stated that his wife was born in
      Bangladesh. All her family are in the UK. The claimant would  be  able
      to work in Bangladesh if returned there and it would be easier for him
      to obtain a good job with his qualifications gained in  the  UK.  They
      cannot return to Bangladesh as a family because although his wife  was
      born there, she has been in the UK all her life and her family  is  in
      the UK [12].


  11. He was not aware that marrying in the UK would not automatically  lead
      to his having a right to live here [13]. He had not discussed the fact
      that his student visa was ending. They did not discuss what they would
      do if the application failed. If his wife and child go to  Bangladesh,
      he will go with them and will not go on his own. If his wife and  baby
      want to go, they will go back together. He cannot live  without  them.
      If they remain in the UK, he  will  remain.  His  wife  sponsored  his
      application. Had she not done so he would have returned to Bangladesh.
      [13]


  12. The Judge set out a number of authorities in respect of Article 8 from
      [28 to 33], including Sanade and Others (British children - Zambrano -
      Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).


  13. The Judge noted that the circumstances had changed since the  refusal,
      as the claimant's child was born. That child is a British citizen,  as
      his his mother. The suitability and eligibility requirements under the
      rules are met but the secretary of state  did  not  accept  that  EX.1
      applies under the partner route [34].


  14. She considered the appeal on the basis of the  circumstances  applying
      at the date of hearing [35].


  15. She found that looking at the claimant and his  partner  only,  taking
      the oral evidence at its highest, the  claimant  had  not  shown  that
      there would be very significant  difficulties  faced  by  him  or  the
      sponsor in continuing family life outside the UK, which could  not  be
      overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the  claimant  or
      sponsor. They can both speak Bengali. His family is in Bangladesh. The
      sponsor  came  to  the  UK   from   Bangladesh.   The   claimant   has
      qualifications and would expect to  obtain  well  paid  employment  to
      support his family on return. Any difficulties with change of climate,
      length of absence, presence of the sponsor's  family  in  the  UK  and
      adaptation to the surroundings and changes may cause some concern  but
      do not reach the threshold of significant difficulties. [36]


  16. Under the "child  route"  she  found  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
      subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying   child.   The
      claimant's child is in the UK and is a British citizen. The issue  for
      determination was whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the UK. [37]


  17. When  applying  Zambrano,  and  Sanade,  she  found  that  it  is  not
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK and  thereby  lose  the
      substance of the rights conferred by virtue of his status as a British
      citizen and citizen of the European Union. [38].  She  found  that  it
      "followed" that EX.1 applies to  the  claimant's  application  in  the
      changed circumstances. She accordingly allowed the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules.


  18. She did not however go on to consider in the alternative an Article  8
      claim outside the rules.


  19. On 10 May 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted the secretary  of
      state permission to appeal. It was arguable that the  Judge  erred  at
      [37-38] in her findings with respect to EX.1 under the child route, in
      her finding as to whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the UK. Given that the child's mother would remain in the  UK
      as she is not a British citizen, it cannot be argued that Zambrano  is
      relevant; nor can Sanade be regarded as relevant as this was based  on
      a concession.


  20.  Mr  Duffy  relied  on  the  secretary  of  state's  grounds   seeking
      permission. The Zambrano principle cannot apply as there is  no  issue
      of removing the sponsor. She is the primary carer of  the  newly  born
      child.


  21. He relied on MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran  [2013]
      UKUT 00380 (IAC) and in  particular  paragraph  41,  where  the  Upper
      Tribunal referred to a judgment of Hickinbottom J  in  Jamil  Saneh  v
      Secretary of State for Work and Pensions and the Commissioner for HM's
      Revenue and Customs [2013] EWHC 2093 (Admin), summarising the learning
      from various authorities set out at [40] of MA and SM, with which  the
      Tribunal agreed and which it adopted. In particular, the rights of  an
      EU child will not be infringed if he is not compelled to  leave.  Even
      where a non EU ascendant relative is compelled to leave EU  territory,
      the Article 20 rights of an EU child will not be infringed if there is
      another ascendant relative who has the right of residence  in  the  EU
      and who can and will in fact care for the child.


  22. Mr Duffy submitted that it is for the national courts to determine, as
      a question of fact on the evidence before it, whether  an  EU  citizen
      would be compelled to leave the EU to follow a  non-EU  national  upon
      whom he is dependent.


  23. Nothing less than such compulsion would engage Articles 20 and  21  of
      the TFEU. In particular, EU law  will  not  be  engaged  where  an  EU
      citizen is not compelled to leave the  EU,  even  if  the  quality  or
      standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a  result  of  the
      non-EU national upon whom he is  dependent  if  for  example  he  were
      removed or prevented from working, although such actions  and  removal
      may result in an interference with some other right, such as the right
      to respect for family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention
      of Human Rights.


  24. Mr Duffy also referred to [56]  of  MA  and  SM,  where  the  Tribunal
      observed in respect of SM that the mere fact that the  sponsor  cannot
      be  economically  active  as  he  would  wish,  because  of  his  care
      responsibilities to the  children  is  not  sufficient  to  support  a
      conclusion that the children would be denied the genuine enjoyment  of
      the EU citizenship rights, nor would this be the case if  the  sponsor
      were required to stop working altogether. The right  of  residence  is
      the right to reside in the territory of the EU. It is not a  right  to
      any particular quality of  life  or  to  any  particular  standard  of
      living. Zambrano was accordingly not relevant.


  25. Moreover, the appeal could not  succeed  under  the  2006  Regulations
      because the child would be entitled to remain with the mother, herself
      a British citizen. The question therefore is whether or not  it  would
      be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.


  26. Although s.55 of the 2009 Borders Act  was  applicable  and  had  been
      relied on, the Judge erred in finding in line with Zambrano and Sanade
      that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK
      and lose the substance of  the  rights  conferred  by  virtue  of  the
      child's status here as a British citizen and of the European Union.


  27. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Bhuiyan adopted his  skeleton  argument.
      He submitted that the Judge gave a detailed analysis  of  recent  case
      law. She found in line with the case law quoted, "including"  Zambrano
      and Sanade which showed that her decision  was  not  based  wholly  on
      those decisions but "only a part of it, albeit a very little  part  of
      it."


  28. He accepted that the Judge could have made her findings  "...  clearer
      accordingly,  in  paragraphs  37-38,   perhaps   by   rephrasing   her
      construction of sentences; even if that is to be considered an  error,
      surely it cannot be considered material enough to trigger a set  aside
      of the decision in order to overturn the original findings."


  29. As an  "alternative  submission"  he  submitted  that  the  matter  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in the event that an error of  law
      is found. There should be a fresh hearing  to  determine  the  issues,
      given that the claimant has been the primary carer of the child  since
      birth due to the mother's ill health and full time work.


     Assessment


  30. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point  of
      law. She found that it is not reasonable to expect the child to  leave
      the UK.


  31. However, the child's mother could not be compelled to leave the UK  as
      she too is  a  British  citizen.  Accordingly,  there  is  a  relative
      available who has the right of residence in the EU  and  who  can  and
      would in practice care for the child.


  32. Although the Judge also had regard  to  s.55  of  the  2009  Act,  she
      expressly included Zambrano and Sanade when concluding that it is  not
      reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.   The  decision  in
      Zambrano was not relevant to the decision that had to be made.


  33. The Tribunal is required, in considering EX.1, to consider whether  or
      not it would be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK.  The
      Judge did not have regard to the Tribunal's decision  in  MA  and  SM,
      supra, or Sanneh which summarised the  relevant  principles  to  arise
      from Zambrano.


  34. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of a material error on a point of law.  I
      accordingly set it aside.


  35. Both parties submitted  that  this  was  an  appropriate  case  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


  36. I have had regard to the Senior President's Practice Statement in this
      respect. In giving effect to that approach, I am  satisfied  that  the
      extent of judicial fact finding which is necessary in  order  for  the
      decision to be re-made is likely to be fairly extensive. I  have  also
      had regard to the overriding objective and conclude that it  would  in
      the circumstances be just and fair to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to
      Taylor House for a fresh decision by another Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer






      Signed                             Date  28 July 2016


