
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27250/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 3 December 2013                            |on 17 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               KONG YOKE CHYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant applied on 11 April 2008 for leave to  remain  in  the  UK,
   outside the Immigration Rules, on the basis of private and family life in
   the UK.  The respondent refused that application for reasons explained in
   a letter dated 10 June 2010.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie dismissed
   the appellant's appeal by determination promulgated on 9 August 2010.  At
   a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on  3  February  2011  before  Designated
   Judge Murray parties agreed that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal erred materially in law.  The case comes before me  following  a
   transfer order made for administrative reasons, to avoid further delay.

2) The history of delay is a long one, due initially to the respondent,  and
   later mainly to the appellant, in respect of matters such  as  change  of
   representation,  adjournment  to  obtain  an  expert  report,  and   non-
   availability of representatives.  Nothing turns on the various delays.

3) There was before the FtT judge a question, then based only on  a  passage
   in the US State Department Report 2009,  whether  the  appellant's  child
   would be treated in Malaysia as stateless and thereby deprived of health,
   education and other facilities.  Error thereon was the original ground of
   appeal to the UT.  It is not clear from the record whether on 3  February
   2011 error was thought to arise from lack of reasoning on that  question,
   or from failure to take account of the principles explained (subsequently
   to Judge Scobbie's decision) in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 regarding the
   best interests of the child.  Perhaps it  was  both.   No  error  of  law
   decision was issued.  The question is not now important,  because  it  is
   common ground that an entirely fresh decision must  be  reached,  on  all
   evidence now available.

4) The personal circumstances and immigration history of the appellant,  his
   partner and child in the UK are  not  in  dispute.   He  is  a  Malaysian
   citizen and passport holder of ethnic Chinese origin, born  on  18  April
   1980.  His partner is Pei Nam Tsi Thow,  also  a  Malaysian  citizen  and
   passport holder of ethnic Chinese origin, born on 5 October  1980.   Both
   are non-Muslims - he  describes  himself  as  of  no  religion,  and  she
   describes herself as Buddhist.  He says that he entered the UK unlawfully
   in 2002 and has been here ever since.  She entered the UK  in  or  around
   2001, initially on some form of visa, and then remained unlawfully.  They
   say they met in 2002 and have lived together since 2003.  They  have  one
   child, Shen Hei Kong, born in the UK on 2 July 2010.   Both  parents  are
   named on his birth certificate.  Since 2010 they have lived with a sister
   of the appellant's partner and her husband.  The  sister  has  indefinite
   leave to remain in the UK, and  the  husband  is  a  UK  citizen.   Those
   relatives have a son, born on 20 April 2010.   The  boys  are  constantly
   together.

5) The appellant and his partner have been legally free to marry in  the  UK
   for some time, the respondent's agreement no longer being required.  They
   made enquiries at the registrar's office with a  view  to  marrying,  and
   were told they would need their passports as evidence of  identity.   The
   passports were in the hands of the respondent, and matters were taken  no
   further.

6) The appellant now puts his case on (a) risk arising from his child  being
   treated as stateless and (b) the close links he, his  partner  and  their
   child have with extended family in the UK, and  in  particular  the  best
   interests of the two children, whose  bond  is  closer  than  usual  with
   cousins, more akin to brothers or even twins.

7) There was before the First-tier Tribunal the US State  Department  Report
   2009.  Ms Loughran referred also to the US State Department Report  2011,
   but did not identify any difference between the passages referred  to  in
   the two reports.  There does not appear to be any.  At section 6  of  the
   report under the heading "Children", the following appears:

    Citizenship is derived from one's parents (see section  2.d).   Parents
    must register a child within 14 days of birth.  The authorities require
    citizens to  provide  their  marriage  certificate  and  both  parents'
    Malaysian Government multi-purpose card ... parents applying  for  late
    registration must prove  the  child  was  born  in  the  country.   The
    authorities do not enter the father's information for a child born  out
    of wedlock unless there is a joint application by the  mother  and  the
    person claiming to be the father ... Marriages between Muslims and non-
    Muslims were officially void.  Couples in such marriages had difficulty
    registering births that recognise the father due to the  invalidity  of
    the marriage.  Children without birth certificates  are  stateless  and
    denied entry into both public and private schools.  Stateless  children
    ... were required to pay higher medical fees, which caused hardship  in
    many cases.


8) The passage marked in the appellant's bundle in the US  State  Department
   report at 2.d reads:

    Citizenship  is  derived  from  one's  parents  (ius  sanguinis).   NGO
    estimates that the number  of  stateless  persons  range  from  several
    thousand to as many as 30,000.  A  foreign  government  estimated  that
    approximately 10-20% of the 60,000 illegal immigrants  and  persons  of
    concern  living  in  Sabah  were  stateless  children  born  in  Sabah.
    Government officials denied  stateless  persons  access  to  education,
    health care, and the right to own property.


    Some persons were stateless because the government refused to  register
    their birth  due  to  inadequate  proof  of  their  parents'  marriage.
    Interfaith marriage is  not  recognised  by  the  government  sometimes
    resulted in undocumented de facto stateless children.


9) There is  an  excerpt  of  information  from  the  UNHCR  Refugee  Agency
   Refworld, in turn sourced from information provided by the Immigration  &
   Refugee Board of Canada, dated 16 November 2007:

    The constitution of Malaysia governs the issue of Malaysian nationality
    ... However, children born in wedlock abroad to a Malaysian mother  and
    a  foreign  father  are  considered  to  have  received  the   father's
    citizenship.  Children born out of  wedlock,  abroad,  to  a  Malaysian
    mother are  not  considered  citizens,  but  may  enter  Malaysia  with
    permanent  resident  status,  with  the  mother,  and  may  apply   for
    citizenship ...


    Applications for confirmation of citizenship  status  and  applications
    for citizenship are made to the  National  Registration  Department  of
    Malaysia ... the documents required will vary ...


10) There was also  produced  an  excerpt  from  the  National  Registration
   Department of  Malaysia  website  on  "special  circumstances"  regarding
   application for citizenship under Article 15A of the Constitution.  This,
   however, is not enlightening as to the circumstances under which such  an
   application may either be required or granted.

11) E-mails between the respondent and the Malaysian High Commission in  the
   UK run as follows:

    From Home Office to High Commission, 24/6/13:


    Please can you confirm  if  UK  born  child  is  entitled  to  Malaysia
    citizenship if both their  parents  are  Malaysian  nationals  but  are
    unmarried.


    From High Commission to Home Office, 25/6/13:


    ... A child born to  Malaysian  parents  is  entitled  to  a  Malaysian
    citizenship.


    From High Commission to Home Office, 27/6/13:


    For unmarried couple, as long as the mother is a  Malaysian  the  child
    can apply for a Malaysian citizenship.


12)  The  appellant  produces  a  report  from  Dr  D  K  Brown,  Reader  in
   International Development and Head of the International Development Group
   at the University of Bath.  He is an expert on the politics of  ethnicity
   and citizenship in Malaysia, and has discussed this case " ...  (although
   not the specific details) with a number of practising lawyers  and  civil
   rights activists in Malaysia."  He says at paragraph 1:

    Following Malaysian citizenship law, an  application  to  register  the
    citizenship of the applicant's child (rather than seek  naturalisation)
    is permissible insofar as the child meets the formal criteria laid  out
    in the constitution.  Under part II of Schedule 2 of the  Constitution,
    however, the child is entitled to citizenship by operation  of  law  on
    the basis that the father is a Malaysian citizen and was  born  in  the
    Federation.   Article  15(2)  of  the  Federal  Constitution,  however,
    permits the Federal Government to  register  the  child  of  a  citizen
    irrespective of place of birth, but does not oblige it likewise.  It is
    outside of my competence to comment on the legal implications of  these
    provisions.

13) Dr Brown comments on widespread discrimination by government bodies  and
   agencies against non-Malays and non-Muslims.  He goes on:

        4.  Registration   of   citizenship   requires   demonstration   of
           "elementary knowledge of the Malay language, but neither the law
           nor any publicly available official  guidelines  determine  what
           constitutes "elementary" knowledge nor how  this  regulation  be
           applied to children ... an  additional  area  of  ambiguity  and
           uncertainty for the citizenship applicant's child.


        5. There is ambiguity in Malaysian legal practice over  the  status
           of children born out of wedlock outside the country.  It may  be
           that the child is required to seek  naturalisation  rather  than
           registration because of the marital status of the applicants  at
           the time of the child's birth.  I have been unable to  ascertain
           how far this has been applied in  practice.   Naturalisation  is
           clearly a much more difficult process ...

        6. In the event that the child is denied citizenship  registration,
           the child will not  be  entitled  to  attend  state  school  ...
           couples without the appropriate marital certificates can find it
           impossible to enrol their child into schools ... The risk of the
           child being denied a basic education is hence two-fold, both  on
           the basis of the risk to his citizenship and the risk  that  the
           applicant's marriage is not recognised.

        7. ... While the applicant's child appears to fulfil the  technical
           requirements for registering citizenship ...  there  is  a  very
           realistic chance that  the  child  will  be  denied  citizenship
           registration ... the administration  of  citizenship  status  in
           Malaysia is  arbitrary  and  discretionary  and  tends  to  look
           disfavourably upon non-Muslims, upon unmarried couples, and upon
           those without a strong  command  of  the  Malay  language.   The
           applicants fall into all three  of  these  categories;  I  would
           hence conclude on the balance of probabilities that there  is  a
           strong chance that the child would be  denied  registration  and
           ... consequently be denied his fundamental rights for education.

14) Mr Mullen relied upon MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  289,  where
   the outcome depended upon whether the Ethiopian authorities  would  allow
   the appellant to return to Ethiopia.  Elias LJ said that it was  not  for
   the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal simply to determine  that  question  to
   the usual standard of proof:

    It is a question which can ... be put to the test.  There is no  reason
    why the appellant should not herself make a formal application  to  the
    Embassy to seek to obtain the relevant documents ...


       50. In my judgment, where the essential  issue  before  the  AIT  is
           whether someone will or  will  not  be  returned,  the  Tribunal
           should in the normal case require the applicant to act bona fide
           and take all reasonably practicable steps to seek to obtain  the
           requisite documents to enable her to return.


       52. ... Bradshaw is an example  of  such  a  case.   The  issue  was
           whether the applicant was stateless.   Lord  MacLean  held  that
           before a person could be regarded as stateless, she should  make
           an application for citizenship of the countries with  which  she
           was most closely connected.


   53. Any other approach leads, in my view, to absurd results.


15) Stanley Burnton LJ discussed the same question at paragraphs 77  to  85,
   finding no good reason why the appellant should not be required  to  take
   reasonable steps such as applying to the Embassy for recognition  of  her
   Ethiopian nationality.

16)  On  that  evidence  and  authority,  is  the   appellant's   case   (a)
   established?

17) None of the terms of the  Constitution,  or  other  citizenship  law  of
   Malaysia, has been produced for direct reference.

18) The appellant and his partner could marry if they chose.   There  is  no
   reason to think the respondent would not make the passports available for
   that purpose.  I do not regard this as a critical point, but if they were
   to marry that could only tend to help the child's situation.

19) Some misconceptions appear to have arisen from the passages  in  the  US
   State Department Report.  If citizenship is  derived  from  the  parents,
   this child qualifies.  The requirement to register a child within 14 days
   is a requirement to  register  the  birth,  not  to  make  a  citizenship
   application.  The present case is not one of late registration of  birth,
   but of a child born out of the country and  whose  birth  has  duly  been
   registered abroad.   He  has  both  parents  on  his  birth  certificate.
   Although Ms Loughran drew attention to the  passage  on  void  marriages,
   this is not a relationship between a Muslim  and  a  non-Muslim.   It  is
   between two non-Muslims,  a  very  common  situation  in  Malaysia.   The
   concerns over stateless children expressed in the  passages  quoted  (and
   elsewhere  in  the  US  State  Department  Report  and  other  background
   material) relate to the children of illegal immigrants and refugees  from
   countries outside Malaysia, not to children with  two  Malaysian  citizen
   parents.

20) The Immigration & Refugee Board of Canada information  is  not  explicit
   about citizenship of a  child  born  out  of  wedlock  to  two  Malaysian
   citizens abroad.  It tends to suggest that citizenship  would  either  be
   automatic, or  readily  granted.   Ms  Loughran  drew  attention  to  the
   sentence, "A  child  born  in  Malaysia  does  not  automatically  obtain
   Malaysian citizenship".  I am satisfied that  concerns  not  a  child  of
   Malaysian parents, but a child of  non-Malaysian  parents.   It  is  well
   known that birth in the national territory by itself  in  some  countries
   confers citizenship, but in many it does not.  That is why  the  sentence
   appears.

21) There has been no reference to  any  evidence  that  any  child  of  two
   Malaysian  citizen  parents,  of  whatever  ethnicity  or  religion,  and
   wherever  born,  has  ever  been  regarded  by  the  Malaysian  state  as
   stateless.  If such a practice  exists,  there  might  be  some  reported
   examples, and criticism from sources such as Refworld and  the  US  State
   Department.

22) Neither party referred to any principle of  private  international  law,
   or of evidence. While the private international law of Scotland and  that
   of England and Wales are distinct, there are no differences  for  present
   purposes, and citizenship law is UK law.  It is presumed that the foreign
   law coincides with the UK position unless the contrary is established.  A
   child born abroad to two UK citizen parents is a UK citizen.   (It  would
   be rather surprising if the law of  most  countries  does  not  recognise
   citizenship of a child born abroad of two citizens.)  The burden of proof
   is on the party who maintains  that  foreign  law  is  different.   Where
   foreign law is relevant, it is to be established as a matter of fact.   A
   common way of establishing it is by a report or  opinion  from  a  lawyer
   qualified in the relevant jurisdiction.  That is not the  only  way,  and
   this jurisdiction has no strict requirements of evidence,  but  it  would
   have been the obvious course.

23) I make no criticism whatsoever of Dr Brown, who has tried to answer  the
   questions put to him as best he can, but, as he recognises at the outset,
   he is not an expert on the law of Malaysia.  There is  confusion  in  his
   report and in the appellant's presentation of the case arising  from  the
   distinction which obviously exists in Malaysia  between  registration  of
   birth and registration of citizenship.  It is by no means clear,  on  any
   view of the evidence, that the child in this  case  has  to  register  or
   apply for citizenship, as distinct from being automatically  entitled  to
   it without any process.

24) Ms Loughran asked me to prefer a detailed expert report to "a  one  line
   e-mail from an unidentified person in the High Commission". However,  the
   expert report is, for the reasons given above, well short of  conclusive,
   and I see no reason not to accept the information provided  by  the  High
   Commission, which is in a position to know, and has no axe to grind.

25) In any event, there was no answer  to  the  Presenting  Officer's  point
   based on MA.  It is in the appellant's power  to  apply  on  the  child's
   behalf to the High Commission for further informal confirmation or for  a
   passport.  Without taking that course, the question cannot be answered in
   favour of the appellant.

26) The case for the appellant so far as based on the alleged  risk  of  his
   child  being  regarded  as  a  stateless  person  in  Malaysia   is   not
   established.

27) It is not necessary to go further than that; but on all the evidence,  I
   think it is overwhelmingly likely that there would be no problem of  non-
   recognition of citizenship of the appellant's child, and that a  passport
   would be forthcoming without any difficulty.

28) On the correct  approach  to  the  interests  of  the  children,  I  was
   referred to the summary agreed in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 at paragraph 10:


      (1) The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
      proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
      (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be a
      primary consideration, although not always the only primary
      consideration; and the child's best interests do not of themselves
      have the status of the paramount consideration;
      (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by the
      cumulative effect of other considerations, no other consideration can
      be treated as inherently more significant;
      (4) While different judges might approach the question of the best
      interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask oneself
      the right questions in an orderly manner in order to avoid the risk
      that the best interests of a child might be undervalued when other
      important considerations were in play;
      (5) It is important to have a clear idea of a child's circumstances
      and of what is in a child's best interests before one asks oneself
      whether those interests are outweighed by the force of other
      considerations;
      (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination of
      all relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved in an
      article 8 assessment; and
      (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not
      responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.
29) The Article 8 considerations on the appellant's side are  as  summarised
   above, derived from witness statements from the  appellant,  his  partner
   and her relatives in the UK.  I accept that there is an intimate  network
   among the three immediate family members and other  near  relatives,  the
   most important aspect of which is the relationship between the two  three
   year  old  boys,  brought  up  closely  together.   To  disrupt  that  is
   unfortunate, and no doubt each would miss the other,  but  it  cannot  be
   said to have any  long  term  adverse  impact  on  their  well-being  and
   prospects in life.  Many people do not live in the same neighbourhood  or
   country as all their close relatives.  The appellant and his partner have
   close family also in Malaysia.

30) There was some evidence, although  Ms  Loughran  did  not  give  it  any
   emphasis, going to whether or not the appellant and his  partner  have  a
   wider family network capable of providing economic support  in  Malaysia.
   I do not find it a matter of any importance.  They  are  both  young  and
   capable of working.  Even if their relatives are elderly and not  capable
   of providing financial support, there is no reason why the appellant  and
   his partner should not be able to provide for themselves and their child.

31) The immigration history of the appellant  and  his  partner  is,  as  Ms
   Loughran pointed out, nothing like as bad as Mr Zoumbas and his wife, but
   there is nothing in the appellant's immigration history  to  his  credit,
   and little in hers, other than arriving lawfully in the first place.   As
   Mr Mullen observed, their situation in terms of family and  private  life
   has been built up entirely  while  they  have  remained  for  many  years
   without any entitlement.  As to the general  considerations  relating  to
   immigration control, guidance is in Huang [2007] UKHL11 at paragraph 16:

    The authority will wish to consider and weigh all that tells in  favour
    of the refusal of leave which is challenged, with particular  reference
    to justification under article 8(2). There will, in almost any case, be
    certain  general  considerations  to  bear   in   mind:   the   general
    administrative desirability of applying known  rules  if  a  system  of
    immigration control is to be workable, predictable, consistent and fair
    as between one applicant and another; the damage to good administration
    and  effective  control  if  a  system  is  perceived   by   applicants
    internationally to be unduly porous, unpredictable or perfunctory;  the
    need to discourage non-nationals admitted to  the  country  temporarily
    from believing that they can commit serious crimes and yet  be  allowed
    to remain; the need  to  discourage  fraud,  deception  and  deliberate
    breaches of the law; and so on.

32) This is not a case of crime or fraud but it is one of abuse,  and  there
   is a public interest in maintaining an effective system according to  the
   Rules.

33) There is no significant detriment to the two children or to anyone  else
   which would render removal a disproportionate step.

34) By concession of the respondent, the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal is set aside for  error  of  law.   The  following  decision  is
   substituted: The appeal,  as  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
   dismissed.





                               [pic]
                                6 December 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
