
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
Ia/27523/2015

                                                     ia/27529/2015

                                                     ia/27539/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1st December 2017                       |On 9th January 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                MRS RAMANDEEP
                                  MR JAGTAR
                                  MISS S M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the three Appellants in this
    case against a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Manyarara promulgated on 23rd December 2016.   The  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was determined on the papers at the request of  the
    Appellants as indeed it is today, a letter having been received  asking
    that it be dealt with on the papers.  The Appellants are  partners  and
    their child, a little  girl  born  in  January  2012.   They  had  made
    application for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  that  was
    refused by the Secretary of State.

 2. The background to this appeal is that in June 2013 the first Appellant,
    the woman, made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.
     That was refused with a right of appeal.  An  appeal  was  lodged  but
    then withdrawn on the basis that the Secretary of State  was  going  to
    reconsider the application.  Then the college was closed and the  first
    Appellant was given the usual 60 days  to  find  a  fresh  Sponsor  and
    submit a fresh application. Then, and because of further  difficulties,
    the Secretary of State gave a further extension for her to  submit  her
    fresh application.

 3. The female adult Appellant arrived in the  UK  in  2011.   Her  partner
    arrived it would appear at the same time.

 4. The Judge, in considering the application looked  at  it  only  on  the
    basis of human rights, as she was required to do, and  did  so  through
    the  lens  of  the  Rules.   She  looked  first  to  see  whether   the
    requirements for leave to remain as a  student  were  met.   The  judge
    found that the first Appellant could not succeed on that basis and then
    looked at Appendix FM.  She found that neither of the first  or  second
    Appellant could meet the requirements of Appendix FM as partners or  as
    parents.  The judge then looked at paragraph 276ADE in relation to  all
    three Appellants and found that they could not meet those  requirements
    either.  It was reasonable to expect the child, who was 5 years old  at
    the time, to return to India with her parents and there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to the adult  Appellants  being  integrated  into
    India on return.  The judge gave considerable thought to the  situation
    of the two adults and their ability to resettle and make  a  living  in
    India and found that they would have no difficulty in doing so.

 5. What the judge did not do and the only ground upon which permission was
    granted was consider specifically Section 55, the best interests of the
    child.  I have looked through the file and the bundle of documents that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.  There are statements from both the
    adult Appellants which concentrate in the main on their wish to  study.
    There is nothing whatsoever in the statements or  other  evidence  that
    the best interests of the child require her to remain in the UK.  There
    is nothing in any of the evidence to indicate that her  best  interests
    lie anywhere other than continuing to live in the family unit with  her
    parents,  wherever  that  may  be,  and  if  the  parents  can  without
    difficulty integrate to the country of their nationality, India,  there
    is no reason why the child cannot either.  Therefore, although  failing
    to consider Section 55 is an error of law I find  it  is  not  material
    because on the evidence before the judge and of course  the  judge  was
    dealing with it on the papers as am I, there  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that the result could have been any different on the available evidence
    and therefore the error is not material.  Accordingly the appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 8th January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 8th January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


