










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27838/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 7 April 2016                      |On 11 May 2016                        |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    [A V]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms C S Peterson, counsel (instructed by London
Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on [ ] 1966.  Her
      appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  25  June  2014
      curtailing her leave to remain and to remove her by way of  directions
      under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
      dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge on human rights grounds and
      under the Immigration  Rules.  The  decision  was  promulgated  on  17
      September 2015.


   2. On  23  February  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. He noted that  the  appellant  entered
      the UK in June 2008 and has remained here ever since.  She  was  given
      leave to remain outside the rules in July 2012 until July 2015 but  it
      was  curtailed  to  expire  on  25  June  2014.  She  had  been  given
      exceptional leave to remain as she had married a man  in  the  UK.  He
      noted that the Judge seems to have accepted that  the  marriage  broke
      down because of her husband's violence; she also found that she  could
      return to the Philippines.


   3. He held it to be arguable that the  Judge  did  not  engage  with  the
      appellant's claim that she should have been treated  as  a  victim  of
      domestic violence and allowed to remain. Had she been  admitted  as  a
      wife rather than being allowed to remain exceptionally, she  would  be
      entitled to such protection.


   4. Ms Peterson, who did not represent the appellant before the First-tier
      Tribunal, adopted the grounds of appeal.  She  noted  that  the  Judge
      considered the submission that there were compelling reasons  why  the
      appellant should be granted leave to remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
      rules. It was accepted by counsel who represented the appellant before
      the First-tier tribunal that the appellant could not be granted  leave
      to remain under the Rules [16] and [17].


   5. The First-tier Judge  referred  to  sections  117A  and  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and considered  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) of the Rules. She found that the appellant  had  lived  for
      most of her life in the Philippines and had worked there as an  adult.
      She was 42 years old when she left and has  relatives  there.  She  is
      familiar with its language, customs and  society.  Accordingly,  there
      would not be any significant obstacles to her re-integration into  the
      country on her return [20].


   6. She had regard to the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls
      which was  in  the  public  interest.  The  appellant  had  a  limited
      entitlement of discretionary leave to remain in the UK at a time  when
      her circumstances were different. It is not  however  disproportionate
      that her claim for leave to remain be refused and that she be  removed
      from the UK. She did not find that there are  sufficiently  compelling
      reasons why she should be granted leave outside the rules [21].


   7. Ms Peterson submitted that the Judge did not properly  factor  in  the
      competing public interest considerations involved in the breakdown  of
      the appellant's marriage through domestic violence. That should in the
      circumstances have been treated as a compelling circumstance rendering
      the proposed removal disproportionate. Further, the  only  reason  the
      appellant failed to qualify  for  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  the
      Immigration Rules was as a result of her status upon  entry  into  the
      UK. That too is relevant to  the  proportionality  and  the  balancing
      exercise.


   8. The First-tier Judge accepted that the appellant's marriage broke down
      on account of significant domestic violence. Ms Peterson  informed  me
      that the appellant's  husband  received  a  sentence  of  imprisonment
      following his assault on the appellant. It was accepted therefore that
      she fled the marital home to avoid further violence.


   9. In expanding her submissions she contended that the Judge did not have
      proper regard to the public interest in ensuring that women should not
      be compelled to stay in an abusive and violent  relationship,  fearful
      that leaving the relationship would endanger her  immigration  status.
      The public interest in respect of  those  who  entered  the  UK  on  a
      spousal visa is reflected in Appendix FM section DVILR 1.1 which  sets
      out the requirements to be met for indefinite leave to remain  in  the
      UK as a victim of domestic violence. She did not meet the  requirement
      under DVILR1.1 that  her  first  grant  of  limited  leave  under  the
      Appendix must have been as a 'partner' under paragraph D-  ECP.1.1  or
      1.2 of the  Appendix,  which  sets  out  the  requirements  for  entry
      clearance as a partner.


  10. There were consequently two competing public interests at play in this
      case and there should have been  a  proper  analysis  of  the  balance
      between them. This the Judge failed to carry out at  all.  She  merely
      referred at [17] to the submissions made  on  the  appellant's  behalf
      relating to the public interest in ensuring that victims  of  domestic
      violence should feel able to  leave  the  relationship.   However,  in
      finding that there were not sufficiently compelling reasons, the Judge
      only had regard to the public interest in the maintenance of effective
      immigration control [21].


  11. It was further contended that the failure by the respondent to  engage
      with  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,  namely  that   her
      marriage broke down as a result of  domestic  violence,  rendered  the
      decision not in accordance with the law.


  12. Ms Peterson submitted that there would only be a very limited category
      of person in the position of the appellant.  A  criminal  offence  had
      been committed against her. The public interest balance, which is part
      of the Rules, had not been considered in her case.


  13.  She  referred  to  a  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  SSHD  v
      Fakhrutdinova,  promulgated  on  30  September  2013  (appeal   number
      IA/07490/2013).  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy   found   that   the
      appellant, a Russian, came to the UK on  a  work  placement.  She  was
      allowed to remain as a student. She then married a British citizen and
      applied for leave to remain as a spouse, which was eventually  allowed
      following  a  successful  appeal.   She   was   granted   36   months'
      discretionary leave to remain.


  14. Her marriage broke down on account of  domestic  violence.  They  then
      divorced. She thereafter applied for leave to remain. The  application
      was refused on human rights grounds rather  than  under  the  domestic
      violence provisions in the Rules.


  15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge applied the structured approach set  out
      in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. The Judge found that the aim  of  the
      maintenance of effective immigration control was not a legitimate  aim
      to be achieved in this case.  He was  rather  of  the  view  that  the
      legitimate aim here is the protection of  women  who  are  victims  of
      domestic violence. The underlying purpose of the Immigration Rules  is
      to ensure that victims of domestic violence are not faced with  having
      to stay in a violent and abusive relationship  in  order  to  maintain
      their immigration status. It was  plainly  wrong  that  the  appellant
      should be placed in a worse position than someone who had been granted
      26 months' leave or less who would be entitled to indefinite leave  to
      remain  once  they  had  established  domestic  violence  without  the
      additional upheaval of having to leave the UK.


  16. The First-tier Judge in that case found that it would  be  unnecessary
      and disproportionate for the respondent  now  to  say  that  once  the
      relationship had broken down owing to domestic violence, the appellant
      should be granted no further leave, and if required, to leave the  UK.
      It is only right that the spirit of the  protection  afforded  by  the
      immigration rules should apply to Ms Fakhrutdinova.


  17. Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy upheld the decision stating  that  those
      conclusions were open to the First-tier Judge, who took  into  account
      the legitimate aim, namely the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
      control, but weighed against that the terms of the  domestic  violence
      rules. He did not say that he was allowing the human rights appeal  on
      the basis of the family life provision  but  what  he  was  doing  was
      weighing up a large number of factors which he  felt  weighed  in  the
      balance and showed  that  the  removal  of  this  appellant  would  be
      disproportionate.


  18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker very fairly accepted that there
      had not been an adequate analysis  and  assessment  of  the  competing
      public interests at play in this case. He  accordingly  accepted  that
      there had been an error of law and that the  decision  should  be  set
      aside.


  19. I accept that there has been a failure by the Judge to make  a  proper
      assessment  of  the  competing  public  interests  as   outlined.    I
      accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved
      the making of an error of law. I accordingly set aside the decision.


  20. The parties both submitted that the matter should be remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for  fresh decision to be  made.  In  acceding  to
      that request I have had regard  to  the  Senior  President's  practice
      statement regarding the remitting  of  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision.


  21. The appeal is accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
      Hatton Cross. The agreed hearing date is 5 August 2016.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross)  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer






      Signed                             Date 6 May 2016

