
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27837/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25th November 2015                |On 4th  December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                              mr umair benjamin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D.  Clarke (Home Office presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This matter comes before me for consideration as to  whether  or  not
       there is a material error of law in the decision promulgated  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sullivan) on 13th March 2015 in which  the
       Tribunal dismissed the EEA appeal on  immigration  and  human  rights
       grounds.

    2. The appellant did not attend for the hearing before me and there  was
       no communication from him giving any explanation for his  absence  or
       seeking any adjournment.  I was satisfied that he had been duly  sent
       the notification of the date and time of  the  hearing  at  his  last
       known address.  I decided to hear the appeal in the  absence  of  the
       appellant following Rules 2 and 38 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Background

    3. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He  appealed  against  the
       refusal of his application for a residence  permit  as  the  extended
       family member of  an  EEA  national.   The  respondent  relied  on  a
       deception made by the appellant in a  previous  application  made  in
       2012 under Tier 1, for which there was no right  of  appeal  and  the
       lack of evidence to show any connection between the appellant and his
       partner. The appellant did not attend  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing. The Tribunal refused  an  application  to  adjourn  made  on
       behalf  of  the  appellant  by  his  representative.   The   Tribunal
       proceeded to determine the appeal in the absence of the appellant and
       his representative, who had withdrawn. The Tribunal was not satisfied
       that the evidence established that the appellant was so ill  that  he
       was unable to attend the hearing and the appeal was put back  to  the
       afternoon to allow the appellant to attend [8-12]

    4. In considering the substantive issue the Tribunal  found  that  there
       was little evidence to show that the appellant was in a  relationship
       with  an  EEA  national  [20  -26].   The  Tribunal  found  that  the
       respondent failed to produce sufficient  evidence  of  any  deception
       and/or evidence to show that the appellant was not in  occupation  of
       his claimed address. (The appellant  complained  extensively  in  his
       grounds of appeal that the respondent had relied  on  the  deception,
       but in fact this was not a material issue as  the  Tribunal  rejected
       the respondent's evidence.)

    5. The Tribunal took into account that the appellant's partner  had  not
       attended for the  hearing  and  there  was  no  oral  or  documentary
       evidence to show they were a couple. [26]

    6. The Tribunal  considered  Article  8  both  inside  and  outwith  the
       Immigration rules [27 -29]. Aside from residence in the UK  for  just
       over 3 years, there was no  evidence  to  show  that  Article  8  was
       engaged.

Grounds for permission

    7. The  appellant  argued  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  refusing  the
       adjournment made on medical grounds.

    8. The Tribunal failed to deal with the Article 8 claim.

    9. Permission to appeal was granted by DUTJ  Archer.   It  was  arguable
       that the Tribunal failed to properly consider Article 8.   There  was
       no arguable error of law in the  Tribunal's  decision  to  refuse  to
       grant an adjournment.



Rule 24 response

   10. The respondent opposed the appeal.  There was no complaint raised  as
       to the substantive findings and decision,  which  should  stand.  The
       Tribunal considered family life and there  was  no  evidence  of  any
       private life for the Tribunal to consider.

Submissions

  11.    Mr Clarke relied on Amirteymour & ors (EEA appeals; human  rights)
       [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC).  He submitted that the Tribunal was under no
       obligation to consider Article 8 in the circumstances where there was
       no section 120 Notice served and no EEA removal decision made.

Discussion and conclusion

  12.    I concur with the submissions made by Mr Clarke and as set out  in
       the Rule 24 response. The appellant was  precluded  from  bringing  a
       human rights challenge in the absence of  a  section  120  Notice  or
       where no EEA removal decision is made. In any event  I  am  satisfied
       that the Tribunal did in fact consider Article  8  issues  adequately
       with reference to the limited evidence that was before it.

Decision

  13.    There is no material error of law disclosed in the decision  which
       shall stand.

       The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 26.11.2015


                               GA Black

NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE


TO THE RESPONDENT

NO FEE AWARD MADE AS THE APPEAL WAS DISMISSED.




                               Signed   Date 26.11.2015


                               GA Black

