
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/28832/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           MR SAIF ULLAH RAB NAWAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Asma Nizimi, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hosie) sitting at Hatton Cross on  11  March
    2015 dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to issue him with a residence card as confirmation that
    he had a retained right of residence following his divorce from an  EEA
    national.  His application for a permanent residence card was  refused,
    and upheld by the First-tier Tribunal, on the ground that he had failed
    to provide the required information to prove that his former  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights  at  the  date  of  divorce.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that  the  appellant  requires  to  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He first entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 September 2006 with valid entry clearance as  a  student.
    On 13 September 2009 he married Ms Solar, an EEA national.  On 9 August
    2011 he was granted a five year residence card  valid  until  9  August
    2016 as the spouse of an EEA national.  On 13 January 2014 his marriage
    to Ms Solar was dissolved.  On 26 February 2014 solicitors  applied  on
    his behalf for a residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside
    permanently in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused on 2 July 2014 on the grounds that  he  had
    not provided sufficient evidence  that  his  ex-spouse  was  exercising
    treaty rights at the date of divorce.  He  had  provided  letters  from
    HMRC which indicated self-employed status of  his  former  spouse,  and
    these letters indicated she  was  paying  class  2  national  insurance
    contributions.  But the latest HMRC letter and  payment  was  dated  30
    March 2013 whereas the date of his divorce was 13 January 2014.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Hosie,  both  parties  were   legally
    represented.  Ms Nizimi of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant.
     As evidence that his ex-spouse was exercising  treaty  rights  at  the
    date of divorce, the appellant relied on the  documents  provided  with
    the application and the following additional documents:

      a) a demand for unpaid national insurance contributions issued by HMRC
         on 29 March 2014 to Ms Solar at  the  matrimonial  address  stating
         that her outstanding liability period ran from 7 April  2013  to  5
         April 2014;

      b) a demand for self-employed class 2 national insurance contributions
         issued by HMRC on 4 October 2014 to Ms  Solar  at  the  matrimonial
         address, in respect of an  outstanding  liability  running  from  6
         April 2014 to 11 October 2014; and

      c) a tax return for Ms Solar for the tax year 6 April 2013 to 5  April
         2014.

 5. Each page of the tax return was stamped with the following rubric:

         Copy only.

         Do not send to HMRC.

 6. In the tax return, Ms Solar declared total taxable profits for the year
    of �8,845.  She was thus not liable to pay any income tax.

 7. The appellant adopted as his evidence-in-chief a witness  statement  in
    which he said that he was not in a position to obtain evidence relating
    to his ex-wife's self-employment.  His relationship ended acrimoniously
    and he had made every effort to provide the required documents.  But it
    was beyond his control to provide information that his EEA sponsor  had
    been working and  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  after  their
    separation and divorce.

 8. Counsel asked the appellant about a letter which he had written to  his
    ex-spouse on 6 February 2015.  The appellant confirmed that the purpose
    of the letter was to ask her to give him some documents  to  show  that
    she was working and exercising her treaty rights.   Counsel  asked  him
    what had happened.  He answered that she had met him and given him  the
    recent national insurance contribution documents and the tax return.

 9. In cross-examination, the  appellant  was  asked  whether  he  had  any
    evidence that the 2014 tax return had been filed.  It was  put  to  him
    that if his ex-wife had submitted the tax return, she would  have  been
    given a receipt.  The appellant said he did not know.  She  had  simply
    given him these documents.  He was questioned as to how he had obtained
    these documents when he said in his witness statement that he could not
    get documents  because  of  the  acrimonious  divorce.   The  appellant
    indicated that things were acrimonious "before  putting  my  case"  but
    that when he had asked his ex-spouse to provide  documentary  evidence,
    she had been happy to oblige.

10. In closing submissions, the respondent's representative asked the judge
    to give little weight  to  the  ex-spouse's  2014  tax  return  as  the
    appellant was unable to provide evidence that she had  filed  this  tax
    return online.  Given what he had said in his  witness  statement  that
    the marriage had ended acrimoniously, the representative submitted that
    the authenticity of the 2014 tax return was highly in doubt.

11. In reply, Ms Nizimi submitted that the tax return showed that  the  ex-
    spouse was a self-employed cleaner until 6 April 2014.  As regards  the
    lack of production of a receipt for an online  tax  return  submission,
    the judge was asked to note that the document was an original and would
    only be produced if the application was filed online.   The  judge  was
    also  asked  to  consider  the  fact  that   the   national   insurance
    contributions at pages 27 and 28 were stamped,  indicating  that  bills
    were paid.  It was a serious allegation, she submitted,  to  doubt  the
    authenticity of a tax return and the judge was asked to  attach  little
    weight to that suggestion.

12. In  his  subsequent  decision,  the  judge  extensively  rehearsed  the
    evidence  that  he  had   received   and   the   submissions   of   the
    representatives.  He gave his  reasons  for  dismissing  an  appeal  at
    paragraphs [17] and [18] which I reproduce below:

         "17. I accept that the Appellant is employed as is shown by his P60
             for the year end April 2014.  Evidence of  his  employment  is
             also shown at pages 43-48.  In terms of his former wife's  tax
             return contained at pages 23-26 this  has  been  completed  in
             type and no supporting evidence has been produced.  It may  or
             may not have been lodged.  In terms of the National  Insurance
             contribution documentation at pages 27 and 28 this shows  that
             payments have been made.  I took into consideration the length
             of the marriage and the circumstances.  There appeared to be a
             rapid change of heart in the relationship in the  space  of  a
             month in July 2013.  This was  the  Appellant's  evidence.   I
             also took into account  the  inability  of  the  Appellant  to
             produce the documentation at the time of application and  then
             the production of it later on.   Why  would  his  former  wife
             produce personal documentation to her former  husband  (in  an
             acrimonious marriage break-up) which could  be  used  for  any
             purpose.  I noted that she was not present  to  speak  to  her
             documents though she appeared to be willing to meet  with  the
             Appellant and to hand over  all  her  personal  and  financial
             details in spite of a bitter marriage  break-up.   I  was  not
             convinced in the  circumstances  as  to  why  she  would  have
             suddenly become helpful and be prepared to assist  her  former
             husband.  She was not however prepared to come to the tribunal
             and speak on his behalf.

         18.  On balance, I was not  convinced  that  the  Appellant's  wife
             submitted her tax return for the year ended 2014 online in the
             absence  of  an   Inland   Revenue   receipt,   signature   or
             authentication.  It stands alone as an  inconclusive  document
             which  does  not  prove  the  Appellant's  case.   I  was  not
             satisfied  that  the  payment  of   her   national   insurance
             contributions, necessarily meant that she was self-employed in
             the absence of receipted tax returns or other  Inland  Revenue
             confirmation.   National  Insurance  contributions  for  self-
             employed persons are levied at a set rate and are not based on
             proof of earnings.  As a result I was not satisfied  that  she
             was self-employed and exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK  at
             the time of her divorce from the  Appellant.   The  burden  of
             proof is on the Appellant and he has  failed  to  provide  the
             necessary evidence to support his appeal.  The end  result  of
             this is that the Appellant's appeal must fail in terms of  the
             Immigration Rules."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

13. Paul Richardson of Counsel  settled  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Ground 1 was that  it  was
    arguable there was no requirement for the appellant to demonstrate that
    his wife was exercising treaty rights on the  day  of  his  divorce  in
    order  to  qualify  for  retained  right  of  residence,  following  NA
    (Pakistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 995.  Ground 2 was that it was  arguably  an
    error of law for the respondent, who could have verified  the  evidence
    in hours, to allege forgery without first doing so.  Ground 3 was  that
    the judge's  conclusion  in  paragraph  [18]  that  national  insurance
    evidence submitted by the appellant did not "necessarily" mean his wife
    was self-employed was flawed, and revealed that the judge  imposed  too
    high a burden of proof on an already disadvantaged appellant.  Ground 4
    was the judge had  erred  in  paragraph  [17]  by  drawing  an  adverse
    inference on the inability of the appellant to produce the evidence  at
    the time of his application but to produce it later  on.   The  reality
    was that  the  appellant  had  produced  national  insurance  and  HMRC
    documents in relation to his ex-wife at the time of his application.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

14. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  for,  inter  alia,  the
    following reasons:

         "The case proceeded on the basis that it had to be  shown  that  at
         the date of the divorce  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising
         treaty rights.  The production of limited  documentation  does  not
         necessarily discharge a burden of proof. That has to be assessed by
         the judge.  Whilst the terminology used might have been more  exact
         it is clear that the judge did not accept that a  reliable  picture
         had been given and was entitled to find that  the  burden  had  not
         been discharged."

The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

15. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission to appeal on
    19 August 2015 for the following reasons:

         "Refusal by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was on  the  sole  ground
         that the judge could not establish that on the date of  his  decree
         absolute his wife was exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   As
         stated in ground 1 of the permission to appeal, this issue has been
         referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union by the Court
         of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) [2014] EWCA  Civ  995.   The  ground  of
         appeal is arguable.

         The remaining grounds stand or fall with the first  ground  and  in
         view of the grant of permission in relation to ground 1 all grounds
         are arguable."

Discussion

16. As I informed the parties at the outset of the hearing before me in the
    Upper Tribunal, there is no merit whatsoever in ground 1.  Firstly,  it
    was not part of the case advanced by Counsel  at  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant did not need to show that his ex-
    wife was exercising treaty rights at the date  of  divorce.   Secondly,
    the case of NA Pakistan did not decide the point.  The Court of  Appeal
    merely recognised that it was arguable that the Regulations  2006  were
    incompatible with the Citizens' Directive in stipulating  unequivocally
    that the ex-spouse must be exercising treaty  rights  at  the  date  of
    divorce.  The decision of  the  Court  of  Justice  European  Union  is
    awaited on this issue.  In the meantime, judges must apply the  law  as
    it stands, not the law as it might be in  the  future.   There  was  no
    error in the judge proceeding on the agreed premise that the  appellant
    had to satisfy all the relevant requirements of Regulation 10 in  order
    to qualify for a retained right of residence.

17. As I explored with Ms Nizimi at the hearing, the grant of permission in
    respect of the remaining grounds is problematic as the reason given for
    granting permission on the remaining  grounds  does  not  stand  up  to
    scrutiny.  As Ms Nizimi readily concurred, the remaining grounds do not
    stand or fall with the outcome of  ground  1.   On  the  contrary,  the
    premise which underlies ground 1 is  precisely  the  opposite  of  that
    which underlies the remaining grounds.  Ground 1  is  directed  at  the
    proposition that the appellant does not need to show that his ex-spouse
    was exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce, whereas the  other
    grounds are based on the contrary premise, which is that proof  of  the
    ex-spouse's exercise of treaty rights at the  date  of  divorce  is  an
    essential requirement.

18. However, as permission had been granted for the  remaining  grounds,  I
    allowed Ms Nizimi to develop them.  This was helpful, as Ms Nizimi  was
    thus able to confirm that there was no version of the 2014  tax  return
    before Judge Hosie which did not specify that it was only a copy  which
    should not be sent to HMRC.

19.  I  consider  the  error  of  law  challenge   overlooks   this   vital
    consideration.  The effect of the  document  being  stamped  with  this
    rubric deprives it of any significant probative  value.   The  document
    informs the reader that it was not sent to HMRC.   It  also  tells  the
    reader that it is not a copy of a tax return that was filed with  HMRC,
    because such a tax return (whether in an original or copy  form)  would
    not have stamped on it the message that it was a copy only that  should
    not be sent to HMRC.

20. As I pointed out in the course of oral  argument,  on  the  first  page
    there is a section headed "How to file your return."   This  says  that
    most people file online, and informs the reader that they must go to  a
    named website to do this.  On the other hand, if the reader  wishes  to
    file on paper, he is asked to fill in "this form". Ms Nizimi  submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the ex-spouse had  submitted  her
    return online.  This was complete speculation:  there was not  a  shred
    of evidence to substantiate such a claim, and it  ran  counter  to  the
    information given on the first page of the document relied on.  For the
    fact that the ex-spouse  had  purportedly  completed  a  paper  return,
    albeit a version which was not to be sent to HMRC,  pointed  away  from
    her having filed a return online, as it was not necessary to complete a
    paper return in order to file an online return.

21. In conclusion, the judge gave adequate reasons in paragraphs  [17]  and
    [18] for finding that the appellant had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proof.

22. Ms Nizimi submits that the appellant has been a  victim  of  procedural
    unfairness  as  the  respondent  did  not  raise  an  issue  about  the
    authenticity of the tax return until the hearing,  rather  than  taking
    steps in advance of the hearing to establish whether the tax return had
    been filed.  But the burden always rested with the appellant  to  prove
    his case, and the tax return document was self-evidently a  weak  piece
    of evidence for  the  reasons  which  I  have  given  earlier  in  this
    decision.  It should have come  as  no  surprise  that  the  Presenting
    Officer would query the reliability of the tax return  as  proving  the
    exercise of treaty rights by the ex-spouse in the absence of other, and
    more persuasive, evidence.

23. Turning to ground 3, the judge has not applied too high a  standard  of
    proof.  One of the grounds for  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof on the balance of probabilities was that
    the  payment  of  her  national   insurance   contributions   did   not
    "necessarily" mean  that  she  was  self-employed  in  the  absence  of
    receipted tax returns or  other  Inland  Revenue  confirmation.   As  a
    result of this consideration, together with other  considerations,  the
    judge was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that  the  ex-
    spouse was self-employed and exercising treaty rights in the UK at  the
    time of her divorce from the appellant.  Viewed in isolation,  the  use
    of the word "necessarily" might arguably  import  that  the  judge  was
    applying a higher standard of proof than the balance of  probabilities.
    But viewed in context, it is clear the judge was not applying the wrong
    standard of proof to his assessment of the evidence.

24. Ground 4 is  vexatious.   The  judge  had  recognised  earlier  in  his
    decision that the appellant had produced some documentation at the time
    of his application.  But it was out of date, as was pointed out in  the
    refusal letter.  The evidence which was now relied  on  before  him  to
    discharge the burden of proof had only recently been produced.  So  the
    sentence in paragraph [17] about which complaint is made in ground 4 is
    neither materially inaccurate nor unfair.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    draw an adverse inference about the late production of the evidence now
    relied on in circumstances where the appellant had  previously  claimed
    that he had been unable to obtain any evidence from his  ex-spouse  due
    to the acrimonious nature of their divorce.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

