
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28813/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th June 2015                      |On 18th June 2015                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    D F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Stanley Richards
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the  Cameroon  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 14th June 1989.  On 11th March 2014 he made application for
    a  Derivative  Residence  Card  pursuant  to  Regulation  18A  of   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006,  on  the  basis  of  him  having  a
    British child in respect of whom it was said that he  was  the  primary
    carer.  On 8th July 2014 a decision was made to refuse the  application
    and the Appellant appealed.  On 17th November 2014 the appeal was heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R R Hopkins sitting at Birmingham.

 2. In a Statement of Reasons promulgated on 2nd December 2014,  but  dated
    30th November 2014, Judge Hopkins dismissed the  appeal.   He  was  not
    satisfied that it was the Appellant who had primary responsibility  (as
    opposed to shared responsibility) for child K.  He went on  to  say  at
    paragraph 28:

         "It is more likely that this is a case of the  Appellant  and  Miss
         Roche (the mother of child K) sharing that responsibility  equally.
         In saying that, I do  not  imply  that  they  undertake  the  tasks
         involved in looking after him on an absolutely equal basis.  It may
         be that at the present time  the  Appellant  does  more  than  Miss
         Roche, but the taking of the day-to-day decisions relating  to  his
         case is something that is carried out by them equally.  It is  very
         unlikely that two parents are ever likely  to  be  able  to  divide
         their tasks in bringing up their child at exactly 50% each."

 3. Not content with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  by  Notice
    dated 12th December 2014, the Appellant made application for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Although there are four  grounds,  in
    short it was the Appellant's case that the finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was against the  weight  of  the  evidence  given  the  mental
    incapacity of Miss R, the mother of child K, due to illness.

 4. On 26th January 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mailer  granted
    permission.  The focus of the grant was upon paragraph  28  being  that
    observation of Judge Hopkins to which I have already referred,  and  in
    particular the fact that the judge appeared to have found that  at  the
    date of the hearing the Appellant was doing rather  more  than  Miss  R
    which was capable of leading to a conclusion that the Appellant was  in
    fact the primary carer.

 5. This matter first came before on 17th April 2015.  I  was  troubled  by
    the absence of sufficient medical  evidence  in  relation  to  Miss  R,
    particularly because the case involved a young  and  vulnerable  child.
    The matter was adjourned and a report has now been obtained.

 6. It was common ground before me today, at the resumed hearing, that were
    I to determine that the Appellant was the primary carer then  that  was
    the only issue of fact that I needed to  resolve  for  there  to  be  a
    favourable outcome for the Appellant;  that  is  not  to  say  that  Ms
    Fijiwala, for the Secretary of State, conceded  the  appeal.   She  was
    however content to leave matters to me, accepting that it was  open  to
    me to make such a finding. However in respect of the psychiatric report
    now obtained she submitted that little weight should be attached to it,
    based as it was, in her submission, on what Dr Persaud  had  been  told
    and little more.

 7. I turn then to the report of Dr R Persaud FRCPsych MSc MPhil BSc DHMSA,
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Emeritus Visiting Gresham Professor for Public
    Understanding of Psychiatry.  The expertise of Dr Persaud was  not  put
    in issue and rightly so.

 8. His opinion was based on what the Miss R and  the  Appellant  had  told
    him.  Dr Persaud did not have access to corroborating information  from
    key informants and the report is to be interpreted in that light but Dr
    Persaud goes on to say, "...having said that I  was  impressed  by  the
    vividness  of  descriptions  of  past  traumas  and  the  intensity  of
    emotional reactions rendering me to believe it is highly unlikely  that
    core parts of those accounts are fabricated or exaggerated."

 9. Absent any suggestions to the contrary it seems to me that an expert of
    Dr Persaud's standing would be well capable of forming his own  opinion
    as to the veracity of what he was being told and certainly he  was  not
    suggesting that there had been any attempt by the Appellant and/or Miss
    R to mislead.

10. Clearly it was put to Dr Persaud that the Appellant was  not  only  the
    main carer of child K but also Miss  R.   The  basis  for  the  illness
    suffered by Miss R is set out in the report.  I need not repeat it,  it
    is on the face of the document but there is an explanation given and it
    is noted that there has been a serious suicide attempt in the past.  It
    was Dr Persaud's opinion that the Appellant is needed by  Miss  R,  who
    continues to suffer from a serious psychiatric disorder including major
    depression probably secondary to the past traumas that Miss  R  claims.
    He goes on to say that because of her severe mental health problems  he
    does not think that she would survive were she to lose the  Appellant's
    support and he opines that her health would deteriorate dramatically.

11. In my judgment, having regard to the evidence that was received by  the
    judge at first instance, and the findings, made including in particular
    the illness of the Miss R, the Appellant is, I find,  undoubtedly,  and
    that is much higher than the  standard  which  I  need  to  apply,  the
    primary carer in this case.

12. Cases are fact-sensitive. This case turns on its own peculiar facts but
    in my judgment, looking to the evidence that was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal taken together with the psychiatric evidence. insofar  as  the
    Miss R is able to cope at all she does so because of the support of the
    Appellant.  In a sense she acts  vicariously  for  the  Appellant  when
    exercising any care at all towards the child.  I perhaps put  that  too
    highly; clearly she is able to function but without  that  the  primary
    carer is the Appellant.  Indeed I accept  that  without  the  Appellant
    child K would be at risk.

13. I have been helped by the guidance in the  case  of  Hines  -v-  London
    Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA  Civ  660  where  at  paragraph  24  the
    following was said by Vos LJ:

         "There  was  much  discussion  in  argument  as  to  the  kind   of
         alternative care that might be  required  in  order  to  avoid  the
         conclusion that the child would be  forced  to  leave  [the  United
         Kingdom].  It would be undesirable, I think, for the court  to  lay
         down any guidelines in this regard, but it was,  as  I  have  said,
         common ground that an available adoption or foster  care  placement
         would not be adequate  for  this  purpose.   That  is  because  the
         quality of the life of the child would be so seriously impaired  by
         his removal from his mother to be placed in  foster  care  that  he
         would be effectively compelled to leave.  I do not, however,  think
         that all things being equal the removal of a child from the care of
         one responsible parent to the care of  another  responsible  parent
         would normally be expected so seriously to impair his  quality  and
         standard of life that he would be effectively forced to  leave  the
         UK.  Apart from anything else, he would,  even  if  he  did  leave,
         still only have the  care  of  one  of  his  previously  two  joint
         carers."

14. This is not a case in which care would be passing from  one  parent  to
    another.  This is a case which on its facts care would be passing to  a
    parent who is incapable at present of giving  the  requisite  level  of
    care.  Consideration has of course to be given to the vulnerable  child
    K.

15. I remind the parties, however, that a derivative  right  lasts  for  so
    long as it is required.  It follows that at  the  point  at  which  the
    Appellant is no longer the primary carer then his right  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom ceases.  A derivative right belongs, in a case  such
    as this, to the child and not the Appellant.

16. It is a matter for  the  Secretary  of  State  in  those  circumstances
    whether or not she wishes continually to  review  the  situation.   One
    would of course hope that the medical condition of  the  Miss  R  would
    improve.  Whether the Appellant is able to  regularise  his  status  on
    some other basis is not for me to decide. It may be a  matter  for  the
    future.  As matters stand, as at the date of the hearing in the  First-
    tier I find that the Appellant was (and remains) the primary carer.  As
    it was agreed that that was the only issue that I needed to resolve and
    that were I to find in the Appellant's  favour  the  appeal  should  be
    determined in the Appellant's favour, that is what I do.

17. For the avoidance of doubt, there was a material error in the Statement
    of Reasons of Judge Hopkins.  That error of law was, that in finding as
    at the date of the hearing that the Appellant was doing more  than  the
    Miss R, he ought properly to have assessed the evidence rather more and
    given the need to focus on the child ought himself to  have  considered
    standing the matter down for a psychiatric report which  has  now  been
    done by the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  the  report  being  admitted  into
    evidence with permission and without objection from the Respondent.

18.  The  involvement  of  a  child  means  that  an  Anonymity  Order   is
    appropriate.

19. Both representatives were of the view that I could not allow the appeal
    outright but that the matter was to be remitted to  the  Respondent  to
    make a decision constant with my Decision. In the circumstances that is
    the course I adopt.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is remade to the  limited  extent  that  the  matter  is
remitted to the Secretary of State to make a  decision  in  accordance  with
the findings that are contained within this statement of reasons.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

