
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28175/2013
                                                               IA/28181/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 June 2015                      |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     IV
                                     DM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Natur, Solicitor, Natur Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is citizen of Ukraine born on 26  June  1982.   The
    second appellant is her son, born on 11 April 2009.  Applications  were
    made by both appellants for residence  cards.   The  applications  were
    refused in decisions dated 18 June 2013.

 2. The appellants appealed against those decisions and their appeals  were
    heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimes  on  18  September  2014.
    Although the appeal of the first appellant was dismissed under the  EEA
    Regulations and on human rights  grounds,  the  appeal  of  the  second
    appellant was allowed under the EEA Regulations.   There  has  been  no
    appeal by the  respondent  against  that  decision.   Accordingly,  the
    appeal of the second appellant has been  listed  in  error  before  the
    Upper Tribunal and no further decision is required in his case.

 3. At the hearing before me it was conceded on behalf  of  the  respondent
    that there was an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as regards the first appellant, who I shall now  refer  to  as
    the appellant.  In the light of that concession,  my  decision  can  be
    expressed relatively concisely.

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK in March 2005 and  was  issued  with  a
    residence card on the basis of marriage from 19 June 2007  to  19  June
    2012.  This was in relation to her marriage to a Latvian national,  PP.
    She returned to Ukraine and was issued with an EEA family permit on  19
    July 2011.  The subsequent application for a residence  card  was  that
    which is the subject of the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. After a detailed and careful examination of the documentary evidence in
    relation to the appellant's husband,  the  First-tier  Judge  concluded
    that at the date of his marriage to the appellant he was in  employment
    in the UK.  She found that he continued  to  be  employed  until  April
    2008.  Again, after further consideration of the  documentary  evidence
    she found that the appellant and he were  married  for  five  years  by
    December 2011 and that PP was a worker and thus  a  'qualified  person'
    throughout that period.

 6. At [17] it was found that the appellant and PP remain married and  that
    the appellant was the spouse and  therefore  the  family  member  of  a
    qualified person for a period of five years.  This led her to  conclude
    that the appellant had acquired a permanent right of  residence  on  15
    December 2011  pursuant  to  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 7. Judge Grimes went on at [18] to consider evidence  of  PP's  continuing
    employment and she concluded that the evidence did not  establish  that
    he was so employed.  She thus concluded that the appellant was not able
    to demonstrate that she is entitled to a residence card.  At  [19]  she
    stated that the EEA decision was to refuse to issue  a  residence  card
    and as that was an application for a  residence  card  and  not  for  a
    permanent residence card  she  was  unable  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 8. Consideration was given to Regulation 15A  in  terms  of  a  derivative
    right of residence, the judge concluding that  the  appellant  was  not
    able to establish her entitlement in that respect.

 9. Lastly, there was a consideration of the extent to which the  appellant
    was able to meet the requirements of the Article  8  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 proper.  I need not set out the reasoning and findings in
    that respect.

10. Before me the parties drew my attention to the judge's finding that the
    appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence by reason of  her
    husband's exercise of Treaty rights for a period of five years.   There
    was no challenge to that assessment on behalf of  the  respondent.   It
    was also agreed by the parties that the First-tier  Judge  had  wrongly
    concluded that the appellant needed to  demonstrate  that  her  husband
    continued to be a qualified person.  However, regulation  15(2)  states
    that the right of  permanent  residence  shall  be  lost  only  through
    absence from the United Kingdom for a period exceeding two  consecutive
    years.  As at the date of hearing, the evidence was that he  was  still
    in the UK.

11. Mr Matthews drew my attention to Regulation 17(1) which states that the
    Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a person who  is  not
    an EEA national and is the family member of a qualified person or of an
    EEA national with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 on
    application and production of a  valid  passport  and  proof  that  the
    applicant is such a family member.   In  those  circumstances,  it  was
    accepted on behalf of the respondent that the appellant was entitled to
    the residence card that she had applied for.  Thus, the  appeal  should
    have been allowed on that basis.

12. Notwithstanding the arguments advanced in the grounds of appeal against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, in terms of a derivative right
    of residence and Article 12 of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68  on  freedom
    of movement for workers within the Community, the parties  agreed  that
    those issues did not require further consideration.

13. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that there is an error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring the  decision  to  be
    set aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.

14. Although I have found an error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, it is important  to  record  that  it  is  evident  from  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge that a great  deal  of  care  and
    effort was undertaken in  the  analysis  of  the  documentary  evidence
    before her in terms  of  the  employment  history  of  the  appellant's
    husband.  There was a considerable amount of material that required  to
    be considered and that careful analysis resulted in the  conclusion  as
    to PP having acquired a permanent right of residence, and when.

    Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision is set aside  and  the  decision  re-
    made, allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  15/09/15

