
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: IA/28041/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th February 2018                 |On 22nd March 2018                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                        MR Mhd MAHMUDUL HASAN MAHMUD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M I Hossain of Chancery Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4  student.  This
       was refused by the respondent on 22 July  2015.It  was  believed  the
       English language certificate submitted had been fraudulently obtained
       with any test being taken by proxy. A notice  of  appeal  was  lodged
       dated 7 August 2015.  The  appellant's  representative  was  Mr  M  I
       Hossain of London Law Associates, 130 Whitechapel Road.

    2. The appeal was struck out on the basis of the appeal fee had not been
       paid. There was a dispute over this and a further notice  was  issued
       dated 16 November 2016  to  the  appellant  and  his  representatives
       stating that the appeal could not proceed until the fee was paid. The
       matter progressed and was listed. A notice of hearing  for  the  18th
       April 2017 was served upon the appellant and his representative on 16
       March 2017.

    3. The appeal was heard by First-tier judge Skehan  on  the  18th  April
       2017 and was dismissed. There was no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant or his representative. The judge checked that  the  hearing
       notice had been issued and proceeded on the basis of rule 28. In  the
       absence of any evidence in support of the appeal  the  judge  adopted
       the refusal. The tribunal decision was promulgated on 24 April 2017

    4. Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  made
       on 7 May 2017. This was on the basis the appellant had  instructed  a
       new representative, Chancery Solicitors, on 13 April 2017. It  stated
       that on 13 April 2017 his new solicitors requested an adjournment  by
       fax stating the appellant was not fit to attend and enclosed a 5 page
       medical report. It states the Tribunal office had  been  closed  from
       the 14th to the 17th April 2017 because of the  Easter  holidays.  It
       was also stated  that  his  representative  telephoned  the  customer
       service manager on 19 April 2017 about the appeal. It states  that  a
       customer service assistant called Amanda confirmed the  Tribunal  had
       received the adjournment request and that no decision had  been  made
       in the appeal.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  it  was  arguable  an
       adjournment should have been granted.

The Upper Tribunal

    6.  Mr  Hussain  of  Chancery  solicitors  attended  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant. He said that he  was  instructed  on  13  April  2017  and
       advised  the  Tribunal  office   immediately   of   the   change   of
       representative and sought an adjournment on the basis  the  appellant
       was unwell.

    7. The Presenting Officer submitted that the change of solicitors were a
       delaying tactic by the appellant. It was now almost three years since
       the refusal letter and still no appeal bundle had been lodged.

    8. I asked Mr Hussain way had not attended on the18th April 2017 instead
       of assuming an adjournment would be granted. He  explained  that  his
       was a small firm and that he employed paralegals and Counsel. He said
       that his offices are in Whitechapel which would be relatively near to
       Taylor House where the appeal was listed.

Consideration

    9. It was when preparing the decision appeal then I realised  the  claim
       by Mr Hossain of a change of solicitors was misleading. The  original
       Notice of Appeal was submitted  by  a  firm  trading  as  London  Law
       Associates with an address at second  floor,  130  Whitechapel  Road,
       London. The  grounds  of  appeal  are  dated  7August  2015  and  the
       representative  is  named  as  MI  Hossain.  I  note  the  from   the
       Application for Permission to appeal Chancery solicitors are based on
       the second floor 130 Whitechapel Road, London and the contact  is  MI
       Hossain. It was highly misleading to suggest there had been a  change
       of solicitors and it seems permission  to  appeal  has  been  granted
       under false pretences. Para.4 of the application  refers  to  `a  new
       legal representative 'and that his representative `submitted  medical
       report (5 pages)'. The application would suggest that  the  new  firm
       had taken over conduct of the appeal whereas the reality is it is the
       same individual in charge of the appeal with the  same  address.  The
       only difference is apparently a name change  for  the  firm.  At  the
       hearing in the Upper Tribunal Mr Hossain never  indicated  any  prior
       involvement.

   10. I agree with the presenting officer that the appellant has, with  the
       connivance of his representative engaged in delaying tactics. The fax
       receipt suggests it was sent on the 12th April 2017 with  a  covering
       letter dated 13 April 2017. It refers to 5-page medical report.  What
       was submitted was a standard sick note issued  by  a  GP  dated  11th
       April 2017 stating the appellant should refrain  from  work  for  two
       weeks because of back strain. There is nothing  to  indicate  he  was
       unable to attend the hearing.

   11. I find no material error of law  in  the  judge  proceeding.  It  was
       presumptuous of the appellant's solicitor  to  take  for  granted  an
       adjournment would be  granted.  The  parties  were  notified  of  the
       hearing and it was up to them to make sure either an adjournment  had
       been granted beforehand or a representative attends.

   12. The judge's decision adopted  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and
       referred to the absence of any contrary argument.  The  documents  in
       the papers indicate that the respondent had discharge the  evidential
       burden. Not only where there the generic statements commonly used but
       also the screen print showing  the  cancellation  of  the  test  from
       Elizabeth College. The presenting officer indicated this college  was
       involved in widespread abuse.

Decision.

  No material error in the decision of First tier  Judge  Skehen  has  been
  established.

  That decision, dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge 20th March 2018

