

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28745/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 30th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MASTER PAVITAR SINGH
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


For the Respondent:  Mr M D Hoare ( H & S Legal Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Respondent,  with
    permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Steven J Pacey promulgated on 9th October 2014 by which he allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain and to remove him to India.

2.   For the purposes of continuity I shall refer in this  determination  to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent and Mr Singh as the Appellant.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that she found it arguable that  the  Judge  had  not  taken  due
    notice of the fact that the Appellant had been in the UK illegally  and
    that his private life had been built up during that time.

4.   The facts of this case are that the Appellant entered the UK aged 5  in
    2001 with his mother and brother.  None had leave to enter.  They  came
    to join the Appellant's father  and  have  remained  ever  since.   The
    Appellant has an  older  brother  and  his  application  to  remain  is
    outstanding before the Secretary of State. The Appellant's  father  now
    has a residence permit to remain in the UK.   The  Appellant  also  has
    twin sisters born in the UK in 2002, who are now British.

5.   Dealing first with the perceived error of law by the Judge who  granted
    permission to appeal, she has failed herself to take into account  that
    the Appellant was a minor on arrival and  only  attained  18  years  in
    December 2014.  He therefore ought not to have  been  held  responsible
    for his illegal presence when he was a minor and under the  control  of
    his parents.  That remained the case when Judge  Pacey  considered  the
    appeal.

6.   The Judge, in a detailed and fully reasoned  determination  found  that
    the Appellant had lived in the UK for  over  half  his  life  and  that
    although there was extended family in India,  he  had  minimal  contact
    with then and  had  no  meaningful  ties  to  India  and  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect him to go there. On that basis the  Judge  found
    that he succeeds under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However the Judge nevertheless went on to consider  Article  8  outside
    the Rules and allowed the appeal on that basis also.

7.   The grounds argue with the Judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant  had
    no ties to India and then criticise the basis for considering Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules.

8.   Case law has established that "ties" to a country of origin have to  be
    meaningful.   In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT
    60 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  said that the natural and ordinary meaning
    of the word 'ties' in paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules  (HC194)
    imports a concept  involving  something  more  than  merely  remote  or
    abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.  It
    involves  there  being  a  connection  to   life   in   that   country.
    Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to such a country  must
    involve a rounded assessment of all of the relevant  circumstances  and
    is not to be limited to 'social, cultural  and  family'  circumstances.
    That is what the Judge did in this case and I can see no error  of  law
    in his approach or conclusions.

9.   The grounds amount to no more than a formulaic  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's conclusions and do not reveal an error of  law  in  what  is  a
    careful and detailed determination.  Whether the Judge  ought  to  have
    considered Article 8 under the ECHR is academic given that he found, as
    he was entitled to do, that the Appellant succeeded under the Rules.

10.  Mr McVeety was unable to make any submissions to the contrary.

11.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed                 Dated 27th January 2015




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
