
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 August 2016                    |On 31 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               YOLANDA TESORO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Magsino of Stanford Law Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Y J Jones) allowing the  appeal  of  Yolanda
    Tesoro (hereafter "the claimant") against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State taken on 26 June 2014 to refuse her further leave to remain as
    an overseas domestic worker under para 159D of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended).

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the Philippines who was born on 25 January
    1978.  She was granted leave to enter the UK as  an  overseas  domestic
    worker on 18 January 2014 with leave valid  until  28  May  2014.   The
    claimant made an in time application for an  extension  of  that  leave
    under para 159D of the Rules.  On 26 June 2014, the Secretary of  State
    refused to extend her leave on that basis.

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Before Judge Jones, the claimant accepted that she  could  not  succeed
    under the overseas domestic worker rule, namely para  159D  or  on  any
    other basis under the Rules.  Instead, the claimant relied upon  Art  8
    and, in particular, her relationship with her partner, Eleazar  Orpilla
    who is a British citizen and was born on 17 April 1974.   In  addition,
    at the time  of  the  hearing,  the  claimant  was  pregnant  with  her
    partner's child.  It was accepted at the hearing that when born,  their
    child would be a British citizen.

 5. In her determination,  Judge  Jones  -  and  this  is  not  disputed  -
    correctly approached her decision in accordance  with  the  established
    case law when considering a claim under Art 8 outside the  Rules.   She
    accepted that the claimant enjoyed family life with her partner in  the
    UK since the end of March 2014.  Judge Jones accepted that Art 8.1  was
    engaged if the claimant were removed.

 6. Judge Jones went on to consider whether the claimant's removal would be
    proportionate taking into account  the  required  factors  set  out  in
    s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   At  para
    38, she accepted  that  the  claimant  was  a  fluent  English  speaker
    (s.117B(2)).  At para 39 she accepted that the claimant was financially
    independent (s.117B(3)).

 7. At paras 40-41, Judge Jones considered  the  application  of  s.117B(6)
    dealing with the public interest where  a  person  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child.   In  that
    paragraph, the Judge took into account that, although not yet born,  by
    the time the claimant would be removed her baby would be born and there
    would be a "genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship"  with  that
    child.  Judge Jones said this:

         "41. Section 117B(6) states  that  the  public  interest  does  not
             require a person's removal where the person has a genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and
             it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.  At the present time it must be said that  the
             appellant does not have such a relationship as  her  baby  has
             not been born.  However, bearing in mind  that  the  appellant
             would not be removed if her appeal failed until after she  has
             given birth because of the imminence of her due date I am able
             to find that by the time  she  is  removed  she  will  have  a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
             child as defined in Section 117D.  It has  not  been  disputed
             that the child when born will be a British citizen."

 8. At paras 42-45, the judge considered the relevant circumstances of  the
    claimant and found that it would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    claimant's child (once born) that the claimant be allowed to remain  in
    the UK and that taking all matters into account the public interest was
    outweighed by the claimant's circumstances.  Judge Jones said this:

         "42. I find in the appellant's favour that  although  there  is  no
             independent evidence of her marriage in the Philippines  there
             is no reason not to accept her  evidence  in  respect  of  her
             marriage and a 13 year old child in the Philippines.   Divorce
             is not permitted in the Philippines and it  is  recorded  that
             she is likely to meet with hostility upon return.  I  find  on
             the balance of probabilities that neither she  nor  her  child
             would be accepted by the local community if  returned  to  the
             Philippines.  This is a matter which has not  been  challenged
             by the respondent.

         43.   Balancing  the  public  interest   against   the   particular
             circumstances and indeed the respective  family  life  of  her
             partner and child, I find that the appellant's situation is  a
             non-standard and particular  feature  not  recognised  by  the
             Rules and it would be unduly harsh if she were to  be  removed
             to  the  Philippines  in  consequence  of   the   respondent's
             decision.  The proportionality balance favours the appellant.

         44.  I find that the public interest of proper immigration  control
             does not outweigh the claimed rights of the appellant in  this
             case.  In the particular circumstances of  this  case  I  find
             that the removal  of  the  appellant  in  consequence  of  the
             respondent's decision would involve a disproportionate  breach
             of her Article 8 rights.

         45.  Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 requires that I consider the best interests of the child.
              Although the appellant's baby is not yet born, its  birth  is
             imminent and I find it is in the best interests of that  child
             who will be a British citizen that the appellant, its  mother,
             be allowed to remain in the UK."

 9. As a consequence, Judge Jones allowed the claimant's appeal  under  Art
    8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of State sought permission on a single issue namely  that
    the judge had been wrong to take  into  account  the  position  of  the
    claimant's child as if she were born when at the date  of  the  hearing
    the child was still in utero.

11. On 21 January 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V P McDade)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission on that ground.

12. Thus, the appeal came before me.

13. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    narrow issue in the appeal was whether the judge had  been  correct  to
    consider the claimant's circumstances on  the  basis  that  her  unborn
    child had in fact been born rather than the circumstances in  existence
    at the date of the hearing.  He submitted that in doing  so  the  Judge
    had erred I law and the decision should  be  set  aside.   However,  he
    conceded that in re-making the decision the claimant's appeal should be
    allowed because there  was  no  challenge  to  Judge  Jones'  reasoning
    leading to her finding that, if the child  were  born,  the  claimant's
    removal would breach Art 8.  The claimant's child (a daughter) was  now
    born and, indeed, attended  the  hearing  with  the  claimant  and  her
    partner.

14. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Magsino briefly submitted that there  was
    no error of law but that in any event the appeal should be allowed.

Discussion

15. In my judgment, Judge  Jones  was  wrong  to  consider  the  claimant's
    circumstances on the basis that her daughter had been born when, at the
    date of hearing before Judge  Jones,  her  child  was  in  utero.   The
    claimant's Art 8 claim had to  be  determined  on  the  facts  as  they
    appertained at the date of the appeal  hearing.   Whilst  a  judge  may
    well,  in  certain  circumstances,  be  able  to  take   into   account
    foreseeable  future  events  such  as,  for  example,  an  individual's
    prospects of future employment, the focus remains upon the facts at the
    date of the hearing.  Here, the  claimant's  child  was  not  born  and
    therefore the impact upon her (and  the  claimant)  by  the  claimant's
    removal at the date of hearing was not a matter which the  judge  could
    properly take into account.

16. That was an error of law and, as a consequence, her decision  to  allow
    the appeal under Art 8 cannot stand and is set aside.

17. As I have already indicated, however, Mr Richards accepted on behalf of
    the Secretary of State that, given the claimant's child  was  now  born
    and none of Judge Jones' findings made on the premise  that  the  child
    was born have been challenged, the proper disposal of the appeal was to
    allow it under Art 8 of the ECHR.

18. The Judge clearly set out of the claimant's circumstances including the
    adverse  impact  upon  her  and  her  child  if  she  returned  to  the
    Philippines.   Given Mr Richards' concession and  the  absence  of  any
    challenge to Judge  Jones'  findings  (including  those  under  s.117B)
    premised on the  birth  of  the  claimant's  daughter,  I  re-make  the
    decision allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 8 on the  basis  that
    her removal to the Philippines would be a disproportionate interference
    with her private and family life protected by Art 8.

Decision

19. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    claimant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of  law
    and is set aside.

20. I re-make the decision allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 8.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Jones made no fee award as the matters raised by the claimant  in  her
appeal were not known  to  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  date  of  her
decision.  I agree with that conclusion and reasoning and no  fee  award  is
made.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                       Date 31st August 2016

