

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28375/2013
       IA/28379/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th August 2014                            |On 7th August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                               DONALD GANDAWA
                              TRAAVONE GANDAWA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    unrepresented; appeared in person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Mr Deller on behalf of the Secretary of State withdrew the decision to
      refuse to vary the leave of Traavone Gandawa and to remove him by  way
      of directions under s47 Immigration Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006:
      he is now a British Citizen and thus not removable. The appeal  before
      me is thus concerned only with  Donald  Gandawa  and  I  have  omitted
      reference to the child Traavone save as where necessary in reaching my
      decision.


      Error of law


   2. Donald Gandawa had sought a variation of leave to remain as the spouse
      of and father of a child who had applications pending  for  indefinite
      leave to remain. Those applications were refused by the SSHD  on  20th
      June 2013 and the appeal was heard and determined  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal following a hearing on  22nd  January  2014.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


   3. At the date of application the claimant's spouse  and  one  child  had
      applied for but not been granted indefinite leave to  remain.  Between
      the date of decision and date  of  hearing  she  and  the  child  were
      granted ILR. That child and  Traavone  have  now,  subsequent  to  the
      determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  registered  as  British
      Citizens. In  [20]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  that  the
      claimant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He
      then went on to consider Article 8 but  failed  to  consider  this  in
      accordance with relevant jurisprudence.  He then concluded by allowing
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

   4. The judge has clearly erred in law not only in reaching  a  conclusion
      that Mr Gandawa met the requirements of the Immigration Rules - he did
      not and then finding that removal would  be  disproportionate  without
      taking proper or any account of relevant jurisprudence.

   5. I set aside the decision to be remade.

      Remaking of the decision

   6. Mr Deller very properly confirmed that in the light of  the  facts  as
      they  now  stand  and  in  the  light  of  current   legislation   and
      jurisprudence the proper course of action is for  this  appeal  to  be
      allowed under the Rules as  they  clarify  and  apply  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence in Article 8 and under Article 8 if applied direct.


   7. I accordingly allow the appeal on all grounds.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remake the decision by allowing the appeal
    of Donald Gandawa (IA/28375/2013) against the decision of the  SSHD  to
    refuse to vary his leave and to remove him.


    There  is  no   longer   an   extant   appeal   by   Traavone   Gandawa
    (IA/28379/2013), the Secretary of State having withdrawn  the  decision
    appealed against.


                                    Date 7th August 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
