
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/28758/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 2 July 2014                            |On 16 July 2014             |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                 RAMAN UWAIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Uwaezuoke of Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Plumptre promulgated on 7 April 2014, which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 25 August 1985 and is a citizen of Nigeria.  On
   20  June  2013   the   Respondent   refused   the   Appellant's   further
   representations for leave based on his family and  private  life  in  the
   United Kingdom and on 25 June the Appellant was served with a  notice  of
   decision to  remove.   The  Appellant's  application  was  considered  by
   reference to Appendix FM and  paragraph  276  ADE.  In  relation  to  the
   partnership route the Appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements
   set out in E-LTRP  1.2-1.12.  In  relation  to  the  parental  route  the
   Appellant had failed to provide evidence that the Appellant's child was a
   British citizen, or had lived in the United Kingdom for 7  years,  or  he
   had parental responsibility for  the  child.  EX.1  did  not  apply.  The
   Appellant did not meet the requirements of 276ADE in view of how long  he
   had lived in the United Kingdom and the fact that there was  no  evidence
   he had lost ties with Nigeria. Consideration was given to the Appellant's
   child's medical condition. It did not meet the high threshold  to  engage
   Article 3. All other factors relevant to paragraph 353 B were  considered
   and removal was still appropriate.


The Judge's Decision
4.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Plumptre (hereinafter called "the  Judge")  dismissed  the
   appeal against the  Respondent's  decision.  The  Judge  found  that  the
   Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
   276 ADE; she found that the best interests of the Appellant's child  were
   to remain with one or both of his parents and that he could readily adapt
   to life in Nigeria; she found  that  the  circumstances  of  the  child's
   medical condition were not sufficiently compellable to warrant a grant of
   leave outside the Rules.
5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  16  May  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Levin gave permission to appeal.

6. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Uwaezuoke  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) Although  the  Judge  purported  to  take  into  account  the  child's
      circumstances she does not refer to the fact that  the  Appellant  had
      been in the United Kingdom for 18  years  and  came  into  the  United
      Kingdom as a minor.

   c) An assessment should have been carried out under Article 8 outside the
      Rules.

7. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Whitwell submitted that :

   a) The Judge took into account Gulshan but found  at  paragraph  85  that
      there were no sufficiently compelling  reasons  for  her  to  look  at
      Article 8 outside the Rules.

   b) It was only if the circumstances were not catered for in the Rules  or
      the circumstances  were  sufficiently  compelling  that  there  was  a
      requirement to look beyond the  Rules:  the  Appellant  did  not  meet
      paragraph 276 ADE , his family life did not meet the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM and the health of the child was considered  in  paragraphs
      64-76 and 85.

   c) The decision may not be the best structured but the decision was clear
      that EX.1 did not apply.

   d) This was simply a disagreement with the outcome of the decision.

8. In reply Ms Uwaezuoke on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

   a) The child's condition had not been given sufficient consideration  and
      was not a case covered by the Rules.

   b) She conceded that the Appellant could neither  meet  Appendix  FM  nor
      paragraph 276ADE.



The Law

9.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to   follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law.
Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. Having conceded that the Appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of
   Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE this is in essence a  challenge  to  the
   Judge's decision not to look at the Appellant's case outside the Rules on
   the basis that the circumstances of the health of the Appellant's  child,
   who has sickle cell anaemia, were sufficiently compelling  to  warrant  a
   grant of leave outside the Rules.

13.  The determination in this case runs to some 19 pages  and  includes  at
   paragraphs1-62 a meticulous , detailed and well  structured  summary   of
   the relevant caselaw, the evidence, lengthy background, the oral evidence
   of all the witnesses. On no rational analysis can it  be  suggested  that
   the Judge was not perfectly aware of the full circumstances against which
   she was making her decision.

14. The Judge's findings in 'Facts and credibility' at paragraphs 63-91  are
   a detailed analysis of the evidence previously recorded starting with  an
   acknowledgement that the best interests of the child in the case  were  a
   primary consideration. The Judge then examines the child's  condition  in
   meticulous detail at paragraphs 67-76 taking into  account,  in  essence,
   the COIS report in relation to the treatment of the condition in Nigeria,
   the fact that the child is not a British citizen so is  not  entitled  to
   the free NHS treatment he had been receiving, the public interest in  the
   removal of the Appellant and his family in those circumstances, that  the
   diagnosis is 'by no means fatal'  as  there  is  treatment  available  in
   Nigeria, that the child's best interests are to remain with  the  parents
   who could return as a family.

15. The Judge then moved on to look  at  the  Appellant's  circumstances  at
   paragraphs 77-83.At paragraph 84 the Judge refers to Gulshan (Article 8 -
   new  Rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)   correctly
   identifying that in accordance with headnote (b) that only if  there  may
   be arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
   Immigration Rules is it necessary for article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to
   consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
   recognised under them. She then states:

   "For the reasons given earlier I find that the diagnosis of  sickle  cell
   anaemia is not of itself sufficiently compelling circumstance"

16.  Given the rational,  detailed  and  logical  analysis  of  the  child's
   circumstances I am entirely satisfied that this was a conclusion that was
   open to her and I find no  merit  in  the  submission  that  the  child's
   circumstances were not properly taken into account.

17. In determining that there was no other reason to look beyond  the  Rules
   the Judge again analyses the Appellant's circumstances at paragraphs  86-
   91 including, amongst other factors, the length of time he has  lived  in
   the United Kingdom. Again there is no merit in the  submission  that  the
   Judge had not taken into account the length of residence. The  conclusion
   she reached at paragraph 91 that the Appellant's  circumstances  did  not
   warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules was one that was open  to  her
   on the evidence.

18. It is abundantly clear from the determination when read as a whole  that
   Judge Plumptre carefully considered all the relevant evidence and spent a
   good deal of time in carefully addressing the complex history and  issues
   in a clear and logical way in her determination. It is not necessary  for
   a judge to painstakingly and repeatedly set out every piece  of  evidence
   considered, provided that it has been properly considered and taken  into
   account but it is in  fact  impossible  in  this  case  to  identify  any
   relevant fact that the Judge did not consider. The conclusions reached by
   the Judge were ones that she was entitled to reach on the evidence before
   her.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date 16
July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





















