
[pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA /28860/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th October 2014                         |On 7th November 2014          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                                 Ms GA BLACK
                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Ms SOOK FUN CHOONG
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr A Jafar (Counsel instructed by Southbridge solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing  following  a  decision  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 27th June 2014 that there was a material error  of  law  in
    the determination of  the  First  tier-  Tribunal.   I  refer  to  that
    decision for the background to this appeal and to the  directions  made
    by the Upper Tribunal as follows;

         "The main findings of fact are unchallenged and are preserved.  The
         decision stands to be remade.  I  direct  both  representatives  to
         produce and serve written submissions on the Gulshan  guidance  and
         Article 8 ECHR within  10  days  of  the  date  of  issue  of  this
         decision."

 2. The claimant is a  citizen  of  Malaysia  and  her  date  of  birth  is
    23.4.1967.

 3. It would appear that owing to administrative error the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision 27.6.2014 was only promulgated  on  3rd  September  2014.  The
    claimant  submitted  written  submissions  dated  9th  September   2014
    inviting the Upper Tribunal to relist the matter for a  hearing  afresh
    on Article 8. No written submissions were received from  the  Secretary
    of State. This matter was listed for oral  hearing  despite  directions
    made for written submissions. Mr Jafar produced a skeleton argument.

 4. Notwithstanding that the directions  were  not  complied  with  by  the
    Secretary of State and taking note of the request for an  oral  hearing
    and  having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective  (Rule  2  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2008), I proceeded to hear oral submissions  from  both
    parties on Article 8 ECHR.

 5. Mr Jafar relied on the facts as set out in  the  determination  of  the
    First tier Tribunal.  He argued that this was a rare case in which  the
    claimant lived in the UK lawfully from 2002 and save for a period of  5
    months until her reapplication in April 2012.  As a work permit  holder
    (granted on 2 occasions)  the  claimant  did  have  an  expectation  of
    settlement in the UK.  It  was  accepted  that  the  claimant  was  not
    responsible for failures in her immigration applications  made  by  her
    employers.  Mr  Jafar  acknowledged  that  there  was  no  "near  miss"
    argument but that the spirit of the rules remained to be  applied.  The
    Gulshan test would apply in this case and the facts justified  allowing
    the appeal under Article 8.

 6. Mr Avery submitted that the claimant did not meet the immigration rules
    under 276ADE.  The basis of her exceptionality argument under Article 8
    arose because of errors on the part of her  employers.   There  was  no
    fault on the part of the Secretary of State.  Her private life could be
    replicated in Malaysia.  The  case  did  not  get  beyond  the  Gulshan
    gateway. Gulshan remained good law notwithstanding the obiter  comments
    in MM( Lebanon & others, R( on the application of) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 985. .

 7. Mr Jafar relied on MM and submitted that the Court of  Appeal  made  it
    clear that there was no tertiary test for Article 8,  following  Nagre.
    The issue was proportionality.

Discussion and decision

Gulshan

 8. The Upper Tribunal decision dated 27th June 2014 found that  the  First
    tier Tribunal erred by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  justifying
    consideration out side of the Rules  following  Gulshan.   The  further
    submissions I have heard  do  not  alter  that  conclusion  as  to  the
    adequacy of the reasons.  In any event, I am satisfied that the outcome
    would be no different whether or not the Gulshan test was  or  was  not
    met.  I have regard to the Court of Appeal in  MM  that  the  "arguable
    grounds" stage is no longer necessary.

Article 8 - proportionality

 9. The main issue before this Tribunal is  the  Article  8  assessment  of
    proportionality. Aside from  the  arguments  pursued  by  the  claimant
    before  the  First  tier  Tribunal  relying  on  Philipson(ILR  -   not
    PBS:evidence)India[201]UKUT 00039  (IAC),  which  I  concluded  was  an
    erroneous approach, I have taken into account the  further  submissions
    made by Mr Jafar as to  proportionality.  There  was  no  new  evidence
    before me and no argument was put that  oral  evidence  was  necessary.
    The findings of fact from the First tier  Tribunal  are  preserved.   I
    accept the clarification that the claimant was granted leave from  2002
    until 2012 and that it was only a matter of 5 months during  which  she
    had no lawful leave.  Nevertheless I remain of the view that whilst the
    situation for the claimant is unfair because of errors on the  part  of
    her employers, there was no unfairness on the part of the Secretary  of
    State.  The claimant may well have believed that she would  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain after being granted leave as a work  permit,
    but that expectation is not a matter that can reasonably be resolved by
    the Secretary of State.  The claimant for whatever  reason  went  along
    with her employers who made mistakes in  her  immigration  applications
    not only on one occasion but on two occasions.  I find that she did not
    take any steps herself in 2007 to rectify that situation.

10. I fully accept that the claimant is hard working and has lived  in  the
    UK for a considerable period of time.   She  has  made  a  contribution
    economically and established a career.  However, there was no  evidence
    before me to indicate  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  resume  and
    replicate her private life in Malaysia.  She  has  transferable  skills
    and would be able to obtain employment as a pattern  cutter.   She  has
    lived for the majority of her life in Malaysia.  There was no  evidence
    to indicate that she did not have  any  ties  in  Malaysia.   There  is
    nothing of major significance about  her  private  life.  In  assessing
    proportionality the  First  tier  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  no
    legitimate aim beyond  immigration  control.   However,  there  was  no
    consideration by the Tribunal of the  reasonableness  of  the  claimant
    returning to Malaysia and any  private  life  that  she  may  establish
    there. I have now heard submissions on these issues.   Whilst  she  may
    face considerable disruption on return to Malaysia after  such  a  long
    absence but there is no evidence to show that she would not be able  to
    work, and make new friends and contacts, thus replicating  her  private
    life in the UK. It remains open to he to make a fresh  application  for
    entry clearance.

11. The claimant has not met the Rules designed to reflect the Secretary of
    State position on private  life  and  public  interest.   There  is  no
    evidence  of  any  exceptional  and/or  compelling  circumstances.  The
    claimant seeks to rely on Article 8 in order to rectify  mistakes  made
    by others. This fails to engage the  real purpose behind Article 8   as
    in  Nasim &  others  (  Article  8)[2014]  UKUT  00025(IAC)  where  the
    headnote states:

         "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve  to  re-focus
         attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,
         in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's  limited  utility  in
         private life cases that are far removed from the protection  of  an
         individual's moral and physical integrity.

         A person's human rights are not enhanced by not committing criminal
         offences or not relying on public funds.  The only significance  of
         such matters in cases concerning proposed or  hypothetical  removal
         from the United Kingdom is to preclude the Secretary of State  from
         pointing to any public interest justifying removal, over and  above
         the basic importance of maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of
         immigration control."


Decision

I remake the decision by substituting a decision that the appeal is
dismissed on immigration and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29.10.2014

Judge GA Black

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 29.10.2014

Judge GA Black

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


