
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 28892 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 May 2014                                |On 18 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Aneesh Babu Suresh Babu
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Khan, legal representative from Bukahari
                    Chambers, Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a rather unhappy case in which I, like the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, have considerable sympathy with the  respondent.   However,  and
    with every respect to Mr Khan's realistic and measured  submissions,  I
    have to conclude that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, although acting in
    a kindly way, was wrong and I must set aside his decision.

 2. Let me explain the case as I see it.  The respondent, hereinafter, "the
    claimant", is a citizen of India, He was born in 1985 and came  to  the
    United Kingdom to study in  October  2010  for  the  degree  Master  in
    Business Administration.  He  is  a  serious  student  and  passed  his
    examinations.  He was going to stay longer to take a further course and
    had permission to be in the United Kingdom to study. He did  not  start
    the intended course and the college, as it thought that it was  obliged
    to do,  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Secretary  of  State  the
    claimant's absence. The Secretary of State then applied  the  necessary
    Immigration Rules and curtailed the claimant's leave.

 3. The claimant did not start the course for the  entirely  understandable
    reason that he was ill.  He had chickenpox as did the people with  whom
    he lived.  Happily the claimant has made a full recovery  but  when  he
    was ill he was too poorly to attend to his personal affairs.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge analysed the  Rules  very  carefully  and
    concluded correctly that the Secretary of State did everything that was
    required.  The  Rules  were  applied  impartially  and  fairly  on  the
    information that was available. Maybe the claimant's college could have
    made some elementary inquiries before reporting the claimant's absence,
    although the fact of his absence was not disputed. Maybe  the  claimant
    could have informed the college, informed the  Secretary  of  State  or
    even applied to vary his leave but the fact is that  the  claimant  was
    feeling very poorly but reasonably expected and early recovery.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then decided that requiring the  claimant
    to leave was a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  private  and
    family life.  The judge said at paragraph 19:

         "The result of allowing this appeal under Article 8 is that  it  is
         for the respondent to allow a sufficient period  of  time  for  the
         appellant to get his affairs in order, whether in relation  to  the
         Access College or by an application to another college."

 6. In short, the judge saw the  remedy  to  the  situation  in  which  the
    claimant found himself was a short period of leave in  which  he  could
    get all his affairs in order. The difficulty is that this is  not  what
    the Rules contemplate.   The  claimant  should  have  left  the  United
    Kingdom and then make further arrangements to return if  he  wanted  to
    when he was in better health.

 7. The judge intended to make a very humane decision  but  there  was  not
    justification for it. He  did  not  indentify  any  factors  that  made
    removal disproportionate and there are none.

 8.  By  inventing  or  devising  this  route  the  judge  has  effectively
    materially  changed  the  Immigration  Rules  and  has   introduced   a
    discretionary or delaying element into the  mandatory  requirements  of
    paragraph 323A to curtail the leave of a person who fails  to  commence
    studying.  This is effectively a rewriting of the Rules, and it has not
    been done to prevent any gross injustice  or  deep  unfairness  to  the
    claimant but simply to make things more convenient for him  because  he
    was not able to start his course.

 9. Although I have considerable sympathy for the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    I have to conclude that the  judge,  rather  than  upholding  the  law,
    decided to rewrite it. He was  wrong  in  law  and  I  must  allow  the
    Secretary of State's appeal and substitute a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State.

10. I do not know the claimant's intentions.  No doubt he will take  advice
    about the lawfulness of my decision but if the decision stands  he  may
    want on some future occasion to be readmitted to the United Kingdom.

11. I put on the face of  this  determination  so  it  will  be  there  for
    everyone to see that there has been no  finding  in  these  proceedings
    that is in any way to this claimant's discredit beyond not  taking  the
    course of action which with the  benefit  of  hindsight  was  the  most
    appropriate.  The core cause of his difficulties was ill health  at  an
    inconvenient time, and that should be remembered if he seeks to  return
    to the United Kingdom.

12. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  was  not
    open to him in law and it is my duty to correct it.

Decision
The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 June 2014                   |







