








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28371/2014
                                                               IA/28372/2014
                                                               IA/28374/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 10 September 2015                 |on 21 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                        Mr Olasunkanmi James Oyeniyi
                       Miss Funmilola Tomilola Oyeniyi
                            Miss Adesewa Omowumi
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr N Garrod, counsel (instructed by AO & Associates
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Nigerian nationals.  They are the father and his two
    daughters, born on 28 August 1959, 31 January 1993 and 14 December 2005
    respectively.

 2. They appeal with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Greasly who in a decision promulgated on 12 March 2015  dismissed
    their appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant them
    EEA Residence cards under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J  G  White  found
    that the Judge gave adequate reasons for his findings on  the  evidence
    that the first appellant was a party to a marriage of convenience.

 4. However, he stated that it is arguable that  in  his  consideration  of
    Article  8,  the  Judge  gave  inadequate  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of the children. In granting permission to appeal, the  Judge
    expressly alerted the parties to the fact that there was at  that  time
    an argument as to  whether  the  refusal  of  an  application  for  EEA
    residence cards engages the consideration of Article 8.

 5. Mr Garrod submitted on behalf of  the  appellants  that  there  was  no
    legitimate justification  for  removing  a  child  such  as  the  third
    appellant. The Judge erred in not applying s.117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act
    in favour of  the  third  appellant.  Removing  that  child  cannot  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aims of s.117B(1). It is also contended
    that the Judge wrongly stated that Mr Adeboye's parents originated from
    Ghana. His parents were from Nigeria. Accordingly, the  Judge  did  not
    give proper consideration to his evidence in arriving at the  decision.
    Moreover,  at  [34]  the  Judge  stated  that  there   are   legitimate
    justifications why it is proportionate and lawful for the appellant and
    his children to return to "Algeria".  However,  the  first  appellant's
    case is that he is from Nigeria, not Algeria.  This  is  an  indication
    that the Judge "totally failed to give the evidence before  him  proper
    consideration before arriving at his decision."  This  shows  that  the
    Judge is biased in arriving at the decision.

 6. The mistake by the  Judge  as  to  whether  the  appellants  should  be
    returned to Nigeria as opposed to Algeria did not feature as part of Mr
    Garrod's oral submissions before the Tribunal. In  any  event,  I  find
    that the reference to Algeria did not in the circumstances constitute a
    material error of law for the reasons referred to below.

 7. Mr Garrod submitted that the Judge failed to have regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children in  accordance  with  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The appellant had arrived in  the
    UK with his two children on 5 August 2010 and accepted that  the  third
    appellant was born on 14 December 2005. She has accordingly arrived  in
    the UK when she was just four years old and remained here  ever  since.
    She would thus have lost all social,  cultural  and  family  ties  with
    Nigeria.

 8. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the respondent submitted in line with the Rule
    24 response that there appears to have been little by way  of  evidence
    advanced in respect of the minor appellant's  best  interests.  Against
    the background of "deliberate fraud"  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that their best interests were served by  their  returning  to
    Nigeria as a family unit.

 9. Mr Whitwell referred to the recent decision in Amirteymour  and  others
    (EEA appeals; human rights [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC),  promulgated  on  4
    August 2015. The pending decision was referred to  by  Judge  White  at
    paragraph 5 of his grant of permission.

10. The Upper Tribunal, presided over by the President, the vice  President
    and an Upper Tribunal Judge, found that where no notice under s.120  of
    the 2002 Act has been served, and where no EEA decision to  remove  has
    been made, an appellant  cannot  bring  a  human  rights  challenge  to
    removal in an appeal under the EEA  Regulations.  Neither  the  factual
    matrix nor the reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402  has  any
    application to appeals of this nature.

11. It is common ground that no notice  under  s.120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had been served in this case;  nor  has
    any decision to remove  been made.  Moreover, the  refusal  letters  in
    the individual cases advised the appellants that if they did not  leave
    the UK, they might be subject to removal action. They also stated  that
    the immigration rules now included provisions for applicants wishing to
    remain in the UK on the basis of their family or private life. As  they
    had  not  made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8   consideration,
    consideration was not given as to whether their  removal  from  the  UK
    would breach Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

12. Notwithstanding the decision  in  Amirteymour  and  others,  Mr  Garrod
    sought to mitigate its effect by contending that there is  a  statutory
    duty imposed on the Tribunal under s.55 of the 2009 Act.

13. However, I  accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  as  a  matter  of
    principle the Tribunal's decision in Amirteymour similarly precludes an
    appellant from raising a discrete s.55 claim.  Moreover,  consideration
    of the best interests of the child constitutes a primary  consideration
    in an Article 8 assessment involving children. It is an  inherent  part
    of that assessment.  In the circumstances, I find that the decision  of
    the respondent was in accordance with the law and the 2006 Regulations.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error of law and the decision shall accordingly stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Dated: 20 October 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
