
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28641/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 July 2016                            |On 12 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                bilal khalid
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Bilal Khalid, was born on 8 February 1990 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Henderson) against a decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to
    issue him a residence card as a family member of an EEA national.   The
    First-tier Tribunal found that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights
    and has been in a durable relationship with the sponsor.  However,  the
    judge erred in law by allowing the appeal outright.   Regulation  17(4)
    of the 2006 Regulations provides the Secretary of  State  to  have  the
    discretion to issue a residence card to an  "extended  family  member".
    That discretion has not yet been exercised.  By a consent order, signed
    and dated 1 July 2016, the parties agreed that the Secretary of State's
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision should be allowed,  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision set aside and the matter shall be remitted
    to the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion provided under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, Regulation 17.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  4  January  2016  is
set aside.  The findings of fact are preserved.  The matter is  remitted  to
the Secretary of State for her to exercise her discretion, in the  light  of
the First-tier Tribunal's findings as to whether to issue  the  appellant  a
residence card as an "extended family member".

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 11 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
