

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28657/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On May 30, 2014                      |On June 2, 2014             |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MOHAMMAD TAJUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bhuiyan (Legal Representative)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as  the  respondent  and  Mr
    Mohammad Tajul Islam as the appellant.

 2. The appellant, born January 1, 1977, is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  On
    January 8, 2005 the appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  student.
    His leave to remain was until October 31, 2007. This leave was extended
    on November 27, 2007 to enable him to undertake a level  6  BBA  course
    (degree course) and allowed him to remain in the United  Kingdom  until
    December 31, 2008. He applied to extend his leave further  and  he  was
    allowed to remain here as a student until February 28, 2010 and then on
    April 8, 2010 he was given leave to remain  as  tier  4  student  until
    April 30, 2011. He was then granted leave to remain as a Tier  1  (post
    study work) migrant until May 19, 2013 and on May 17, 2013  he  applied
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 3. The respondent refused this application on June 28, 2013 on  the  basis
    he did not satisfy paragraph 245ZX(ha) HC 395. He was also served  with
    a decision to remove him by way of directions under section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. On July 9, 2013 the appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and human rights grounds.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Suchak
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on January 29, 2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on February 10, 2014 he  allowed  his  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on February 17, 2014.  Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cruthers  on
    April 8, 2014.

 7. The matter was listed before me on the above date and the appellant was
    in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Saunders relied on the authority of Islam (Paragraph 245ZX(ha): five
    years study) [2013] UKUT 00608. The Tribunal made clear that it was not
    the period of study but the period of leave to remain as a student that
    counted. For the purposes of calculating whether the new  course  would
    take him over the maximum period of study at degree level  (60  months)
    the Tribunal should look to when he was granted leave to  remain  as  a
    student/Tier 4 for degree purposes. This  appellant  had  been  granted
    leave initially until October 31, 2007. Part of this leave was for non-
    degree purposes and this should be ignored. He commenced  his  "degree"
    course on January 22, 2007 and any periods of leave thereafter  in  the
    country as a student or Tier  4  counted  towards  his  60  months.  He
    remained in this country as a student/Tier 4 until his leave was varied
    on May 19, 2011. This meant he had been granted  leave  to  remain  for
    study purposes for 52 months (January 2007 to May  2011).  His  current
    course would take him over the maximum 60-month  period  as  it  was  a
    fourteen-month course. The FtTJ erred in dealing with the  case  as  he
    did because he failed to apply the principles of Islam.

 9. Mr Bhuiyan adopted his skeleton argument and  submitted  the  facts  of
    this appeal could be  distinguished  from  Islam  because  firstly  the
    applicant in that appeal "dropped out"  and  secondly  Islam  does  not
    address the fees incurred by the applicant. The decision in Islam  also
    failed to have regard to the fact he had been given leave to study  for
    a non-degree course and had "upgraded" his studies whilst here  in  the
    United Kingdom. It was unfair to attribute the two years of study  that
    led to no qualification when no blame for this could be attached to the
    appellant himself. The college was suspended and subsequently  had  its
    licence revoked.

10. I reserved my decision  on  the  error  of  law  although  I  did  take
    submissions from both representatives on both the Immigration Rules for
    private life purposes and article 8 ECHR.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The appellant's  immigration  history  was  helpfully  set  out  in  Mr
    Bhuiyan's skeleton argument. The appellant came to the  United  Kingdom
    in 2005 to study English and  having  completed  that  course  he  then
    studied for a diploma before applying  to  study  a  degree  course  at
    London Reading College. His leave to remain was extended and instead of
    completing his three years course he ended his course after  two  years
    because the college's licence was suspended in January  2009  and  then
    revoked in April 2009. He remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  when  the
    college's licence was revoked and then chose to study an MBA in banking
    and finance at Kensington College of Business. This course commenced on
    September 21, 2009 and he received his results in January 2011.

12. The Tribunal in Islam considered  a  different  set  of  facts  but  it
    follows that facts in cases are  generally  different  and  it  is  the
    principle that counts.  The  Tribunal  in  Islam  considered  paragraph
    245ZX(ha) HC 395. The issue they had to consider was whether it was the
    period of study and period of time in the United Kingdom  that  counted
    towards the 60-month period. The  Tribunal  acknowledged  that  courses
    that fell below degree level did not count towards the 60 month  period
    but at paragraph [7] of their determination the Tribunal found-

        "It is the period of the leave and not the actual  study  which  is
        the measure for calculating the period spent in the UK  imposed  by
        paragraph 245ZX(ha)."

13. The Tribunal went onto consider whether the guidance would assist  that
    applicant and they concluded at paragraph [17]-

        "... It states that a person who is a "Tier  4  student"  can  only
        study at degree level or above for a maximum of five years. It does
        not exclude time spent in the past studying under  the  pre-tier  4
        rules...."

14. Mr Bhuiyan sought to distinguish  this  appeal  from  the  decision  of
    Islam. I disagree with his submission that  they  are  distinguishable.
    The Immigration Rules place a limit on the period of time a student has
    to complete degree studies. That limit is five years. Whilst it was not
    the appellant's fault that his college lost its licence he  would  have
    been aware that he had a limited period of time to complete his  degree
    studies. There are provisions for further studies at a higher level but
    they do affect this appeal. It is unclear why the appellant was  unable
    to transfer to a different college to conclude this course  or  why  he
    chose to study a different course in  September  2009  but  the  simple
    facts of this case are the proposed course  would  take  him  over  the
    maximum period of sixty months.

15. I am satisfied the Rules make it clear what has to be achieved and this
    appellant did not meet the Rules when he applied to extend his  current
    leave.

16. The FtTJ  did  not  have  regard  to  the  decision  of  Islam  in  his
    determination. He was not helped by the lack of  a  presenting  officer
    who may have brought the decision to his attention. The FtTJ  concluded
    in  paragraph  [13]  that  the  appellant  had  only  spent  43  months
    undertaking studies at degree level or more. This was the wrong test to
    apply as confirmed by the Tribunal in Islam.

17. I therefore find there has been an error  of  law  in  respect  of  his
    decision on the Immigration Rules.

18. As the appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 245ZX(ha) HC 395  his  appeal
    to extend his stay as a Tier 4 student is dismissed.

    SUBMISSIONS ON PRIVATE AND FAMILY LIFE

19. The  FtTJ  did  not  consider  article  8  ECHR  because  he  found  it
    unnecessary to consider the claim under article 8 because he allowed it
    under the Immigration Rules. There was no cross-appeal but  it  follows
    that if I am being asked to remake the  decision  then  I  should  give
    consideration to family and private life under the Rules.

20. It has not been argued at all that this appellant would satisfy  either
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE HC 395. The appellant has  argued  that
    he has established private life.

21. The Tribunal in Gulshan at paragraph [24]-

        "Drawing the threads together, and not without some difficulty,  we
        conclude that on the current state of the authorities:


        (a) ... ;


        (b) after applying the requirements of the rules, only if there may
        arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
        is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
        there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
        under them: Nagre;


        (c) the term  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as
        Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are impossible to surmount: MF
        (Nigeria); they concern the practical possibilities of  relocation.
        In the absence of such insurmountable obstacles, if removal  is  to
        be disproportionate it is necessary to show other non-standard  and
        particular   features   demonstrating   that   removal   will    be
        unjustifiably harsh: Nagre."

22. The Tribunal stated in Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC) at paragraph [31] :

        "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
        mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in  particular
        and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
        640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
        of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
        granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
        purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
        circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

23. The following evidence was before me:-

     a. The appellant came to the United  Kingdom  with  limited  leave  to
        remain in 2005.
     b. Since 2005 he has undertaken a number of courses and also  remained
        as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) migrant.
     c. His application to remain as a Tier 4 student has been rejected.
     d. He has spent money on his courses.
     e. He has successfully completed a number of the modules in respect of
        his current studies.
     f. His family live in Bangladesh.
     g. He has no family in the United Kingdom.





    ARE THERE ANY COMPELLING FACTORS TO ENABLE  CONSIDERATION  OUTSIDE  THE
    RULES


24. I cannot lose sight of the fact that this is an application to extend a
    period of stay to further his studies. The Tribunal in Nasim and others
    (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  00025  (IAC)  considered   a   variety   of
    circumstances for the purposes of article 8 ECHR. The Tribunal made the
    following findings-

        20. We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others
        is a significant exhortation from the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
        attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
        particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
        one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
        operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
        The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
        be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
        interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
        reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
        controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
        proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached).


        40.  ...  Furthermore,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the
        appellant in CDS was faced with a hypothetical removal, which would
        have prevented her from completing the course of  study  for  which
        she had been given leave.   In  the  present  cases,  each  of  the
        appellants has finished the course  (or  latest  course)  to  which
        their leave to remain as a student related...."

25. The appellant has completed his studies and has undertaken  post  study
    work. He was not in the middle of any course when he applied to  extend
    his stay. His leave was about to expire and he  sought  to  extend  his
    stay further  as  a  student.  The  fact  he  has  continued  to  study
    throughout these proceedings was a choice he took and which the college
    clearly facilitated. However, at the time he commenced these studies he
    had completed his previous studies and carried out post study work.

26. If the appellant met the Rules his application would have been granted.
    The fact he met part of the Rules does not mean his  appeal  should  be
    allowed either within or  outside  of  the  Rules.  The  appellant  has
    studied and worked here and no doubt he has made friends.

27. I find nothing in the facts of this case that persuade me  to  consider
    the case outside of the Immigration Rules  (applying  Gulshan)  and  in
    those circumstances I have not considered this appeal  outside  of  the
    Rules.





    DECISION

28. There was a material error of law. I set aside the FtTJ's decision.


29. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

30. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated: 20 June 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award.

Signed:                                 Dated: 20 June 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
