
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA288632014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th May 2016                              |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                      MR MOHAMED SADIQUE MAHABOOB BASHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant was born on 1st March 1980 and is a citizen of India.

 2. On 20th September 2011 the Appellant was granted leave to enter the  UK
    as a student, that leave to expire on 20th September 2013.

 3. On 17th October 2013 the Appellant made  application  for  a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to reside in the  UK  under  European
    Community law, on the basis of his  marriage  on  4th  August  2013  to
    Vanessa Monteiro, a Portuguese national exercising treaty rights in the
    UK.

 4. The Appellant's application was refused by the Respondent in a decision
    dated 11th July 2014. The Respondent was satisfied that  the  Appellant
    and his EEA national spouse had contracted a marriage  of  convenience,
    for the sole purpose of allowing the Appellant to remain in the UK.

 5. The Appellant appealed that refusal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Montgomery).  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  15th  October  2015  it
    dismissed his appeal.  The Appellant now appeals,  with  permission  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  this  basis.
    Part of  the  Respondent's  case  against  the  Appellant  consists  of
    evidence contained in a record interview which the Appellant gave to  a
    Home  Office  interviewing  officer.   Prior  to  the  FtT  hearing,  a
    direction was served upon the Respondent to serve a full record of that
    interview upon the Appellant's representatives.

 7. At the commencement of the FtT hearing, the Appellant's representatives
    made application for an adjournment on the  basis  that  they  had  not
    received a copy of the Appellant's Home Office interview as directed by
    the Tribunal.  The judge refused the application and proceeded with the
    hearing after standing the case down for a  short  time  to  allow  the
    Appellant an opportunity to peruse a copy of the document.

 8. In granting permission Judge Kelly said the following:

         "Having earlier directed the Respondent to serve a full record of a
         Home Office interview upon the Appellant, it is arguable  that  the
         Tribunal's subsequent decision to refuse  to  adjourn  the  hearing
         when the Respondent failed  to  serve  that  document  (whether  in
         accordance with the terms of the direction  or  at  all)  was  both
         inconsistent and unfair.  This was arguably material to the outcome
         of the appeal because the Tribunal went  on  to  place  substantial
         reliance upon what were claimed to  be  discrepancies  between  the
         replies given in that interview by the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
         respectively.  It is further arguable that the Tribunal  failed  to
         have  regard  to  material  evidence.   In  particular  whilst  the
         Tribunal made passing reference to the fact that the Appellant  had
         called three witnesses  at  the  hearing,  it  arguably  failed  to
         explain what (if any) weight it attached to that evidence."

Error of Law Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Bellara for the Appellant and Mr Tufan  for
    the Respondent.  Mr Bellara kept to the grounds seeking permission  and
    submitted that the decision of the FtT should be set  aside  for  legal
    error, on account of the Appellant not being afforded a  fair  hearing.
    This was on  the  basis  that  it  would  seem  that  unfortunately  an
    administrative error had occurred, in that the documents containing the
    Appellant's Home Office  interview,  had  been  sent  to  his  previous
    representatives rather than his current representatives.

10. In addition three witnesses had attended the hearing to  give  evidence
    on behalf of the Appellant.  There  was  no  meaningful  assessment  of
    their evidence. As the FtT had found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness, then in  fairness  to  the  Appellant,  the  decision
    should have contained an analysis as  to  why  those  three  witnesses'
    evidence was not accepted.

11. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Respondent did not  disagree  that  it  would
    seem that the papers were  erroneously  sent  to  the  Appellant's  old
    representatives rather than his current representatives.

12. I find that the decision of the FtT  should  be  set  aside  for  legal
    error.  I reach that  conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.   I  am
    satisfied that the FtT's decision to refuse to adjourn the hearing when
    requested to do so, has resulted in the Appellant being deprived  of  a
    fair hearing.  The Appellant was entitled to have  sight  of  the  copy
    interview record with sufficient time to consider its import. There  is
    a judicial direction to that effect.  It would  seem  that  through  an
    unfortunate oversight, the Appellant's past representatives were served
    with the copy record interview and  his  current  representatives  were
    not. I was informed that the Appellant's current  representatives  came
    on record well before the date of the hearing before Judge  Montgomery.
    This oversight resulted in the Appellant's representatives being placed
    in a position whereby they could not  take  full  instructions  on  the
    contents of the interview.  The evidence of the Home  Office  interview
    forms the core of the case against the Appellant.

13. I am reinforced in my finding that the Appellant did not  have  a  fair
    hearing by the fact that it seems that the FtT failed to have regard to
    material evidence.  It is recorded at  [8]  that  Tribunal  heard  oral
    evidence from three witnesses.  I  see  no  proper  analysis  of  their
    evidence.  There is simply a passing reference at [15]  which  says  "I
    heard evidence from the three other witnesses, but  this  evidence  did
    not suffice to resolve the issues  or  allay  the  concerns  which  had
    arisen."

14. As a footnote I see that the FtT keeps  referring  to  the  Appellant's
    wife as if she lived in Scotland.  There has never been any  suggestion
    in the papers that the Appellant's wife has lived anywhere  other  than
    the London area.  It seems that the Tribunal may  have  lost  focus  in
    this appeal.

15. In the circumstances I see no alternative to setting this matter  aside
    for material error.  I find that the errors outlined above  infect  the
    whole of  the  decision.   Nothing  can  be  preserved  from  it.   The
    appropriate course is for this appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, for a fresh fact finding hearing, before a judge  other  than
    Judge Montgomery.







Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT is set  aside  for  legal  error.   The  Appellant's
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Montgomery)  for  a
fresh re-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     08 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
