
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28599/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 May 2014                                  |On 28th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          adewoyin adebukola yemisi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Mohsin (instructed by Heath & Power Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Adewoyin Adebukola Yemisi, was born on 2 August 1981 and
    is a citizen of Nigeria.  The appellant made an application  for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
    and her application was refused on 17 August  2012  with  no  right  of
    appeal against that decision.   However,  following  a  review  by  the
    respondent a further decision  was  taken  to  remove  her  by  way  of
    directions.  That decision is dated 24 June 2013.  It was against  that
    decision that the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Robson) which, in a determination  promulgated  on  13  December  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.   The  appellant  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal
    herself although she was represented by Counsel at the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing.

 2. In essence, the appellant argues that the fact that she had submitted a
    false bank statement (from Rockshield Microfinance Limited) in  support
    of her application was immaterial; she asserts  that  the  "Immigration
    Officer... knew that I would have met all the standard requirements [of
    the Immigration Rules] even without the false bank statement...".

 3. Granting permission, Judge Osborne went beyond that  ground  of  appeal
    when at [3], he observed:

         ... It is an arguable error of law for the judge to have  dismissed
         the appellant's appeal without a specific finding that someone else
         (other than  the  appellant)  is  responsible  for  the  fraudulent
         activity (creation of the false bank statement).

 4. Judge Osborne observed the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria)  [2010]  Imm
    AR 4 had held that "dishonesty  or  deception  is  needed,  albeit  not
    necessarily  that  of  the  applicant  himself,  to  render  a   'false
    representation  a  ground  for  mandatory  refusal'."   Judge   Osborne
    considered that there was an arguable error of law  that  Judge  Robson
    had made "no specific finding against any other person."

 5. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Mohsin submitted that the judge had  made
    an unequivocal finding at [60]  that  the  appellant  herself  had  not
    "knowingly participated in what was  clearly  a  fraudulent  activity."
    The judge found [61] that there was "no evidence to suggest it was  she
    herself that initiated the creation of that document."  The analysis of
    the appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules ends  somewhat  abruptly
    at that point as the judge goes on to consider Article 8 ECHR but it is
    clear from [71]  that  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    dismissed.   Judge  Robson  has,  therefore,  clearly  found  that  the
    appellant herself was not responsible for the fraudulent document.   He
    has made no finding that any other  individual  was  responsible.   His
    failure to do so, submitted Ms Mohsin, constituted a material error  of
    law. Mr Mohsin also sought  to  argue  that  the  appellant  had  never
    accepted that the document in question was false.

 6. I do not agree with that submission.  As I told Ms Mohsin in court,  it
    was simply not open to the appellant to argue at this  stage  that  she
    had never accepted that a bank statement was a false  document.   Judge
    Robson recorded that she had not disputed that the document  was  false
    [55] whilst two firms of lawyers instructed by her had written  to  the
    respondent acknowledging (presumably on the  appellant's  instructions)
    that the document was false.

 7. The Rules clearly provide that submitting a false document  in  support
    of an application will lead to the refusal of that application  whether
    or not the applicant himself or herself has perpetrated the dishonesty.
     A false bank statement in this case was created by some  human  agency
    even if it was not that of the appellant herself.  I do not  find  that
    it was necessary for Judge Robson to identify who had created the false
    document; indeed, there was scant evidence to  indicate  who  may  have
    created it. Whilst it was open to the judge to find that the  appellant
    herself had not created  the  false  document,  that  finding  was  not
    sufficient to save her application.

 8. Finally, I find the appellant's own grounds of  appeal  to  be  without
    merit.  If a false document is used in support of an  application  then
    that dishonesty wholly undermines it and it is immaterial  whether  the
    applicant satisfies all  the  other  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 22 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

