
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28157/2015
     IA/28163/2015
     IA/28172/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2016                          |On 15 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  SONEY [P]
                                  JOSMI [L]
                                    [N S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel (instructed by Amjad Malik, Solicitors)

For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State. However, for the sake of continuity and  clarity  I
    shall continue to refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent  in
    this judgment.

 2. This appeal concerns a Decision and Reasons of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Henderson) promulgated on 9 May 2016 by which the  appeals  were
    allowed on the basis that the third appellant met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules and the first and second
    appellants' appeals were allowed outside  the  Immigration  Rules  with
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    attached too much weight to  the  fact  that  the  third  appellant  is
    receiving the benefit of an education in the United Kingdom and further
    that if the first and second appellants were to be removed it would  be
    reasonable to expect the third appellant to go with them.


 4. Miss Patel argued that the Judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusion
    that she did; namely that it would be unreasonable  for  the  child  to
    return to India.


 5. At the time that the Judge determined this  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal she did so by assessing reasonableness focused solely  on  the
    child. Since that time  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  determined  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  that  approach  to  be  incorrect.  At
    paragraph 45 of that judgment Lord Justice Elias indicated  that  while
    he favoured an approach inconsistent with the very recent  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450,  he  found
    himself unable to depart from it and said  in  his  judgment,  "if  the
    court should have regard to the conduct of the applicant and any  other
    matters relevant to the  public  interest  when  applying  the  "unduly
    harsh" concept under section 117C(5), so should it when considering the
    question of reasonableness under section 117B(6)." He went  on  to  say
    that he "recognised that the provisions in section  117C  are  directed
    towards the particular considerations which have to be borne in mind in
    the case of foreign criminals, and it is true  that  the  court  placed
    some weight on section 117C(2) which states that the more  serious  the
    offence, the greater is the interest in deportation  of  the  prisoner.
    But the critical point is  that  section  117C(5)  is  in  substance  a
    freestanding provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even  so
    the court in MM (Uganda) held that wider public interest considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion".
    He went on to say "it seems to me that  it  must  be  equally  so  with
    respect to the reasonableness criterion in section  117B(6).  It  would
    not be appropriate to distinguish that decision simply because  I  have
    reservations whether it is  correct.  Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
    approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the
    Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the
    only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven-year  rule
    is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of  leave
    to remain being granted."

 6. On the basis that Judge Henderson assessed reasonableness from a child-
    centred point of  view  I  find  she  made  an  error  of  law,  albeit
    unwittingly given that MA (Pakistan) was not then promulgated. On  that
    basis I set aside the determination only as concerns the assessment  of
    reasonableness. There is no error in the Judge's factual  findings  and
    they are preserved.


 7. I indicated, in accordance with  the  directions  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, that I would proceed to redecide the appeal  immediately.  It
    was agreed that evidence would not be  required,  given  the  preserved
    findings, and I would deal with the matter on  submissions.  I  allowed
    Miss Patel time to prepare her arguments.


 8. Mr Harrison's submissions were brief, relying on the matters previously
    decided and he simply commented that whilst case law indicated that the
    position of the child must be given significant weight,  it  is  not  a
    trump card.  Miss Patel argued strenuously that, based on the  findings
    of Judge Henderson it was clearly unreasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the UK.


 9. I now turn to the factual matters of this  claim.  The  appellants  are
    husband and wife and their daughter, who was born in India on  7  April
    2004. The appellants are all Indian nationals.


10. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student  on  3  May
    2007 with a visa valid until  31  August  2008.  He  was  then  granted
    further leave until 30 November 2009. His wife and daughter entered  as
    his dependents on 22 December 2008 and were granted leave in line  with
    him. All three were then given further leave until 30 January 2012 as a
    student and dependents. On 20 January 2012 the appellants made  further
    application for leave to remain on the basis  of  their  human  rights.
    That was refused and their appeals were dismissed. They  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 5 March 2015.


11. On 16 March 2015 the appellants made a further application for leave on
    the basis of their private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom.  I
    pause at this point to note that the appellants  have,  save  for  that
    brief period between 5 and 16 March 2015, always had leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom either granted by the Secretary of  State  or  under
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.


12. It is now not in dispute that the adult appellants  cannot  succeed  as
    partners under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  as  neither  is  a
    British citizen or settled in the UK and neither could  they  meet  the
    requirements as parents given that they live  together.  Neither  adult
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE as they have  not  been  in
    the UK long enough.


13. The reality is that this case centres around the position of the  third
    appellant child. She entered the UK on 22 December 2008 at the  age  of
    four years and eight months. At the date of decision she  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom six years and at the date  of  the  application  she
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. That paragraph of
    the Immigration Rules requires the child to have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years at the date of the  application.   Indeed  that
    indicates a further error of law by Judge  Henderson  who  allowed  the
    appeal in relation to the third appellant on the basis of paragraph 276
    ADE. She could only satisfy the requirements of that Rule  if  she  had
    been in the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  at  the  date  of  the
    application. The application was made in January 2012 when she had been
    in the United Kingdom four years. That leaves only a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. It was  not  suggested  by  Mr
    Harrison that I should not consider the matter outside  the  Rules  and
    indeed, given that by the date of  the  hearing  almost  4  years  have
    passed since the date of  application,  it  is  clearly  appropriate  I
    should do so. It is also clear that this case is about proportionality,
    the final question identified in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.


14. Although the child cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE,
    when assessing proportionality under the ECHR outside  the  Immigration
    Rules I must consider the position as at the date  hearing,  namely  in
    December 2016. The child has now  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  eight
    years. Section 117B of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  contains
    provisions which reflect paragraph  276ADE.  Section  117A  requires  a
    Judge  to  take   certain   matters   into   account   when   assessing
    proportionality. Section 117B provides as follows:-


        1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
           public interest

        2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
           of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
           who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to
           speak English, because persons who can speak English-
              a.  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
              b.  are better able to integrate into society.

        3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
           of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
           who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   are
           financially independent, because such persons-
              a. are not a burden on taxpayers, and
              b. are better able to integrate into society.

        4) Little weight should be given to-
              a. a private life, or
              b. a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
        that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.


        5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
           person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.

        6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
              a.  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
              b.  it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                 the United Kingdom.

15. The first five subsections of section 117B are factors which,  if  they
    do not apply are to be taken against an appellant but if they do  apply
    they are neutral.

16. The Upper Tribunal case of Treebhawon & Ors  (section  117B(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 00674 (IAC) tells us that  section  117B(6)  provides  a  complete
    answer and if it applies appellants are entitled to succeed.


17. Judge Henderson did not accept there were any risks to  the  appellants
    in India. She considered the claims that  they  would  be  at  risk  on
    account of their real or imputed religious beliefs and  dismissed  that
    claim. Judge Henderson referred to a previous Judge's determination  in
    relation to their earlier asylum claim and noted that the appellant had
    given evidence that his daughter had minimal knowledge of their  native
    language, Malayalam. He said that the appellant's evidence was  evasive
    and inconsistent. The same issue with regard to the  child's  inability
    to speak the native language was raised before Judge Henderson and  she
    did not accept  that  she  was  completely  ignorant  of  her  parents'
    language. She noted that the third appellant had lived with her parents
    in India until the  age  of  four  years  and  eight  months  and  that
    Malayalam is the first language  of  the  parents  and  she  concluded,
    reasonably, that Malayalam would be the language used at home from  the
    appellant's birth and therefore she inevitably would be able  to  speak
    it. It was acknowledged by Judge Henderson that  of  course  the  third
    appellant speaks English in  school  and  that  is  now  her  preferred
    language. That is not equivalent to having no knowledge  of  Malayalam,
    although she has been educated entirely in the UK thus far.  The  Judge
    accepted that the child would have difficulties in readjusting to  life
    in India for a number of reasons.  She  has  spent  the  whole  of  her
    primary schooling in the UK and has enjoyed a public education  through
    the English system for the most part while  her  parents  were  legally
    resident. She has made friends in the  UK  and  enjoys  extracurricular
    activities  such  as  dancing,  drama  and  martial  arts.  Her  school
    attendance record is excellent and  she  has  high  ambitions  for  the
    future. She has never visited India since she was  four  and  therefore
    has no close friends there.

18. However, the Judge did not accept that the child could  not  adjust  to
    the education system in India, although she acknowledged that it  would
    be difficult for her having never previously  experienced  the  system.
    The Judge concluded that it would not be in the child's best  interests
    to leave the United Kingdom. It was not simply a  matter  of  education
    but also friendships and relationships and activities which formed  her
    private life would be disrupted and India is  a  society  and  culture,
    values, norms and language  alien  to  her  and  the  change  would  be
    emotionally stressful.

19. The judge expressed her concerns that the first and  second  appellants
    had exaggerated the difficulties they would face in India, for  example
    suggesting that the child would be forcibly married to a Roman Catholic
    should they be returned and that he would be unable to protect her. The
    judge found this to be entirely without credibility.

20. The judge found the parents to be  loving  and  supportive.  The  first
    appellant is well educated, having obtained  additional  qualifications
    in the UK.  He is working as is his wife. She rejected  their  evidence
    that they will be unable to find employment in India.  The  judge  also
    rejected claims that the first appellant's health  prevented  him  from
    returning to India.


21. Taking into consideration the matters I am required to by section  117B
    the first Judge found that all three appellants spoke English and  were
    employed. The private life that the adults had built up in  the  United
    Kingdom had been whilst their  status  was  precarious  and  so  little
    weight should be given to their private life.


22. The crux of this matter is the situation of their daughter and  whether
    it is reasonable to expect her to return to India.


23. I have no difficulty in finding that if I  were  considering  only  the
    best interests of the child, her best  interests  would  be  served  by
    remaining in the UK however, that is not the determining factor.


24. The child has been in the UK for a period of eight years  and  all  her
    education thus far has  been  in  the  UK  and  conducted  in  English.
    However, it is not the case that she does not speak the  same  language
    as her parents. It is not the case that an  education  in  the  English
    language is unavailable in India. Her father spoke English  on  arrival
    in the UK, a skill learned in India. It is not the case that the  child
    is at a critical state stage of her education, she is 12 years of age.


25. The child, although she has been in the UK now  for  eight  years,  did
    spend the first four years of her  life  in  India.  I  acknowledge  of
    course that she will have very few memories of that time.


26. The child has no health issues preventing her living in India.


27. While the first and second appellants committed no offences and have at
    all times, save for a very short period, been lawfully in the  UK,  the
    fact is they currently have no basis on which they can remain.


28. There is considerable case law both in the United  Kingdom  and  Europe
    about the importance of a child being entitled to live in  the  country
    of its nationality. The country of this child's  nationality,  heritage
    and culture and the country where any distant relatives will be is  not
    the UK. In the same way as a British child is entitled to be brought up
    in the UK, an Indian child is entitled to be brought up in India and it
    would be quite wrong to suggest one is better than the other.


29. In terms of the upheaval for the child of returning to  India,  I  find
    that this has been wildly exaggerated. Children are frequently uprooted
    by their parents either to other parts of the UK at great distance from
    where they currently live and have made their life and their friends or
    internationally.  This  might  happen  due  to   a   breakdown   in   a
    relationship, parents' employment or simply as a matter of  choice.  It
    has never been suggested that to do this is a  breach  of  the  child's
    human rights. The only difference here is that the parents would prefer
    to remain in the UK. The parents did not consider the disruption to the
    child of removing her from her home country when they  brought  her  to
    the United Kingdom and indeed because they are a loving and  supportive
    family any disruption was managed; so will it be on  return  to  India.
    The family will be returning to the country of their  nationality.  Any
    difficulties the child has can be managed through the love and  support
    of her parents. Being highly educated,  the  father  will  be  able  to
    secure employment and in the same way as do all children who move homes
    she will make new friends, form new attachments and be  able  to  enjoy
    extracurricular activities as she does in the UK.

30. For all  of  the  above  reasons  I  do  not  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United   Kingdom.
    Accordingly, section 117B(6) does not apply and the appellants' appeals
    must be dismissed.


       Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed  and
    the  apps'  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


