
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/28940/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons  promulgated      |
|On 15 August 2017                     |On 22 September 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         MILANKUMAR DEEPABHAI CHAVDA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Jafferji instructed by Highcross Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 6 April 2017, the Upper Tribunal found First-tier Tribunal Judge
        O'Hagan had materially erred in law  in  allowing  the  appellant's
        appeal for the reasons stated and  set  aside  that  decision.  The
        matter comes before the Upper Tribunal today for the purposes of  a
        Resume hearing to enable the decision to be remade.
     2. Mr  Jafferji  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  raised  a  number  of
        preliminary issues which can be summarised as being  (a)  that  the
        decision under challenge is unlawful, (b) that  the  assessment  of
        the  maintenance  element  under  Appendix  FM  should  have   been
        reassessed in light of the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  R(on
        the application of MM (Lebanon) and Others) v  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC  10,  and,  (c)  that  further
        disclosure of documents relating to the ETS element of  the  appeal
        were required.
     3. In relation to the assertion the decision is unlawful, Mr  Jafferji
        referred the Tribunal to an earlier decision, a copy of  which  was
        in the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, dated 22 October 2014
        in which an application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
        Student Migrant was refused with no right of appeal.  The  decision
        maker acknowledged that the appellant had applied for such leave on
        18 August 2014 but in Section B: Appeal Rights stated the appellant
        was not entitled to a right of appeal as  he  still  had  leave  to
        enter or remain valid to 9 February 2015 and the current conditions
        of  that  leave  continued  to  apply.  It  was  asserted  on   the
        appellant's behalf that he did not have valid leave as  claimed  as
        the application on 18 August 2014 was made  on  the  last  day  his
        previous leave expired meaning that his leave continued  thereafter
        solely by virtue of Section 3C.
     4. Mrs Aboni confirmed the appellant had been granted leave to  remain
        as a Tier 4 Student but that a  previous  refusal,  dated  16  June
        2014, had curtailed that leave as  the  college  at  which  he  was
        studying had lost their licence, which had been revoked, so  as  to
        expire on 18 August 2014.  It  was  accepted  on  the  respondent's
        behalf that when the appellant made the application  on  18  August
        2014 it was an 'in time' application.  It  was  accepted  that  the
        statement in the refusal of 22 October 2014 that the appellant  had
        extant leave was wrong as it appears  the  decision-maker  on  that
        occasion did not appreciate, or was not aware of, the fact that the
        appellant's previous leave had been curtailed. It was accepted that
        as a result of the error the appellant should  have  been  given  a
        right of appeal against the decision of 22 October 2014 and that  a
        valid decision on that application is still awaited.
     5. It was further accepted by Mrs Aboni  that  the  statement  in  the
        decision that is the subject of this appeal, that the appellant  is
        an over stayer, is also incorrect.
     6. It was accepted by Mrs Aboni  that  the  decision  currently  under
        challenge is therefore not a lawful decision as it is based upon an
        incorrect assessment of the appellant's immigration status.
     7.  Accordingly,  there  is  no  need  to  consider  the  further  the
        submission  relating  to  the  failure  of  the  decision-maker  to
        reassess the maintenance aspects of the application in light of the
        decision of the Supreme Court or the request for further disclosure
        of documents relating to the ETS case.
     8. Mrs Aboni was asked  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  wished  to
        withdraw the decision under challenge but she stated that it  would
        be better if the Upper Tribunal allowed the appeal on the basis  of
        an unlawful decision.
     9. The Upper Tribunal therefore allows the appeal  on  the  basis  the
        decision under challenge is an unlawful decision and the  appellant
        still awaits a lawful decision on both the application of 18 August
        2014 and the current application.
    10. Mr Jafferji was asked to inform  Mrs  Aboni  in  writing  of  those
        issues he considered required further investigation which he agreed
        to do. It is hoped that that information will be considered by  any
        subsequent decision-maker to ensure that when a further decision is
        produced there are no outstanding  issues  that  will  prevent  the
        First-tier Tribunal being able  to  determine  the  merits  of  any
        appeal that may arise at the first opportunity.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and that decision set aside. I remake the decision  by
        allowing the appeal on  the  basis  the  decision  is  an  unlawful
        decision and the appellant awaits a lawful decision upon  both  his
        application of the 18 August 2014 and the current application.




   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 August 2017












