
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28143/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th July 2016                             |On 15th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     V S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    De Haney,  promulgated  on  13th  May  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 21st April 2015.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who  was  born  on  31st
    October 1982 and is 32 years of age.  She appeals against the  decision
    of the Respondent Secretary of State dated 26th June 2014 refusing  her
    application for variation of leave to remain in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is based upon the  fact  that,  although  she  is
    married to a British citizen husband, and has a British citizen  child,
    the main issue is whether or not her English language test  certificate
    has been provided by an approved provider.  She had submitted  a  valid
    English language test certificate authorised by  Edexcel,  she  claims,
    and the Community Support Plus Ltd (see page 25 of  her  bundle).   The
    certificate itself refers to Edexcel but also refers to the certificate
    being issued by Pearsons (see  pages  23  to  24).   According  to  the
    register, Pearsons were on the Register of Approved Providers, and  the
    issue was whether or not the certificate had been genuinely  issued  by
    Pearsons.  Pearsons itself did not issue the paper certificates, as the
    register confirmed, but rather issued online certificates, and provided
    the same to the Respondent.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard submissions that the Appellant had met the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules because she had sat  an  appropriate  test  in
    ESOL and the Skills for Life test.  A certificate had been provided  by
    the test centre and this  was  a  genuine  certificate  provided  by  a
    certified provider.  There was a letter from  Community  Support  Plus.
    Second, Pearsons had also provided the number and it was clear that the
    Appellant met the requirements of the Rules.  Third, as far as  Article
    8 was concerned, the Appellant had a  British  citizen  child  and  her
    husband and daughter had been given indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    UK.

 5. The judge observed that the Respondent Secretary of State had  rejected
    the Appellant's application on the  single  point  that  they  did  not
    accept that the certificate in respect of her English language test had
    been from an approved  provider.   The  judge  went  on  to  say  that,
    "further when the provider was shown to be  an  approved  provider  the
    Respondent appears to have changed that  stance  and  stated  that  the
    certificate was not genuine" (paragraph 11).  The judge  also  recorded
    that the letter from Community Support Ltd  dated  25th  February  2015
    shows that the Appellant had passed the  relevant  exam  and  had  been
    awarded the relevant certificate.  In his conclusions he recorded that,
    "given my finding under the Immigration Rules, it is not  necessary  to
    set out why it" has been "found that the Appellant's removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with the  right
    to family life" (paragraph 13).  The latter being  a  decision  by  the
    judge on Article 8 grounds.



Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that Upper Tribunal Judge McClure  had
    given directions  that  the  Appellant  is  to  provide  evidence  from
    Pearsons to show that the certificate is valid or  in  the  alternative
    provide a copy of the relevant register showing Community Support  Plus
    Ltd on it.  However, the letter that had been provided was dated  prior
    to  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  certificate  which  according  to
    paragraph 12 was issued on 20th February 2014 and therefore the  letter
    dated  23rd  May  2013  did  not  concern  the  relevant  date  of  the
    certificate of 20th February 2014.

 7. On 5th April 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Bates,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent,   appears   to   have   changed   tack   again,   and   not
    unapologetically, pointing out that, although this was  a  matter  that
    had  been  up  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  before,  there  had   been   a
    misunderstanding on the application of the Rules, which had simply  not
    been picked up by anyone so far.  This was to do  with  the  applicable
    Immigration Rule.  At page 36 of the Appellant's bundle was a reference
    to Appendix O, and whilst it was accepted that Pearsons  was  the  only
    approved provider, as set out in  Appendix  O,  and  that  the  English
    language test was a ESOL test, what page 32 of the  bundle  made  clear
    was that as far as the test for ESOL entry level 3 course is  concerned
    then the approved provider is  "Cambridge  English".   At  the  hearing
    before Upper Tribunal Judge McClure previously, this issue had not been
    picked up.  It was arguable that the  Upper  Tribunal  directions  were
    complied with.  However, if the wrong Rule had been applied,  and  that
    with respect to entry level 3 course of ESOL the provider  should  have
    been  Cambridge  English,  but  this  was  not  the  provider  in   the
    Appellant's case, then there must be a finding of an error of law.

 9. For his part, Mr Bradshaw wisely and graciously accepted that this is a
    "Robinson obvious" point which should have been picked up and he  would
    find it difficult to disagree.  Nevertheless, no application  to  amend
    the grounds had been made by Mr Bates.  That too, was  a  point  wisely
    taken by Mr Bradshaw.  However, whilst he would have to accept that the
    correct provider had to  be  "Cambridge  English"  in  accordance  with
    Appendix O, he was not withdrawing  the  appeal.   Second,  the  appeal
    could not be allowed under Article  8  either  because  the  judge  had
    linked his conclusions with respect to  Article  8  (at  paragraph  13)
    directly with his "finding under the Immigration Rules" and  then  went
    on to say that, "it is not necessary to set out why  it  would  in  any
    event be found that the Appellant's removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would  be  disproportionate",  without  making  any  express   findings
    independently in relation to Article 8.   This  being  so,  the  appeal
    could not be argued on Article 8 grounds either  for  the  time  being.
    Third, accordingly, Mr Bradshaw submitted that  this  would  mean  that
    there needs to be oral evidence in relation to  Article  8  before  the
    Tribunal and also the  Appellant  would  need  to  submit  a  Cambridge
    English test certificate for entry  level  3.   Finally,  and  no  less
    importantly, in order to be able to sit  the  Cambridge  English  entry
    level 3 course, it was necessary for the Appellant  to  have  back  her
    passport from the Respondent authority, failing which she would not  be
    allowed to sit the test.  It was important that directions  were  given
    by this Tribunal for the service upon the Appellant of her passport.

10. For his part, Mr Bates replied to say that he would have to agree  that
    if the judge had made separate findings in relation to  Article  8  and
    allowed the appeal on that basis, then his  decision  could  have  been
    upheld, but as it was, those findings were directly linked and subsumed
    under the findings on Immigration Rules, and therefore could not  stand
    independently from the Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This however,  as  is
    clear from above, is through no fault of the judge below  at  all.   In
    fact, on one  view,  this  is  an  example  once  again  of  how,  "the
    Respondent appears to have  changed  that  stance"  (paragraph  11)  as
    transpired before Judge De  Haney  below.   That  changing  of  stance,
    however, was not however, anything other than entirely  understandable,
    because whereas the well-established position in public law is that  an
    estoppel may operate, it cannot operate if the decision is  made  by  a
    public body when there was no jurisdiction to make that decision.  That
    is the case here.  The jurisdiction was to consider allowing the appeal
    on the basis of the application of  the  correct  Rules.   The  correct
    Rules was that for an entry level 3 course, the test certificate had to
    come from Cambridge English.   Unfortunately  the  Rules  are  far  too
    complex these days and have not for nothing  been  described  as  being
    byzantine in  their  complexity.   At  first  blush  Pearsons  was  the
    approved provider.  Indeed, Pearsons is set out in Appendix O as  well.
    However, with respect  to  entry  level  3  ESOL  tests,  the  approved
    provider is Cambridge English.  This had  not  been  mentioned  at  any
    stage by anyone before, even though the matter had gone  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal before the Tribunal of DTJ McClure,  but  has  only  now  been
    picked up, without  any  notification  to  the  Appellant's  side,  and
    without any application having been made to amend grounds by Mr  Bates.
    Nevertheless, the decision below could not stand because it was outwith
    the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to conclude  as  it  did.   The  right
    Rules had not been applied.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  back  to  a
    judge other than Judge De  Haney.   This  is  because  as  Mr  Bradshaw
    indicates, this appeal is not being withdrawn.

13. In the meantime, I  direct  that  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    without any further delay releases and serves upon  the  Appellant  her
    passport so that she may proceed to comply with the Rules, as  she  has
    so far, and to her great credit, has striven to do.  It was  not  known
    to her that the approved provider in her case  was  Cambridge  English.
    It was, in fact, not known to anyone until today's hearing.

14. That being so, and so as to allow the Appellant  ample  opportunity  to
    comply with the law, as she has always set out to do, it  is  important
    that she is given the chance to sit the English language  test  in  the
    correct way and for the correct provider.

15. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016


                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing      |Professor S S Juss                |
|approval:                         |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Mrs Vanitha Sundaramoorthy        |
|Case Number:                      |IA/28143/2014                     |

Oral decision (please indicate) X


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    Professor Satvinder Juss

Date:    13th September 2016


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



