
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28384/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal       |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 July 2015                          |             On 12 August 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        oluwaseun mayowa samson amosu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Evans, WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Oluwaseun Mayowa Samson Amosu, was born on 29 April 1993
    and is a male citizen of Nigeria.  On  27  June  2014,  the  respondent
    refused to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom and made  the
    decision to remove him by way of directions under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  He appealed to the First-
    tier  on  the  papers  (Judge  Blair)  which,  in   the   determination
    promulgated on 13 October 2014 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, that Deputy Judge Norton-Taylor considered that,

         It is arguable that the First-tier Judge followed and compounded to
         the respondent's error in applying  the  wrong  provisions  of  the
         Rules to the  appellant's  case.   Instead  of  being  required  to
         provide documents under paragraph 319H-SD(a) (on the basis that the
         appellant was residing with his mother),  the  respondent  and  the
         First-tier Judge required him to provide documents under  paragraph
         319H(d) (on the basis that he was not).  Deputy Judge Norton-Taylor
         also noted that there was "documentary evidence on file  suggesting
         the appellant may in fact have been residing with  his  mother,  as
         claimed ....

    Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  McVeety  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    acknowledged that such evidence did exist in the form of a letter  from
    the  appellant's  university  and  his  driving  licence.   Mr  McVeety
    accepted that the appellant met the requirements as a Tier 1  (General)
    child residing with a parent who had been granted leave to remain under
    the points-based system (PBS).   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    immigration decision should, therefore, have been allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 13  October
2014 is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
against the decision of the respondent dated 27 June 2014 is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 4 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane






