
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28700/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 July 2015                               |On 22 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                      NARCISSE TIBAUT DJEUKAM KOUENKAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussein, instructed by NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Narcisse Tibaut Djeukam Kouenkam, was born on 8 November
    1972 and is a male citizen of Cameroon.  The appellant claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom in 2004 legally.  In May  2007,  he  applied
    for a residence card which was issued to him.  That card expired on  19
    September 2012 and, on 18 July  2012,  the  appellant  applied  for  an
    extension of the residence card which was refused.  He appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal but his appeal was dismissed  (7  May  2013).   His
    further application in November 2013 for a permanent residence card was
    also refused.  The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the  respondent  reconsidered  the  application
    upon receipt of new evidence.  On 24 June 2014, the decision was  taken
    to uphold the  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  the  appellant  with  a
    permanent residence card.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Fist-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Birkby) which, in a decision promulgated on  9  January
    2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In essence, there are two grounds of appeal.   First,  it  is  asserted
    that the judge perpetrated  an  unfairness  against  the  appellant  by
    refusing to adjourn the hearing on 19 December 2014.  Judge Birkby  had
    first  considered  this  appeal  on  18  November  2014  when  he   had
    acknowledged that the "appellant did not have sufficient notice of  the
    assertions [made by the respondent for the first time at  that  hearing
    that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  one  of  convenience]  and   was
    potentially ill-prepared  to  deal  with  the  issue."   The  appellant
    asserts that Judge Birkby proceeded with  the  second  hearing  without
    requiring  the  respondent  to  provide  evidence  of   a   "reasonable
    suspicion" that the marriage entered into was one  of  convenience  and
    that such suspicions had only arisen following the cross-examination of
    the appellant at the December 2014 hearing.  The appellant states  that
    there should have been  a  further  adjournment  following  the  cross-
    examination to enable him to consider the  details  of  the  allegation
    that his marriage was a sham which had only arisen in submissions  made
    by the respondent's representative  following  cross-examination.   The
    burden of proving that the marriage was not one of convenience had  not
    fallen upon the appellant given that the details  of  the  respondent's
    allegation had arisen so late in the proceedings.

 3. The second ground of appeal concerned the failure of the judge to  have
    regard to all the evidence.  The judge had concluded that there was  no
    evidence that the appellant and  his  wife  had  lived  together.   The
    appellant claims that his bundle of documents (in particular, pages 21,
    23, 74 and 85) contained evidence  of  cohabitation.   The  judge  had,
    therefore, failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  material  evidence  in
    reaching his conclusion.

 4. I find that the grounds of appeal are without merit.   I  am  satisfied
    that the judge was aware of  the  requirement  for  the  respondent  to
    establish  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is   one   of
    convenience because he says as much [27].  (The requirement detailed in
    the Upper Tribunal decision of  IS  (Marriage  of  convenience)  Serbia
    [2008] UKAIT 31).  I find that the judge  acted  entirely  properly  by
    adjourning the hearing in October 2014 because, prior to that  hearing,
    there had not only been no allegation in the present  proceedings  that
    the marriage was one of convenience but the respondent  had  previously
    issued the appellant with a residence card.   To  have  proceeded  with
    that hearing would, as Judge Birkby acknowledged, would  have  amounted
    to a procedural unfairness against the appellant.   However,  when  the
    matter came back before Judge Birkby in  December  2014  the  appellant
    should have been prepared to deal  with  the  respondent's  allegation.
    The judge  does  not  explain  in  detail  in  his  decision  what  the
    Presenting Officer had said  to  him  in  October  2014  regarding  the
    marriage but it is apparent from the decision  the  Presenting  Officer
    had not simply made bold and unsupported assertions that  the  marriage
    was  a  sham.   Indeed,  had  the  appellant  and  his  representatives
    considered the respondent had made an  unsupported  assertion  then  it
    should have indicated to Judge Birkby that it required  the  respondent
    to provide material in support of the allegation prior to the adjourned
    hearing.  There was no suggestion that they did so.   To  suggest  that
    the  appeal  should  have  been  further  adjourned  following   cross-
    examination was to suggest, in effect, that the appellant  should  have
    been given the opportunity to  go  away  from  court  and  perfect  his
    evidence and to address any difficulties and anomalies which  may  have
    arisen during  cross-examination.   The  appellant  was  professionally
    represented at the hearing and his representative should have used  the
    opportunity for re-examination of the appellant.  I  am  not  satisfied
    that the judge has acted unfairly or that he had done so other than  in
    accordance with the law.

 5. As regards the second grounds of appeal, I find that this has no merit.
     The judge made it clear [25] that he had "considered  the  appellant's
    evidence together with all the  documentation  and  submissions  made."
    The judge stated again [27] that he had looked at the "totality [of the
    evidence]" and had considered "the evidence cumulatively ..."   I  have
    no reason to believe that the judge had ignored those items of evidence
    in the appellant's bundle which might have indicated  that  the  couple
    had cohabited.  The judge was not obliged to deal with each  and  every
    item of evidence and I find that he has given very clear cogent reasons
    for concluding that the appellant was not a credible witness  that  his
    marriage was not genuine.

 6. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 20 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

