
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28550/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 3 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                               md abdul kader
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge S J Walker)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 3 August 2015 refusing to vary his  leave
    to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and to remove  him  by  way  of
    directions.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  5  August  1978.   He
    first entered the UK on 25 January 2010 with leave to enter as a Tier 4
    (General) Student.  He was granted  further  extensions  until  31  May
    2014.  On 29 May 2014 he applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant.  His application was refused on 3  August  2015  and
    this is the decision under appeal.

The Respondent's Decision

3.   The requirements for leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant  are
    set out in para 245HD of HC 395.  It was accepted  that  the  appellant
    met the first requirement as he had been previously granted one of  the
    specified types of entry clearance, leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant
    (para  245HD(b)(ii)(1)).   The  appellant  then   had   to   meet   the
    requirements in para 245HD(d).  The respondent found that he could save
    for the requirements of (d)(v) ("sub para (v)") which reads as follows:

         "(v) If the institution studied at  is  removed  from  the  Tier  4
             Register, the applicant's qualification  must  not  have  been
             obtained on or after the date  of  removal  from  the  Sponsor
             Register."

4.   It was the respondent's view that the appellant  was  studying  at  the
    London  School  of  Marketing  ("LSM")  for  a   Master   of   Business
    Administration degree ("MBA")  to  be  awarded  by  the  Anglia  Ruskin
    University ("ARU").  LSM was removed from the Tier 4  Sponsor  Register
    on 5 September 2014.  However, the appellant had completed  his  degree
    course and was awarded his MBA by ARU on 24 April 2015.  The respondent
    found that the appellant could not therefore meet the  requirements  of
    sub-para (v) as the degree had been  awarded  after  the  date  of  the
    removal of LSM from the Sponsor Register.  However, it  was  argued  on
    behalf of the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal that LSM was  an
    associate college of ARU, delivered its courses validated  by  ARU  and
    the appellant was enrolled with and was provided with a student  number
    by ARU.  In these circumstances, the institution at which  he  studied,
    so it was argued, was not LSM but ARU  and  as  ARU  had  not  had  its
    sponsorship removed, the appellant could therefore rely on  his  degree
    certificate.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge was satisfied that LSM's sponsorship had been  revoked  on  5
    September 2014 and that the appellant was awarded an MBA  on  24  April
    2015 by ARU.  The  appellant's  qualification  was  therefore  obtained
    after LSM's sponsorship licence was revoked and so if he  was  studying
    at LSM, he failed to meet the requirement of sub para (v).   The  judge
    noted that the appellant's CAS was issued by LSM on  28  May  2014  and
    that it made no mention of ARU.  He accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    involved with ARU in that he had a student identity number  with  them,
    access to their research facilities and LSM was an associate college of
    ARU.  However, he was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  in  fact
    studying at ARU, finding that it was clear that the course  itself  was
    provided by LSM and it was that factor which was crucial.  It  was  the
    judge's view that the institution studied at was the institution  which
    provided the teaching and in the appellant's case this was LSM.

6.   The judge summarised his findings as follows:

         "27. This conclusion  is,  in  my  judgment,  consistent  with  the
             wording of  the  Rules.   It  is  significant  that  paragraph
             245HD(d) does not refer to the awarding body of  a  qualifying
             degree.  If it were intended to make the awarding body the key
             factor the Rules could have done so and  could  probably  have
             been expressed much more simply.  The relevant provision could
             simply have said  the  applicant  must  have  a  valid  degree
             awarded by a UK recognised or listed body.  As [the Presenting
             Officer] correctly observed, the Rules instead  focus  on  the
             process  of  obtaining  the  relevant   qualification.    This
             suggests  that  the  emphasis  is  on  the   study   not   the
             qualification.


         28.  This emphasis is made more obvious when  other  provisions  in
             the Rules are considered.  First there is the definition of  a
             degree.  As set out above, the definition in the Rules of a UK
             bachelor's degree includes the following "a programme of study
             or research which leads to the award, by or on behalf  of  the
             university, college or other  body".   Thus,  a  degree  is  a
             course of study not merely an award.   Although  there  is  no
             corresponding definition for a master's degree in my view  the
             principles  must  be  the  same.   Also,  the  Rules   clearly
             contemplate a course of study at one institution resulting  in
             an award made by another institution.  I note  from  paragraph
             120-SD of Appendix A  as  set  out  above  that  there  is  no
             requirement for the Tier 4 sponsor to provide the award  which
             is being studied for but rather the award can  be  made  by  a
             long list of  other  bodies.   Given  this  clear  distinction
             elsewhere in the Rules between study and award, and given  the
             choice to refer to the place at which the student  studied  in
             paragraph 245HD(d), in my judgment it is clear that it is  the
             process of study with which this Rule is concerned."

7.   For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds it is  argued  firstly  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    interpretation of para 245HD(d)(v) by concluding that the reference  to
    the "institution studied" was to the physical college  or  place  where
    the studies took place but in fact it could only be a reference to  the
    institution  awarding  the  degree  otherwise  sub-para  (vii)   became
    unworkable.   The grounds further argue that there was evidence  before
    the judge that the resident labour market test had been  satisfied  and
    that he erred in failing to recognise that in these circumstances there
    was no need for the appellant to have a degree.

9.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  grounds
    relating to the institution at which the appellant was studying  needed
    to be explored and that it was possible that the judge may  have  erred
    in law.

10.  Mr Karim submitted that  the  reference  in  sub-para  (v)  was  not  a
    reference to the physical place where classes were  held  but  must  be
    construed by reference to the institution  awarding  the  degree.   The
    appellant's degree had been awarded by ARU and  LSM  was  an  associate
    college of ARU.  The judge had drawn an analogy in [26] with a pupil at
    school sitting an examination set by an  awarding  body  in  which  the
    pupil  registers  with  that  body.   The  judge  had  said  that   any
    qualifications obtained were provided by the awarding body and that  it
    was inconceivable that anybody  would  conclude  that  a  school  pupil
    sitting the exam set by an examination board  was  studying  with  that
    board.  Mr Karim submitted that this was not a good analogy,  a  better
    one being students studying at the Open University, where  even  though
    they studied at home or at other places, the fact  remained  that  they
    were studying with the Open University.

11.  In respect of the second ground, Mr Karim submitted that the judge  had
    not engaged with this aspect of the case and should have dealt with the
    issue of whether the resident labour market test  had  been  satisfied.
    He argued that this issue should not have been linked with the argument
    about the college at which the appellant was studying and the judge had
    erred in law by failing to deal with it.

12.  Mr Duffy submitted that the meaning of sub-para (v) was  clear.   As  a
    matter  of  ordinary  English  interpretation,  it  clearly  meant  the
    institution at which an applicant studied.  So far as the second ground
    was concerned, this issue had not been pursued  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where it had been accepted at [19] that it was  not  necessary
    for the judge to consider whether the resident labour market  test  had
    been met.

Assessment of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

13.   I  shall  deal  firstly  with  whether  the   judge   erred   in   his
    interpretation of sub-para (v).  I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    correct to find that the institution the appellant studied at was  LMS.
    The appellant's CAS was issued by LSM.  The  judge  accepted  from  the
    evidence which he set out at [25] that LSM was an associate college  of
    ARU but, as set out in the correspondence from  both  parties,  it  was
    clear that LSM offered a number of courses validated  by  ARU  and  was
    responsible for recruitment to and delivery of the course although  the
    award was conferred by ARU.  The letter from ARU of 24 June  2015  said
    that it was important  to  note  that  ARU  did  not  sponsor  students
    studying at LSM under the Tier 4 immigration route and  their  licences
    were entirely separate.

14.  In the letter from LSM dated 23 June 2015 it was said that students  of
    the academic qualifications delivered by LSM were recruited through LSM
    which handled  the  admissions,  course  delivery,  and  administrative
    support for the course.  They were then enrolled directly with  ARU  by
    LSM and became students also of ARU subject to  their  regulations  and
    procedures and given both a student ID number and card  and  access  to
    ARU's VLE resource server and that whilst LSM  carried  out  the  first
    marking of assessments, they were moderated and in  some  cases  second
    marked and closely scrutinised by ARU and the degree was awarded by ARU
    and not LSM. In the light of this evidence it was open to the judge  to
    find that the course itself was provided by  LSM  and  that  the  Rules
    focused  on  where  the  appellant  was  studying  rather  than   which
    institution awarded the final qualification.

15.  The analogy drawn by the judge in [26] with a pupil  at  school  taking
    an exam with an awarding body is in my view a better analogy than  that
    of a student at the Open University but, in any event, it is a question
    of fact at  which  institution  a  student  is  studying.   I  am  also
    satisfied that the judge's finding that the appellant was  studying  at
    LSM is more consistent with a straightforward reading of the Rules than
    a finding that he was studying at ARU.  The fact that the appellant was
    also registered with ARU, had a student number and access to facilities
    there does not detract from the fact that the course was taught at  and
    delivered by LSM and his CAS was issued by LSM.

16.  Mr Karim relied heavily on the provisions of sub para (vii) set out  in
    full at [8] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  referring  to  the
    institution awarding the degree but there is no reason why that  should
    not be a  different  institution  from  the  institution  at  which  an
    applicant studies.  The  judge  considered  this  issue  at  [30].   He
    accepted that evidence of the award of a  degree  must  come  from  the
    awarding body but it did not follow that the awarding body  had  to  be
    the place where the appellant studied as the requirement  of  sub  para
    (vii)  could  be  fulfilled  by  production  of  an   original   degree
    certificate as opposed to an academic transcript or academic reference,
    which would normally have to come from  the  institution  teaching  the
    course.

17.  So far as the second ground is concerned I am not satisfied that it  is
    open to the appellant to pursue this.  It is clear  from  [19]  of  the
    judge's decision that both Mr Karim and the Presenting Officer accepted
    that the relevant issue was where  the  appellant  was  studying.   The
    judge recorded both  representatives  accepted  that  the  question  of
    points under Appendix A was something of a red herring and it  was  not
    necessary for him to consider whether, in the absence of an  exemption,
    the resident market test had  been  met.   If  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of para 245HD(d) his appeal would succeed as he would have
    met the non-point scoring requirement and would score 30  points  under
    table 11A and the resident labour market exemption would apply  but  if
    he did not meet those requirements his appeal would fail, as  he  would
    not meet the non-point scoring requirements irrespective of whether  he
    would in fact score 30 points under table 11A.

18.  I also note that Mr Karim's submissions on this issue were  limited  to
    an argument that the judge had not engaged with this aspect of the case
    and he did not deal at all with the merits of the  assertion.   In  any
    event, as I have already indicated as the issue was conceded before the
    First-tier Tribunal, it was not open for this  point  to  be  taken  on
    appeal.

Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and the decision stands.  No
    anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:  30 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




