
                                                             [pic]
      Upper Tribunal
                    (Immigration         and         Asylum         Chamber)
Appeal Numbers: IA/28681/2014

                                                          IA/28680/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




      Heard  at  City  Centre  Tower  Birmingham                 Decision  &
      Reasons Promulgated
      On the 13th July 2015
         On the 27th July 2015





                                   Before:



                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY



                                  Between:




                              MRS ASMA SHAKOOR
                          MISS FATIMA ZAHRA YAQOOB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent

      Representation:

      For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain (Solicitor)
      For the Respondent: Mr Smart (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS




   1. This is  the  Respondent's  (the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department) appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Birk promulgated  on  the  4th  December  2014.  Although  it  is  the
      Respondent's  appeal,  for  the  sake  of  clarity,  throughout   this
      decision, the parties will be referred to as they were referred at the
      First-tier Tribunal hearing, such that Mrs Shakoor and Miss Yaqoob are
      referred to as the Appellants and the Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department is referred to as the Respondent.




      Background




   2. The First Appellant Mrs Asma Shakoor was  born  on  the  10th  January
      1985. The Second Appellant, Miss Fatima Zahra Yaqoob is  her  daughter
      and she was born on the 3rd April 2014. They  are  both  nationals  of
      Pakistan. Mrs Shakoor entered the United Kingdom on the 9th July  2008
      with Entry Clearance as a student valid until the 30th June  2012.  On
      the 10th September 2012, she was granted further leave to remain as  a
      student, which was valid until the 14th November 2014. That leave  was
      curtailed to the 16th April 2014, due to non-attendance. The Appellant
      then applied for leave to remain outside of the Immigration  Rules  on
      the 11th April 2014, which was refused  by  means  of  refusal  notice
      dated the 26th June 2014. The First Appellant's daughter  Fatima  (the
      Second Appellant), was born in the UK on the 3rd April 2014. She  also
      applied for leave to remain as a  dependent  of  her  mother  and  was
      refused in line with her mother's application.




   3. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber) and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Birk on the 21st November 2014. His decision is dated the 1st December
      2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk found that it had not been argued
      that the Appellants met the  requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  in
      respect of their private lives or Appendix  FM  in  respect  of  their
      family life,  but  he  allowed  the  Appellants'  appeal  outside  the
      Immigration Rules in respect of Article  8  based  upon  their  family
      life.




   4. The Respondent appealed against that decision to the Upper Tribunal on
      the 4th December 2014.




           Our findings on error of law and materiality




   5. It was argued by Mr Smart on behalf of the Respondent that the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in his approach to section 117 A-D of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014. It was argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      failed to address the weight to be afforded to the maintenance  of  an
      effective immigration control under section  117B  (1)  and  that  the
      finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph  22  that  "the
      Appellants have funds available to them" and is finding that "although
      the First Appellant gave her evidence through an  interpreter  it  was
      clear that she  had  a  certain  level  of  understanding  of  English
      language because of the way that she was able to answer  the  question
      before it had been translated"  were  inadequate  and  amounted  to  a
      failure to give adequate reasons  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge had  not  specifically  considered  whether  or  not  the  First
      Appellant was able to speak English and had failed to consider whether
      or not the Appellants were actually financially  independent  for  the
      purposes of section 117B.




   6. We bear in mind following the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the
      case of Dube (sections 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) that Judges are
      statutorily required to take account of the enumerated  considerations
      between section 117A-D and that sections 117A-D are not therefore an �
      la carte menu, which it is at the discretion of the Judge to apply  or
      not to apply and that the Judge is duty-bound to have  regard  to  the
      specified considerations. However, it was also  stated  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in that case that "it is not an error of law to fail to refer
      to the sections 117A-D considerations, if a Judge has applied the test
      he or she was supposed to apply according to its terms;  what  matters
      is substance, not form."




   7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk at paragraph [22] of his decision  made
      it clear specifically  that  he  had  had  "regard  to  the  statutory
      provisions relating to Article 8, as set out in sections 117  A-D.  He
      found that the evidence in the form of bank statements  had  not  been
      challenged and showed that the Appellants had funds available to them.
      Although the First-Tier Tribunal Judge's findings in this regard could
      have been better expressed, we find that it is clear  that  the  Judge
      has had consideration to the relevant statutory provisions relating to
      Article 8, as  set  out  in  sections  117  A-D  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and did make  a  finding  that  funds
      were available to them having considered the bank statements.




   8. We also bear in mind the judgement of Baroness Hale of Richmond in the
      House of Lords case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH
      (Sudan) and others (2007) UKHL 49 at paragraph  30,  when  in  talking
      about the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal she stated that :




           "This is an expert tribunal charged with administering a complex
           area of law in challenging circumstances. To paraphrase a view I
           have expressed about such expert tribunals in  another  context,
           the ordinary courts should approach appeals from  them  with  an
           appropriate  degree  of  caution;  it  is   probable   that   in
           understanding and applying the law in the specialist  field  the
           tribunal have got it right:  Cooke  v  Secretary  of  State  for
           Social Security [2001] EWCA Civ 73. They and they alone are  the
           judges of the facts. It is not enough  that  their  decision  on
           those facts may seem harsh to people who have not heard or  read
           the evidence and arguments which they have heard  or  read.  The
           decision should be respected unless it is quite clear that  they
           have misdirected themselves in law. Appellate court  should  not
           rush to find such misdirection simply because  they  might  have
           reached  a  different  conclusion  on  the  facts  or  expressed
           themselves differently."




   9. Although we might have expressed  ourselves  differently,  we  do  not
      consider that First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk has  misdirected  himself
      in law on this issue, as he clearly made reference to section 117 A-D,
      and his finding that funds were available to them shows  that  he  did
      consider  them  to  be  financially  independent,  and  he  did  state
      specifically that he had considered the bank statements  of  both  the
      First Appellant and her husband in this regard, such that the basis of
      his finding was explained adequately. Such  a  finding  was  open  and
      available to him on the evidence and is sustainable.




  10. In respect of the  criticism  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      finding that the First Appellant  had  "a  certain  level  of  English
      language certain level of understanding of English, because of the way
      that  she  was  able  to  answer  the  question  before  it  has  been
      translated" lacked clarity and was inadequate, again, the we find that
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk clearly had in mind the requirements of
      section 117 A-D, and although again his findings in this regard  could
      have been better phrased, we cannot assume that he misdirected himself
      having clearly indicated that he had considered both the  requirements
      of section 117A-D and  had  clearly  turned  his  mind  to  the  First
      Appellant's English language capabilities, and thereby whether or  not
      she was able to speak English. Section 117 B (2) does not require  the
      Judge to make any specific findings as to an Appellant's precise level
      of English eligibility, as it is not a requirement for the purpose  of
      section 117 B (2) for an English-language test to be provided, with  a
      certain level of English being proved, before the Appellant's  ability
      to speak English becomes relevant for the purposes of consideration of
      the public interest applicable in all  Article  8  cases.  We  do  not
      consider therefore that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  materially
      erred in this regard. We further bear in mind that the First Appellant
      had been in the UK as a student since 2008. The question as to whether
      or not the First Appellant therefore had sufficient  English  language
      ability to actually follow her proposed course would have already been
      assessed. We therefore  find  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      finding  in  that  the  Appellant  did  have  "a  certain   level   of
      understanding of the English language because of the way that she  was
      able to answer the question before it had  been  translated,"  was  an
      adequate and sufficient finding and does not disclose a material error
      of law.




  11. Further we find that at paragraph [18], the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      did specifically accept that there is a legitimate aim in the  sponsor
      maintaining an effective immigration control and that this fell  under
      the aspect of "prevention of disorder or crime" and "the economic well-
      being of the country". The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  therefore
      properly considered that maintaining immigration control under Section
      117B  is in the public interest. We therefore find that  there  is  no
      merit in the first ground of appeal.




  12. The second ground of appeal  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge has in effect used the best interests of  the  Second  Appellant
      child as a "trump card"  and  that  whilst  it  may  be  in  the  best
      interests of the child to have access to  both  parents,  such  access
      could be reasonably continued in Pakistan and  that  is  a  matter  of
      choice for the family as to whether  or  not  the  Second  Appellant's
      father remains in the UK for the remainder of his leave or it was open
      for the Appellant's to make an  application  for  entry  clearance  as
      dependents from Pakistan.




  13. It was quite properly conceded by Mr Smart on behalf of the Respondent
      that nowhere within his determination does First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Birk state that the best interests of the child were a  "trump  card".
      However, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  clearly  duty-bound  to
      consider the best interest of the child for the purposes of section 55
      of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  and  to  have
      regard to  the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  being  a  primary
      consideration in assessing  proportionality,  as  he  was  statutorily
      obliged to do so. We therefore find that it was perfectly  proper  for
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph [28] to state that he could
      take into account "the considerable weight that had been placed on the
      likely impact of any separation upon the Second Appellant". The Second
      Appellant as at the date of the  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Birk was only 7 months old, she having  been  born  on  the  3rd
      April  2014.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge    did   consider   as
      countervailing features the fact that any separation would only be for
      a limited period since Mr Yaqoob's leave expired in October 2016, that
      he did not have permanent residence residency in the  UK  and  neither
      was he prevented from returning to Pakistan  as  a  national  of  that
      country and further there was nothing to  prevent  him  returning  for
      periods of time for visits and that Mr Yaqoob could keep in touch with
      the Appellants by modern means of communication.




  14. However, it was open to him to find and take into account, as  he  did
      at paragraph [28], that the "the age of the child means that she could
      not have any meaningful contact in the way that  the  First  Appellant
      can have. Visits by her father will, in my assessment, be insufficient
      to assist with the bonding process and she cannot participate  in  any
      other means of communication or contact with him."




  15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to state at paragraph [30] that,
      "However, the prospective length and degree of family disruption is an
      important and relevant factor for consideration and I find that  there
      will be a serious and detrimental disruption to the  Second  Appellant
      in terms of her monitoring and I have also make findings in  paragraph
      [28] above about the serious and detrimental  effect  that  separation
      would have upon the Second Appellant".




  16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to  take  account
      of what he considered to be the detrimental  effect  upon  the  Second
      Appellant if separated from her father, even for  a  short  period  of
      time, given her young  age.  His  finding  that  regard  is  perfectly
      adequate and sufficient and is sustainable upon the evidence. We find,
      therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has properly  considered
      and weighed the factors on both sides of the balancing exercise,  when
      considering the issue of proportionality and has properly taken all of
      the relevant factors into account.




  17. We have borne in mind, as was stated by Lord  Hodge  giving  the  lead
      judgment in the Supreme Court in case of Zoumbas v The  Secretary  for
      the Home Department [2013) UKSC 74 at paragraph 10, the best interests
      of a child are an integral  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment
      under Article 8 of the ECHR and the best interests of the  child  must
      be a primary consideration,  although  not  always  the  only  primary
      consideration, but the child's best interest did not itself  have  the
      status of the paramount consideration. Lord Hodge  found  specifically
      that the best interests of the child can be outweighed by a cumulative
      effect of other considerations, but no consideration can be treated as
      inherently more significant. We do further bear in mind in  this  case
      that although the First Appellant's leave was curtailed as a result of
      non-attendance, such non-attendance was simply  as  a  result  of  her
      pregnancy, as was recognised in  the  Refusal  Notice.  There  was  no
      suggestion of any criminality or any deliberate or  repeated  flagrant
      breaches of the Immigration Rules.




  18. In such circumstances the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      that the decision  to  refuse  the  Appellants'  application  was  not
      proportionate and in breach of Article 8 was a decision that was  open
      to him on the evidence, bearing in mind  his  perfectly  adequate  and
      sustainable findings as to the best interests of the child,  which  he
      has properly balanced against the countervailing factors.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge not consider the best interest of the child simply
      being a "trump card", but did properly weigh the interest of the child
      in the balancing exercise. There was no material error in law  in  his
      consideration thereof.




  19. In respect of the third ground of appeal that the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge misapplied Article 8 in that family  life  could  reasonably  be
      continued in Pakistan, we do bear in mind that Mr Yaqoob  was  validly
      in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student and was in the middle of his
      studies. In such circumstances when  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birk
      found that it was in the best interest of the child to  be  with  both
      parents if possible, it was open to him  to  find  that  it  would  be
      disproportionate for the Appellants to be removed from the UK when  Mr
      Yacoob was  still  undertaking  his  studies  and  that  it  would  be
      disproportionate for them to have to go back to Pakistan  to  make  an
      application from abroad. This was a matter for the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge's discretion in considering Article 8, and there is no  evidence
      to suggest that he has in fact misapplied Article 8 in this regard.




  20. Although Mr Smart on behalf of the respondent argues that this case is
      more akin to the case of Hayat (Nature  of  the  Chikwamba  principle)
      Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC), than a straight Chikwamba  case  and
      that in such circumstances the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong  to
      rely upon the case of Chikwamba, the Upper Tribunal in   Hayat  stated
      that the significance of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 is to make it
      plain  that,  in  appeals  where  the  only  matter  weighing  on  the
      respondent's side of an  Article  8  proportionality  balance  is  the
      public policy of  requiring  an  application  to  be  made  under  the
      immigration rules from abroad, that legitimate objective will  usually
      be outweighed by factors  resting  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
      balance. The Chikwamba  principle  is  not  confined  to  cases  where
      children are involved or where the person with whom the  appellant  is
      seeking to remain has settled status in the United Kingdom.  The  fact
      that Mr Yacoob therefore did not have settled  status  does  not  mean
      that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  to  consider   the
      detrimental effect to the Second Appellant,  of  separation  from  her
      father even for even a relatively short period of time. The First-tier
      Tribunal Judge therefore did not err in law in considering this point,
      rather than simply finding that the family could theoretically  return
      back to Pakistan as a family unit, when Mr Yacoob did  have  leave  to
      remain as a student and was still in the middle of his studies.


  21. Further, in the case of R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of
      State  for  the  Home  Department   (Appendix   FM-Chikwamba-Temporary
      Separation-Proportionality) [2015] UKUT  189,  before  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Gill, it was held that Appendix FM did not include consideration
      of the question whether it would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  an
      individual to return to his home country to make  an  entry  clearance
      application to re-join family members in the UK, and that there may be
      cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
      being enjoyed outside the UK, but where temporary separation to enable
      an individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
      disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the individual to place
      before the Secretary of State evidence that such temporary  separation
      will interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It  will  not
      be enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD
      [2008] UKHL 40.




  22. We find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not simply relied  upon
      Chikwamba, but has given clear reasons why temporary separation  would
      interfere disproportionately with protected rights.


  23. We consider that First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk has properly and fully
      considered  all  of  the  factors  in  respect  of   Article   8   and
      proportionality in this case, and that  his  findings  in  respect  of
      proportionality were open to him and within the  reasonable  range  of
      findings based upon the evidence. His reasons were also  adequate  and
      sufficient and it is clear from reading the  decision  as  to  why  he
      reached the decision that he made. The decision therefore discloses no
      material error of law and simply amounts to a  disagreement  with  the
      same. The appeal is therefore dismissed.




      Notice of Decision




      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk does  not  contain  any
      material errors of law and is maintained.




      The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  13  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made
      before us. No such order is made.



      Signed
                                            Dated 17th July 2015



      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

