
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28692/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2018                           |On 22nd February 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ANDREW JORDAN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 bhuttu paul
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior HOPO)


                     DECISION ON FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal against determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  I
    Ross, promulgated on 17th August 2016, following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 22nd July 2016.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the
    Appellant's  appeal  under  the   EEA   Regulations.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before us.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  10th
    July 1992.  On 26th February 2015, he applied for a residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the UK. By a decision dated 29th
    July 2015, the application was refused on the basis of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The reason given  was  that,
    from the documentation provided, the Respondent Secretary of State  was
    unable to verify the Appellant's  relationship  with  his  EEA  Sponsor
    uncle, a Mr. Rahman.  It was determined that there was insufficient  on
    the claimed relationship with the uncle. Furthermore, the evidence  did
    not show that the Appellant's dependency on his sponsoring EEA uncle in
    Bangladesh.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge Ross, there was evidence by  the  Appellant
    to the effect that his uncle would transfer  money  regularly  to  him.
    The judge found that the Sponsor's evidence was  that  it  was  only  a
    small amount that was transferred once  a  year.  The  judge  concluded
    that, "I accept that the Appellant has also produced evidence of  money
    transfers directly to him from his uncle consisting of one transfer  in
    2007 and two transfers in 2010" (paragraph 9).  However, he  then  went
    on to conclude that the chronology was telling in this respect, in that
    it showed that the Appellant was never part of the Sponsor's  household
    in Bangladesh or in the UK between 2010 to 2014; that he came to the UK
    not as a dependent on his uncle but was accommodated free by Mr Rahman;
    that the Appellant did not come  to  the  UK  to  join  his  uncle  and
    continue his dependency; and that the  Appellant's  dependency  on  his
    uncle in the UK only began in 2014, and was probably now only dependent
    upon his uncle in this country, due to his inability to work in the  UK
    (see para 10).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The Grounds of Appeal state that the Appellant's uncle's evidence, with
    regard to how often he transferred money to the Appellant directly, was
    in fact entirely consistent with the evidence given by  the  Appellant.
    Insofar as the judge found there  to  be  an  inconsistency,  this  was
    factually mistaken, such that the judge fell into error: see E and R  v
    Secretary of State [2004] EWCA Civ 49.  The  grounds  stated  that  the
    judge had made no other adverse finding with respect to the credibility
    of the Appellant's  account  or  indeed  of  any  other  witness.   The
    evidence before the  judge  was  that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a
    labourer and a small hold farmer who suffered from  diabetes  and  back
    pain and this impacted upon his ability to work, leading the  Appellant
    to become dependent upon his uncle, Mr. Rahman.

 6. On 9th March 2017, the Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that "the First-tier  Tribunal  might  have  misunderstood  the
    evidence and so built  the  conclusion  on  an  unsustainable  premise"
    (paragraph 3).

 7. On 20th March 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect  that,
    as clarified by the Upper Tribunal in  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  to  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 411, such cases do not attract a right of appeal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before us on 3rd January 2018, Mr Jarvis,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, submitted that this Tribunal should be aware  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's order, dated 9th November 2017, in Khan v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department & Anor [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 (09 November 2017),
    which ruled that the decision of the Upper Tribunal that there  was  no
    valid appeal, was to be set aside, and the case remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a  rehearing  on  all  the  issues.  That  being  so,
    submitted Mr Jarvis, the practice of the Secretary of State now was  to
    apply for all such cases to be stayed.

 9. The issue in this appeal, however, was  what  evidence  existed  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross in relation to  the  dependency  of  the
    Appellant upon his uncle, prior to his entry to the UK.

10. To this, Mr Lewis, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that
    there was, in fact, substantial evidence to this effect.  Although  the
    judge had made a finding that, "the Sponsor's evidence was that it  was
    a small amount once a  year"  (paragraph  9)  which  was  sent  by  the
    sponsoring uncle, the evidence was much wider, according to  Mr  Lewis.
    This was notwithstanding  that  there  were  only  three  direct  money
    transfers from the Appellant's uncle to the Appellant, as noted by  the
    judge (at paragraph 9).

11. Mr Lewis nevertheless made good his argument by  drawing  attention  to
    page 60  of  the  bundle  which  refers  to  the  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence; to page 107 of the bundle; which contains  a  statement  that
    there was a high degree of reliance upon the uncle; to page 86; to page
    87; and page 77.  Mr Lewis submitted  that  the  evidence  showed  that
    there were regular payment of monies to the Appellant.  The Appellant's
    bank statement (at pages 22 to 28) confirms the  bank  transfers  which
    can be matched by what appears at pages 40 to 42.   Our  attention  was
    also drawn to the "spot cash" tracking number  (which  correlates  with
    page 29).

12. In reply, Mr Jarvis relied upon the case of Aladeselu [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    144  which  highlighted  the  importance  (at  paragraph  45)  of   the
    requirement that the person "continues to be dependent  upon  [the  EEA
    national] or to be a member of his household", and that in  this  case,
    submitted Mr Jarvis, there had been a break in the  dependency  on  the
    Sponsor by the Appellant.

13. However, Mr Jarvis conceded that First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross had not
    engaged with all the different sources of  the  funds  upon  which  the
    Appellant was dependent with respect to his uncle.  He had not grappled
    with all the sources of income that  the  Appellant  could  draw  upon.
    There had been no attempt to trace the entire money trail and to locate
    the trail into any  particular  household.   The  judge  also  had  not
    engaged with the difference between "dependency" and  "topping  up"  of
    the  Appellant's  income.   Moreover,  it  had  not  been   ascertained
    precisely what the household budget was of the Appellant and how it was
    being met.  If the  individuals  concerned  (such  as  the  Appellant's
    father)  were not working it had to be enquired as to why they were not
    working.  Finally, if there were breaks in  the  dependency  so  as  to
    impact upon "continuity" the significance of these  breaks  had  to  be
    evaluated.

Decision

14. Having heard both parties, we have come to the following conclusion.

15. First, the Respondent Secretary of State had opposed this appeal on the
    basis (see Rule 24) that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction as a  result
    of what was decided in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411.

16. At the error of law hearing today, both parties agree that the decision
    in Khan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  &  Anor  confirms
    that jurisdiction exists to hear this  appeal.   The  decision  in  the
    Court of Appeal was since been approved by  the  Supreme  Court  in  SM
    (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa Section [2018] UKSC 9  (14
    February 2018).

17. At this hearing also, Mr  Jarvis,  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  has
    conceded that issue.  No stay is merited.

18. Accordingly, as evidence is to be led,  it  is  appropriate  that  this
    matter be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal, especially given that:

      i) the judge did not grapple with all the sources of income  of  which
         the Appellant could avail himself;

     ii) did not draw upon the evidence, which goes much wider than what  it
         recorded  in  the  determination,  in   the   Appellant's   witness
         statement; and

    iii) does not engage  with  the  money  trail,  and  what  the  relevant
         households were, and who  was  living  where,  and  dependent  upon
         income from which source.

19. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of an error on a point of law.  It is set aside  in  terms  of  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th February 2018
