
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28537/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2014                           |On 9 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Ayodele Oluwafemi Faleye

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant: Mrs M Hannan, Solicitor from Corban Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant, Mr Faleye, whom I shall refer to as the appellant  as  he
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen  of  Nigeria  and  his
    date of birth is 12 June 1980.  The appellant entered the UK in 2008 as
    a student and he had been granted further leave to remain as a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  On 17 May 2012 he made  an  application  to
    vary his leave to remain in the UK based on his private and family life
    here in the UK.  The application was refused by the Secretary of  State
    on 1 July 2013.  The Secretary  of  State  considered  the  application
    under appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules whether or not there  were  exceptional  circumstances  to  grant
    leave outside the Rules).

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed under article 8 by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Shamash in a decision which was promulgated  on  27  May  2014
    following a hearing on 27 February 2014 and 9 May 2014.  The  Secretary
    of State was granted permission to appeal against  the  decision  in  a
    decision of Judge Colyer on 16 July 2014.  Thus the matter came  before
    me.

The Hearing and the Evidence Before the First-tier Tribunal

3.       The appellant's mother and five siblings live in  the  UK  and  all
    but one sibling are British citizens (one sibling has leave  to  remain
    in here in the UK).  The Judge heard evidence from the  appellant,  his
    mother (Mrs Faleye), his sister (Mrs Alabi), his  brother  (Oluwaradare
    Faleye) and a pastor.  There was  medical  evidence  before  the  Judge
    relating to the appellant's elderly mother which established  that  she
    has a number of health problems.  She  is  aged  73  and  suffers  from
    osteopenia,  high  blood  pressure  and  she   had   recently   had   a
    parathyroidectomy. The medical evidence was that the appellant performs
    most of his mother's domestic tasks (cooking,  prompting  her  to  take
    medication, laundry and shopping) and helps her to bathe  and  provides
    emotional support to his mother.

4.   The evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  mother  and  other  family
    members was that the appellant had moved in with  his  mother  in  July
    2012 when her health deteriorated and he cares for her. His mother came
    to the UK when she was aged 20 and some of her children were born  here
    and as a result are  British  citizens.   The  appellant  is  supported
    financially by his sister Mrs Alabi, who is the director of Kip McGrath
    Education Centre in Grays in Essex.  She is unable to take care of  her
    mother because she is self-employed and does  not  live  locally.   The
    appellant's brother could not take care of his  mother  because  he  is
    employed and resides with his family.  There  were  witness  statements
    from other family members all of whom asserted that they were unable to
    take care of the appellant's mother because of  their  own  family  and
    work commitments.  The evidence was that the  appellant  did  not  have
    family members in Nigeria.  He would not have family support and  would
    be isolated from the  rest  of  his  family.  The  Judge  accepted  the
    evidence and found the appellant and witnesses to be credible.

5.   The Judge made the following findings:

         "32. In this case I accept the basic factual matrix which  is  that
             the appellant's  mother  and  father  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom in the 1960s and that three  of  their  children  were
             born here in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  other  three  in
             Nigeria.  All of the children now live outside Nigeria.   Were
             the appellant to return he would be left returning on his  own
             to Nigeria.


         33.  I have not gone on to consider paragraph 276ADE  because  this
             provision postdates the application and is not relevant.   The
             appellant would in my view have  had  difficulty  establishing
             that he met 276ADE(vi).  He left Nigeria in 2008 and there was
             insufficient evidence before me  of  the  situation  for  this
             appellant from the age of  17  until  2008.   There  was  also
             insufficient evidence before  me  to  establish  even  on  the
             balance of probabilities that the appellant has no  ties  with
             Nigeria.  I make this observation  despite  the  fact  that  I
             accept that his close family live in the United Kingdom.


         35.  On the facts of this case I find that there is family life.  I
             find that the appellant lives with his elderly mother and that
             he cares for her.  I find adopting the test in  Kugathas  that
             there  is  sufficient  evidence  of   additional   dependency,
             principally between the appellant and  his  mother  to  engage
             Article 8, but it note that  the  threshold  for  establishing
             that there has been an interference in  the  right  to  family
             life is not high, and the fact that  all  of  the  appellant's
             siblings live in the United Kingdom is not  insignificant.   I
             make this finding on the basis that, when  considering  family
             life, I must of course consider how a  decision  that  I  take
             will impact on each of the family  members  not  just  on  the
             appellant.  This is part of the exercise that I am obliged  to
             undertake under proportionality.


         36.  The appellant does not meet the  rules  and  the  respondent's
             decision is therefore in accordance with the law.  I  need  to
             consider whether the interference is  justified  in  order  to
             maintain immigration control and for the economic wellbeing of
             the country and whether these  facts  outweigh  the  right  to
             family life that exists between this appellant, his mother and
             his siblings.  I should say at the outset  that  although  the
             appellant has a close relationship with his siblings, were  it
             not for the care that  he  affords  his  mother,  I  would  be
             dismissing  his  appeal.   This  has  been  a  difficult   and
             borderline  appeal  and  there  are  factors  which   I   have
             considered that weigh  against  the  appellant.   For  example
             there are other siblings living  in  the  United  Kingdom  who
             might well take on the task  of  caring  for  the  appellant's
             mother if he was not here.  Mrs Faleye's health is compromised
             but she is by no means critically ill.  This said, there are a
             number of factors which when taken together lead  me  to  find
             that  a  decision  to   remove   this   appellant   would   be
             disproportionate.  The main factor which  has  weighed  on  my
             mind is that the appellant's mother is getting  older  and  as
             she gets older she will need more and more  care  from  family
             members.  The provision of care is available  from  the  State
             but it could only be afforded at a significant cost.  I accept
             that care from family members  when  available  is  preferable
             both for the State and for the patient/elderly person.


         37.  Whilst I accept that there are numerous family members in  the
             United Kingdom who could afford care and support,  it  appears
             from the evidence and from documentation that the appellant is
             performing this function and that he is best placed to provide
             the care she needs in the future.  It was put to the appellant
             that he is caring for his mother to enhance  his  application,
             that he had taken on the task expediently.  Whilst this may or
             may not be true, the reality of the situation is that he moved
             into his mother's house when she  needed  an  operation.   The
             evidence of Pastor Morley was that the appellant enhances  his
             mother's life.  I accept this evidence.


         38.  I do not find that the appellant's mother, Margaret Faleye  is
             acutely unwell however  I  find  that  she  has  a  number  of
             conditions which are debilitating and that her general  health
             is likely to deteriorate with age.  I  understand  that  as  a
             consequence of her condition that if she  falls  she  is  more
             likely than an ordinary old person to find  herself  immobile.
             I find the  evidence  of  Dr  Kasinathan  that  the  appellant
             performs an important function and is registered at the GPs as
             her carer to be significant.  I accept that he assists her  to
             go to church which enhances the quality of her  life  and  was
             insufficient evidence to establish that the appellant  has  no
             ties in Nigeria, I note that the whole family are  now  living
             in the United Kingdom.  The split in this family which  was  a
             consequence of the appellant's parents' move back  to  Nigeria
             has had the  effect  of  potentially  isolating  one  sibling.
             Although he is an adult, he will not have his immediate family
             around  him  if  he  is   returned   to   Nigeria.    In   the
             circumstances, taking all of these factors  together,  I  find
             that a decision to remove the appellant would place the United
             Kingdom in breach of her obligations under Article 8 ECHtR and
             would be disproportionate."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions


6.   The grounds seeking permission assert that the Judge erred  in  failing
    to give adequate weight to the availability of alternative care options
    including that the  appellant's  siblings  could  take  care  of  their
    mother.  It is argued that the dependency between the appellant and his
    mother has come about as a result of choice rather than  necessity  and
    therefore can be distinguished from the case of Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31.  It is also argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have had regard to the Home Office guidance in relation to carers which
    sets out that leave should only be granted where  it  is  warranted  by
    particularly compelling and compassionate circumstances.

7.   I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Melvin  submitted  that
    as the appeal was allowed simply on the basis that the appellant  cares
    for his mother the Judge should have applied  the  policy  relating  to
    carers.  The dependency between the appellant and his mother  could  be
    met by other members of the family.  There were numerous  other  family
    members who could provide care for their mother.  The Judge  failed  to
    consider the alternative care arrangements that could be available.

8.   Mrs Hannan on behalf of the  appellant  submitted  that  the  appellant
    made an application under Article 8 of the  1950  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and this did not relate to the policy relating to  carers.   The
    appellant's mother  has  several  health  conditions  outlined  in  the
    medical evidence.  The Judge did consider alternative care arrangements
    and she based her findings on the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his mother and also took into account that should he be removed  he
    would be isolated from the rest of his family.

Conclusions

9.   The grounds in my view are limited  and  do  not  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  The Judge considered the appeal under Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules and there was no challenge to this. The challenge
    appears to be to the finding that there was family life in the Kugathas
    sense, the weight that the Judge attached to evidence and  the  failure
    to consider the policy relating to  carers.  In  my  view  the  grounds
    amount to an attempt to reargue the case and a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Judge.  The Judge was entitled to find that  there  was
    dependency between the  appellant  and  his  mother  in  the  sense  of
    Kugathas whether or not this was out of necessity or choice. The  Judge
    was aware of and factored into the balancing exercise that  there  were
    other family members in the United  Kingdom  who  could  care  for  and
    support the appellant's mother (see [37]). However, she found that from
    the evidence the appellant was the best place to provide care  for  his
    mother. There is nothing perverse or irrational about this finding.

10.  The application was made under article  8  outside  the  Rules  on  the
    basis of the appellant's private and family life  here  and  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal on this ground. It was not an application for him to
    remain as a carer in accordance with the policy relating to carers, and
    as such the guidance was not considered by the  decision-maker  and  it
    was  not  raised  by  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Judge found that the caring element of  his  evidence  as
    determinative of the appeal, but the appeal was allowed under article 8
    and there is no reason to believe that the policy applies in this case.
    It does not follow that because the appellant could  not  benefit  from
    the policy, his appeal should be dismissed under article 8.

11.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights is maintained.


Signed
Joanna                                                             McWilliam
            Date 9 September 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
