
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28078/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th September 2017                        |On 20th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              miss meena kurami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N A Bajwa, a Solicitor's Clerk from A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 23rd  November  1963.   She
    made application to the respondent for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that application was refused by the respondent on 22nd July
    2015.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4th March 2000, as a
    visitor and with entry clearance until 15th  August  2002.   Thereafter
    she stayed without leave.  It was on 24th November  2011,  she  applied
    for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  This was refused on
    22nd July,2012.

2.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot on 19th September  2016.   At
    paragraph 5 of the determination the judge refers  to  the  appellant's
    representative requesting an adjournment because the Presenting Officer
    had given an indication that credibility would be an issue,  which  had
    not earlier been apparent from the refusal letter.  The  judge  refused
    that application.  He went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

3.   The appellant  sought  and  obtained  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

4.   Before me, Mr Mills on behalf of the Secretary of State  told  me  that
    he relied on Otshudi [2004] EWCA Civ 893 and pointed out that it should
    have been obvious that the Presenting Officer was entitled to raise the
    issue of credibility at the hearing.  Nonetheless, if  the  appellant's
    representatives were taken by surprise and had not  properly  prepared,
    then the judge had erred by failing  to  grant  an  adjournment  to  an
    enable the appellant's representatives  to  consider  the  matter.   He
    agreed that the determination could not stand. I believe  that  he  was
    right to do so.

Notice of Decision

5.   I believe that the appellant has been denied a fair hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I therefore remit the matter for hearing afresh
    by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.  I believe that
    two hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal and  a  Hindi
    interpreter should be booked.


Richard Chalkley
Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley                                 Date:  15th
September 2017

