
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/28446/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 14 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and



                              MRS HAMIDA BEGUM
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr Sargheel Javed


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna promulgated  on  13  March  2014  in
    which he allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 7 August 2013 to refuse her leave to remain.

 2. The claimant is a widow now aged 85.  She has  difficulty  in  standing
    and spends most of her life in bed as a result. She requires assistance
    in all aspects of personal care, and even to move around her home.  She
    last entered the United Kingdom on 29 March 2012 and  on  25  September
    2012 applied for further  leave  to  remain  with  her  daughter  ("the
    sponsor") and her family.  That application was refused  on  the  basis
    that she did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as  set
    out in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE,  the  respondent  noting  that
    although she claimed to be needing medical attention and was too  frail
    to travel, she had not provided documentary evidence of this.

 3. At the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal she  was  represented  by  her
    grandson, Mr Sargheel Javed who is the son of the sponsor.   The  judge
    accepted [16] that the claimant did not qualify for indefinite leave to
    remain under any of the categories covered by the  respondent  nor  did
    she qualify as an adult dependent relative as she had not  entered  the
    United Kingdom with leave to remain in that capacity.  The  judge  then
    considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, finding that:-

      i) the claimant has a family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her
         daughters  who  are  both  British  citizens  and  their   families
         comprising her children and grandchildren [24] and removal from the
         United Kingdom would interfere with that;

     ii) the interference was sufficiently serious to engage Article 8  [25]
         and that whilst that was in accordance  with  the  law  and  had  a
         legitimate  aim,  the  interference  was  disproportionate  as  the
         claimant would suffer significantly from the removal being a  widow
         who lives alone in Pakistan who is frail with significant  mobility
         problems and requiring assistance in all her daily needs  including
         personal care such as washing and going to the toilet as  evidenced
         by her GP;

    iii) the claimant was reliant on the care given by the sponsor  and  her
         family and without that she would be  unable  to  manage  and  that
         whilst she might be  able  to  make  a  successful  application  to
         return, her present and continued reliance on family in the  United
         Kingdom would make it unduly harsh to expect her to return to  make
         the application.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Mulvenna's finding that removing the claimant to Pakistan  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with her right to respect for her  family
    and private life involved the making of an error of law because:-

      i) the judge made no findings on the possible care options open to the
         claimant and whether there were  family  members  in  Pakistan  who
         would be able to accompany her or family  members  in  the  UK  who
         would accompany her to Pakistan;

     ii) the conclusions that the  claimant  would  succeed  in  future  was
         wholly speculative and should not enhance her human rights claim;

    iii) there were no findings in the evidence before the judge as set  out
         in the letter from the GP saying that she was unable to  return  to
         Pakistan or that her ailments are of  such  severity  or  that  her
         physical wellbeing and welfare would be compromised by the decision
         to refuse her application;

     iv) the judge failed to establish the circumstances are exceptional  or
         very compelling.

 5. On 25 April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M  Hollingworth  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

 6. Mr Harrison made no submissions other than stating that  he  wished  to
    rely on the grounds of appeal.  In the circumstances, I considered that
    it was not necessary to hear from Mr Javed.

 7. I deal with the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1 - failure to make findings with respect to care options

 8. The grounds of appeal do not establish that it was put to the judge  by
    the respondent that he should take into account care  options  open  to
    the claimant in Pakistan or whether  there  would  be  people  able  to
    accompany her or family members who could look after her there.  It was
    for  the  respondent  to  show   that   removing   the   claimant   was
    proportionate. It is not sufficiently established that  submissions  to
    that effect were put before the Tribunal, nor were they properly raised
    in the refusal letter; it cannot be said that the judge erred in law in
    not taking them into account.

    Ground 2 - taking into account an irrelevant matter - application  from
abroad

 9. It is evident from the judge's findings that he had concluded that  the
    claimant had established  a  family  life  in  this  country  with  the
    sponsor, given the degree of dependency. That was  a  finding  open  to
    him.  In considering the fact that an application could  be  made  from
    abroad, the judge was not speculating in an impermissible manner. It is
    evident from SSHD  v  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054  that  whether  an
    application can be made from abroad needs to be considered and  in  any
    event, the Judge found, as was open to him, that a requirement to do so
    in this case would be unduly harsh.

    Grounds 3 & 4- failure to make  findings  establishing  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances

10. It was the clear evidence before the Judge that  there  were  no  other
    relatives in Pakistan.  Whilst it is correct that the  judge  does  not
    set out in detail what is said in the letter from the doctor, it states
    the following:-

         "This 84 year old lady is very frail and really struggles with  low
         mobility.  She spends most of her time in bed as she is so unstable
         on her feet but when she mobilises around the house or goes to  the
         toilet she needs somebody with her.

         She has no significant medical history apart from hypertension  for
         which she is on treatment.

         On examination she is very unsteady on  her  feet  and  had  to  be
         supported by a member of her family when I saw her in  the  surgery
         today."

11. Whilst it is correct to say that these do not say that she is unable to
    fly, they do indicate the extent to which she is entirely dependent  on
    her family for all aspects of her care.  The judge was entitled to take
    these letters into account and it was open to him on the facts of  this
    case to conclude given the  claimant's  age,  vulnerability  and  being
    entirely dependent on her family, with whom she was  found  to  have  a
    family life, that the interference that would be  caused  by  requiring
    her to go back to Pakistan did amount to compelling circumstances.

12. Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  that  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mulvenna did not involve the making of an error  of  law
    and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
       making of an error of law and I uphold it



Signed                                  Date:  10 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
