
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28736/2014
                                                               IA/28740/2014
                                                               IA/28743/2014
                                                               IA/28746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr p s
                                   mrs m k
                                 miss m k d
                                 miss p k d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   Mr R Sharma (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The appellants are citizens of India, the first and  second  being  the
    parents of the third and fourth.  Their appeals  against  decisions  to
    remove them to India were allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eames
    ("the judge") in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  6th  February
    2015.  So far as the first and second  appellants  are  concerned,  the
    judge dismissed the appeals in relation to the Immigration Rules  ("the
    rules")  but  allowed  them  under  Article  8  of  the  Human   Rights
    Convention.  So far as the third and fourth are concerned,  he  allowed
    the appeals under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  rules  and,  additionally,
    under Article 8.

2.   The first and second appellants became overstayers on expiry  of  visit
    visas issued to them in December 2003, with no leave  to  remain  since
    June 2004.  The third and fourth appellants were born  here,  in  March
    2005 and July 2007 and have lived in the  United  Kingdom  continuously
    since then.  The judge found that the children had lived  here  for  at
    least seven years by the time their parents made applications on behalf
    of the whole family, in September 2012.  He concluded that the  private
    life ties established by the third and fourth appellants in the  United
    Kingdom could only be properly secured by the presence of their parents
    and that, overall, the balance  to  be  struck  between  the  competing
    interests fell in favour of the family and  against  the  Secretary  of
    State.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge misdirected himself in  law  in  several  respects.   He
    erred in taking into account and applying the version of the  rules  in
    force as at the date of the removal decisions in  September  2013  (the
    same outcome resulting from a reconsideration by the Secretary of State
    subsequently, with supplementary decisions made in June  2014),  rather
    than the version of the rules in force as at the date of the hearing in
    early 2015.   The judge also erred in focusing on the  interference  in
    the private lives of the children, contrary to  guidance  given  in  EV
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and in failing to make a rounded assessment in  the
    light of the circumstances of the family as  a  whole.   In  making  an
    assessment outside of the rules, the judge erred in his approach to the
    balancing exercise required.  He failed to give due weight to the  fact
    that the third and fourth appellants had no lawful status in the United
    Kingdom and gave no reasons for finding that their interests outweighed
    the public interest.  The judge's approach to section 117A to D of  the
    2002 Act was also flawed.  It was inaccurate to find in the  children's
    favour that for two years of their time here, their presence  was  "not
    unlawful" as they had never had any  form  of  leave.   Similarly,  the
    finding that the unlawfulness in the family's immigration  history  was
    not of their own making was also flawed, as was  the  judge's  positive
    finding that the public interest appeared to require that the  children
    should stay in the United Kingdom.   The  absence  of  criminality  was
    given undue  weight  and  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    requirement to consider whether or not  the  parties  were  financially
    independent.

4.   Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that the correct  version  of  the  rules  was  applied  and  the
    remaining grounds amounted to a disagreement with the judge's findings.
     In a renewed application, the Secretary of State's case that the  most
    up-to-date version of the rules fell to be applied was restated and  it
    was contended that the judge's findings were incompatible with  binding
    authority.

5.   The Upper Tribunal granted permission on 23rd June 2015, on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge erred in applying the wrong  rules,
    may have erred in relation to section 117A to D of the 2002 Act and may
    have reached a decision which was contrary to authority.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Kotas said that the first ground, regarding the correct  version  of
    the rules to be applied, was  not  pursued.   It  was  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge applied the pre-July 2014 rules,  although  the
    date of the hearing was January 2015, but the error was  not  material.
    It was clear from  paragraph  35  of  the  decision  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE were  not  met  in
    the  first  and  second  appellants'  cases  was  the  correct  outcome
    whichever version of the rules, pre or  post-July  2014,  was  applied.
    The key issue was the position of the third and fourth  appellants  and
    the assessment of the reasonableness of expecting  them  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

7.   The Secretary of State's case was, nonetheless, that  the  judge  erred
    materially in law, particularly in  failing  to  apply  the  ratio  and
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in EV.  That judgment showed that
    a "real world assessment" was required, meaning  a  global  or  overall
    assessment, taking into account the best interests of the children  and
    the reasonableness of expecting them to leave.  The judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 39 a series of bullet points in  the  children's  favour  and
    then made up his mind at paragraph 42.  He did not properly  take  into
    account the absence of any leave, this factor  forming  no  substantial
    part of his assessment.

8.   The  judge  also  erred,  as  appeared  in  the  original  grounds,  in
    appearing to find that the public interest  required  the  children  to
    stay.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act provided  that  there  is  a  clear
    public interest in immigration control.  The judge was required to show
    how that interest was outweighed.

9.   It was clear from paragraph 74 of the decision that the judge  assessed
    the position of the children first and  then  proceeded  to  find  that
    removal of the entire family was unlawful and that all  should  remain.
    None of the appellants  had  ever  had  leave  to  remain  and  it  was
    inaccurate for the judge to describe two years of the time  spent  here
    by the children as not unlawful.

10.  Mr Sharma said in response that the Secretary of State  disagreed  with
    the judge's findings and conclusions but there was no material error of
    law.  The error regarding the correct version  of  the  rules  was  not
    material.

11.  Neither of the two children in  EV  had  been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom for anything like seven years and so their cases could only  be
    considered outside the rules.  On the other hand, much of the  guidance
    given in EV was helpful and supported the  appellants'  cases  and  the
    judge's assessment.  Paragraph 35 of the judgment, for example, set out
    factors relevant to the best interests assessment and section 55 of the
    2009 Act.  It was clear from the  decision  that  the  judge  addressed
    those questions and gave answers to them.

12.  The judge set out his reasoning.  The parents could not  succeed  under
    the rules, as was made clear at paragraph 36, in relation  to  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE.  The judge properly went on  to  consider  the
    position of the children.  Paragraph 39 of the decision did indeed list
    features falling in their favour but there  was  no  error  in  setting
    these out.   All  were  relevant  and  taken  into  account.   Nor  was
    paragraph 39 the only place where the basis of the  decision  appeared.
    Paragraph 20 contained a summary  of  the  evidence,  relevant  to  the
    assessment.  The judge found the witnesses  reliable  insofar  as  they
    gave consistent and credible accounts.  It was  clear  from  paragraphs
    23, 24 and 25 that the judge had the appellants' cases fully  in  mind,
    as he did the adverse factors.  Paragraph 35 contained cogent reasoning
    showing why the first and second appellants failed under the rules  and
    it was clear that the judge did  not  consider  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants' cases in isolation.

13.  The judge went on to consider the position of  all  of  the  appellants
    outside the rules, giving cogent reasons why this step was required.

14.  Turning to the particular criticism that the  judge  appeared  to  give
    positive weight to a period of two years of the children's stay as "not
    unlawful", what the  judge  meant  here  was  that  moderating  factors
    included a delay  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  dealing  with  the
    applications for leave, a  further  period  of  delay  during  judicial
    review proceedings and  then  the  inevitable  time  it  took  for  the
    decisions to be remade by the Secretary of State, as they were in  June
    2014.  Overall, this period of some two years was a formative period in
    the children's development.  The judge had  in  mind  in  this  context
    guidance given in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197, the children being over
    4 years old at this stage.  Paragraph 58 of the decision shows that the
    judge carefully considered the appropriate weight to be  given  to  the
    public interest and he was clear that there had been abuse on the  part
    of the first and second appellants.  Notwithstanding that abuse, having
    weighed the competing interests, the judge concluded that  the  balance
    fell to be struck in the appellants' favour.  His finding at  paragraph
    68 that the children's interests and the private life ties  established
    by them had considerable weight was open to him and not irrational.  At
    paragraph 69, the judge went on to rationally  conclude  that  removing
    the parents  would  mean  removing  the  children  too,  this  being  a
    practical assessment of the position.  He explained why this  would  be
    destructive in relation to the children's interests, at  paragraphs  70
    and 71, and plainly took into account guidance given in  EV,  expressly
    taking into account the costs involved in providing a British education
    for the  children.   His  findings  regarding  the  private  life  ties
    established by the third and fourth appellants were made in  the  light
    of the clear absence of any leave to remain and  the  poor  immigration
    histories of the first and second appellants.

15.  The overall conclusion at paragraph 74 was open to  the  judge.   There
    was no possibility of success under Appendix FM, that part of the rules
    suggesting that only one parent could succeed in similar circumstances.
     Be that as it may, there was nothing in the decision  amounting  to  a
    misdirection in law.

16.  Mr Kotas said that  although  the  decision  was  thorough,  the  judge
    compartmentalised the position of the children and  the  parents.   The
    correct approach was to make a global  assessment  and  the  judge  had
    failed to do this.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17.  As is readily apparent from  the  decision,  the  judge  has  carefully
    constructed his assessment and,  as  Mr  Kotas  accepted,  it  is  very
    thorough.  The  broad  outlines  are  these:  the  judge  set  out  the
    immigration history of the family, summarised the  parties'  cases  and
    the evidence which emerged at the  hearing  and  briefly  set  out  the
    submissions made by the representatives.  He then  first  assessed  the
    requirements of the rules.  The first and second appellants failed  but
    the judge went on  to  allow  the  appeals  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, concluding that the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  were
    met in relation to the children.  After that, he considered family life
    under Appendix FM and then made an assessment  outside  the  rules,  in
    relation to all the appellants, dealing first  with  the  children  and
    then with their parents.  The critical challenge made by the  Secretary
    of State is that the assessment in relation to the children was flawed,
    as being too closely tied to their private lives and as  falling  short
    of a rounded or global assessment in the light  of  decided  authority,
    most recently EV .

18.  I accept the submission made by Mr Kotas on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State that a rounded assessment is required, in relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children and also the reasonableness of expecting them
    to leave the United Kingdom.  On the other hand,  it  is  obvious  that
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) plainly applied in view of the years spent here by
    the children since their birth, in contrast with the  position  of  the
    children in EV, ensuring that the focus was on the second part of  that
    sub-paragraph and the reasonableness of expecting them to leave.  It is
    true that paragraph 39 lists the features identified by  the  judge  as
    showing the extent of the ties  established  by  the  children  and  is
    swiftly followed by a conclusion at  paragraph  41  that  the  relevant
    requirements  were  met.   However,  it   would   be   artificial   and
    inappropriate  to  read  this  part  of  the  decision  in   isolation.
    Paragraph 39 is plainly a summary, drawing on the  evidence  which  was
    before the judge.   Nor  is  it  appropriate  to  exclude  the  careful
    reasoning which appears before and  after  paragraphs  39  and  41,  in
    relation to the assessment of the best interests of  the  children  and
    the position of the first and second appellants, their parents.   There
    is, perhaps inevitably, a degree of repetition, with the judge  drawing
    once again on the features identified in  paragraph  39  later  on,  in
    paragraphs 49, 50 and 51 where he assessed the proportionality  of  the
    decisions under appeal.  It is in this part of the  decision  that  the
    judge took into account section 117B of the 2002 Act in relation to the
    children.  There is no express mention of the  importance  of  economic
    self-sufficiency  but  this  absence  is  insufficient  of  itself   to
    undermine the  judge's  reasoning.   He  correctly  took  into  account
    guidance given in Azimi-Moayed  and  had  regard  also  to  what  might
    broadly be described as the limited or qualified nature of  the  rights
    protected under Article 8, at paragraph 53, where  he  clearly  had  in
    mind Nazim [2014] UKUT 25 and Patel and Others [2013]  UKSC  72,  cases
    referred to in the Secretary of State's written grounds.

19.  The  assessment  which  immediately  follows  is  one  which  has  been
    carefully made.  Paragraphs 54 and 55 show, for example, that the judge
    was well aware that the substantial period in which the  children  have
    resided in the United Kingdom is not a trump card  or  any  "overriding
    right" as he described it.

20.  It is also clear from the decision that the judge had clearly  in  mind
    and gave due weight to the very poor immigration history of  the  first
    and second appellants, overstayers for many years, since the expiry  of
    their visit visas in June 2004.  He made several  adverse  findings  in
    relation to the parents, at paragraphs 35 and 73 of  the  decision.   I
    accept that he erred in describing, at paragraph 57,  two  years  which
    elapsed from the date of the applications for leave as  time  in  which
    the children's presence was "not unlawful" but this is not  a  material
    error as, in context,  he  was  merely  describing  moderating  factors
    bearing on  the  precarious  immigration  status  shared  by  all  four
    appellants.  In any event, the  judge  expressly  found  that  a  "very
    minimal degree of blame"  attached  to  any  delay  occasioned  by  the
    Secretary of State so that this particular factor led to no substantial
    reduction in the weight to be given to the public interest in  removal.
     Although the presence of the children in this country  as  active  and
    engaged young citizens is not properly a matter of public  interest  to
    be found in section 117B, it is also plain  that  the  judge  was  well
    aware of the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control,
    a factor which he expressly referred to in paragraph 50.

21.  Read overall, the decision shows that the judge had  in  mind  all  the
    salient features of the parties' cases, made an  assessment  under  the
    rules, albeit applying the wrong version but not erring  materially  in
    doing so, and came to a reasoned conclusion that  the  requirements  of
    the rules were met in relation to  the  third  and  fourth  appellants.
    Conscious that he was dealing with a  family  unit  consisting  of  two
    parents and two young children, and taking  into  account  his  finding
    that the first and second appellants could not meet the requirements of
    the rules, he went on to make an Article 8 assessment outside them.  In
    so doing, and bearing on at least  part  of  his  rules  assessment  in
    relation to the children, he made an assessment of the  best  interests
    of the third and fourth  appellants  and  took  into  account  relevant
    guidance from the decided authorities.  Although his overall conclusion
    was one that other judges might not have reached, I find that it was  a
    conclusion open to  him.   The  judge  did  not  focus  solely  on  the
    interference in the private lives of the children in assessing  whether
    it was reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom.  He  took
    into account the position of  their  parents  and,  in  fact,  made  an
    assessment fully consistent with the approach  in  EV.   The  technical
    errors regarding  the  immigration  status  of  the  children  and  the
    apparent  identification  of  a  positive  public  interest  in   their
    remaining here, are relatively minor and do not  displace  the  salient
    findings or upset the analysis.   Nor does the absence of  any  express
    mention of financial independence in relation to section 117B(3).   The
    judge had the public interest in removal clearly in mind,  revealed  in
    part by what he described as the abuse shown in the  first  and  second
    appellants' immigration histories.

22.  In conclusion, the grounds fall short of indentifying a material  error
    of law in the decision, which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing  no  material  error  of
law, shall stand.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The judge made an anonymity direction, referring at  the  very  end  of  the
decision to "sensitive issues".  He had in mind, no doubt,  that  the  third
and fourth appellants are  still  children  and  the  circumstances  of  the
family overall.  The anonymity direction shall continue in force until  this
Tribunal or a court directs otherwise.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
