
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28354/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2015                 |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr Md Nazmul haque
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Md. Islam, Solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal C. Greasley following a hearing on 5 March 2015.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who applied for further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student, pursuant
    to paragraph 245ZX(A) and paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules  HC
    395 (as amended).  His application was refused and he appealed.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 11 March 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    C. Greasley allowed that appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    Grimmett on 5 May 2015.  The reasons for that decision are:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal,  in  time,  against
             the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated
             on 11th March 2015 to allow the Appellant's appeal against the
             decision of the Respondent on 25th June  2014  to  refuse  him
             leave to remain as a Tier 4 student.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge was wrong to find  that  the
             Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the  rules  as  he  was
             undertaking a supplementary course while awaiting the  outcome
             of his application for leave the (sic) remain.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge erred  in  concluding  that  the
             Appellant was  undertaking  a  supplementary  course  as  that
             course took place after the Appellant's leave to remain  as  a
             student had expired."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the hearing Ms. Holmes handed up the authority of Bhimani  (Student:
    Switching Institution: Requirements)  [2014]  UKUT  00516  (IAC).   Mr.
    Islam handed up Tier 4  points-based  system  policy  guidance  of  the
    respondent in relation to extra studies whilst in  the  United  Kingdom
    and supplementary courses.

 6. Both representatives acknowledged that there was a typing error  within
    the judge's decision  at  paragraph  6  where  there  is  reference  to
    "Nottingham Trent University".  However both were accepting it  had  no
    material impact on either the appeal or the proceedings before me.

 7. Ms. Holmes also acknowledged that for  the  first  time  she  had  this
    morning been able to give consideration to the policy  guidance  issued
    by the Home Office and argued that the issue before me was  whether  or
    not the appellant's attendance on an extra course was  supplemental  to
    the one for which he had been issued with a CAS.   She  quite  properly
    referred me to the authority of Bhimani and in particular paragraphs 23
    and 24 which state:-

         "23.     It is important also to bear in mind the terms  of  s.3(2)
             which, as set out above, establishes  that  the  Secretary  of
             State shall from time to time lay before Parliament statements
             of the rules or changes in the rules laid down by  her  as  to
             the practice to be followed in the administration of  the  Act
             for, inter alia, regulating the entry into  and  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom of persons required by the Act to have leave to
             enter, including any rules as to the period for which leave is
             to be given and the conditions to  be  attached  in  different
             circumstances.

         24.  It is in this light that paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(1) has  to  be
             seen. The effect of this provision is that entry clearance  in
             the case of a Tier 4 (General) Student will be granted subject
             to conditions including the requirement that  the  student  is
             not allowed to study  except  at  the  institution  which  the
             Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  Checking   Service
             records as their  sponsor.  That  is  a  clear  example  of  a
             provision made in accordance with s.3(2) of the 1971 Act."

    She submitted that the judge may have erred by not taking into  account
    this authority but also acknowledged that it may well have not been put
    before him.  She also, in my view quite properly,  recognised  that  at
    paragraph 16 of the judge's decision there appears to be  a  concession
    by the Presenting Officer at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  an
    acknowledgement that the appeal should be allowed.  However,  again  in
    my view quite properly, she acknowledged that if the judge  had  indeed
    erred it could not be said that he had done  so  on  a  material  basis
    which would have in any way caused the outcome  of  the  appeal  to  be
    anything different to it being allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 8. In those circumstances there was no need for me to hear from Mr. Islam.



 9. I accept the submissions made by Ms. Holmes and on my own  analysis  of
    this appeal I am satisfied that the judge did not materially err.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22 September 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
