
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia 28975 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2013                                |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            saeeda khatoon akhtar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer of Counsel, instructed by HRS Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. It is accepted that the appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born
    on 7 April 1947 and so is now 66 years old. She applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  dependant  relative  of  a
    person present and settled there and the application was refused.

 2. One of the reasons for refusal was that the appellant  did  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 317(iii) of HC 395 which requires  her  to
    show that she is financially wholly or mainly dependent  on  a  relative
    present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.   Clearly  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was not satisfied on this point and if this  decision  is
    sound  then  any  error  relating  to  another  part  of  the  rules  is
    immaterial.

 3. However, although the decision that the  appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point might eventually be seen to have been right I cannot be  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge would have disbelieved that  evidence
    if he had not disbelieved other strands of evidence and I  am  satisfied
    that some his findings of fact were skewed by error.  It  follows  that,
    having considered all of the material before me, I have decided that all
    the findings of the First-Tier Tribunal must be set aside.

 4. At paragraph 10 of the determination the First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    by saying:

         "I regarded it as unhelpful to the appellant's case that  even  the
         question  of  her  relationship  to  the  sponsor  raised  so  many
         unsatisfactory evidential issues".

 5. This remark concludes a paragraph which, read as a  whole,  creates  the
    impression that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  wholly  unpersuaded
    that the appellant and sponsor are related as claimed or even related at
    all. Ms Martin,  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  argued  that  this  is
    precisely what the Judge meant. He was not, she said, persuaded that the
    appellant and sponsor are related as claimed.

 6. The difficulty is that in paragraph 14 of the  determination  the  Judge
    says that he is not satisfied that the appellant "had been in the United
    Kingdom between 2002 and 2012 enjoying  family  relationships  with  the
    sponsor and her other children in the country".  Ms Martin says there is
    no inconsistency here. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the
    appellant had children in the United Kingdom but the sponsor was not one
    of them.  I cannot agree with that.  I can make no sense of this finding
    unless I accept that the sponsor is a child of the appellant.  No  other
    interpretation that I could see gives a conventional meaning to the word
    "other" in the phrase "other children in the country.

 7. It follows therefore that I am persuaded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has not shown if he accepted that the appellant is  the  sponsor's
    son.

 8. I  also  accept  Mr  Singer's  submission  that  this  equivocation  has
    necessarily impacted on the assessment of the sponsor's  means.   It  is
    not clear how much of the sponsor's evidence is believed and  whilst  it
    might be appropriate to disbelieve  the  sponsor's  evidence  about  his
    means if he is unreliable in other respects I am not satisfied that  his
    evidence should be disbelieved if he is  telling  the  truth  about  his
    relationship with the appellant, at least as he understands it.

 9. The uncertainty about whether or not the appellant is  the  son  of  the
    sponsor is reflected in the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   Again,  Ms
    Martin energetically argued that it  was  clear  from  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter that the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant and her alleged son are related. Having read the letter  quite
    satisfied I am satisfied that might be the meaning of the letter  but  I
    am do not agree that this is its clear meaning. This uncertainty impacts
    on the conclusions that can be drawn from the failure of  the  appellant
    to support her case with DNA evidence.  It is accepted  in  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter that the appellant is aged over 65 years.  Given that
    that is accepted, if it is the respondent's case that the  appellant  is
    not related as claimed then it would have made sense to have refused the
    application with reference to paragraph 317(i)(a)  and  to  have  stated
    that the decision maker was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a
    parent (who was divorced, widowed, single or  separated)  aged  over  65
    years. The Secretary of State did not rely  on  that  rule.  Rather  she
    relied upon paragraph 317(i)(f) which applies  where  there  is  a  son,
    daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over the age of 18,  if  living
    alone outside the United Kingdom in the most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances.  This is a Rule that might be applicable in the case of a
    relative other than a parent and relying on this rule  might  have  been
    the decision maker's way of saying that it  is  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant is the son of the sponsor but it would have  been  helpful  if
    the point was clear beyond argument.

10. For my part I would find it potentially  significant  if  the  appellant
    failed to produced DNA evidence to support a disputed claim  to  be  her
    sponsor's mother but I do not think it right to make such findings  when
    the respondent's case is equivocal.

11. Before me Ms Martin made it clear beyond argument  that  the  respondent
    does not accept that appellant is related to the sponsor as claimed. Now
    that is clear the appellant know the case that she  must  meet  and  any
    failure to produce scientific  evidence  can  be  a  proper  matter  for
    comment.

12. Quite contrary to my initial thoughts about this appeal I  am  persuaded
    that there has been no clear finding of fact on a matter of  fundamental
    importance in this case and that therefore the appeal needs to  go  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided again.

13. The consideration of the claim on human  rights  grounds  will  be  done
    best with the  benefit  of  clear  findings  about  the  nature  of  the
    biological  relationship,  if  any,  between  the  appellant   and   her
    supporters. Without deciding the point it seems to me that it  would  be
    perfectly possible, although very unlikely, that an appeal ought  to  be
    allowed on human rights grounds if they are taking care of her  even  if
    there is absolutely no physical relationship at  all.  Everything  would
    depend on findings that have not yet been made.

14. It may be that this is a vexing decision  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge who may have been clear in his own mind about what he  meant.   It
    is not clear in the determination and that is what I have to consider.

15. It follows therefore that I rule the decision is wrong and I  allow  the
    appeal and direct that the case  is  decided  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

16. I accede to Mr Singer's request to make plain that I am  not  preserving
    any of the existing findings. They are all tainted by error.

17. This case should not be listed before 3 September 2013 because now  that
    the appellant knows that her relationship to the sponsor is in issue she
    should be given time to prepare her case but I decline  to  give  formal
    directions as the First-tier Tribunal can organise its own affairs.

Decision

I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  order  that  the
appeal be decided again by the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 July 2013                    |

