











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28056/2015+5

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 19 April 2017                 |On:  8 May 2017                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [J T]
                        Olaocha Unwaneanea Vivian Eze
                         Anthony Nduaguibe Ugochukwu
                                    [D T]
                                    [P t]
                                    [m T]
                        no anonymity directions made

                                                                 Respondents
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Burrett, counsel (instructed by Kristal Law)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondents as the claimants.


   2. The claimants are all nationals of Nigeria, consisting  of  a  married
      couple and their four minor children, aged 10, 8, 5 and 6.


   3. In a decision promulgated on  18  October  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge James allowed the appeals of the two eldest children  appellants
      under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules; the  parents  and
      the two eldest children's appeals pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) and
      the appeals of the fifth and sixth under Article 8 of the Human Rights
      Convention.


   4. On  27  February  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson
      granted the secretary  of  state  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision. She found that it was  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  by
      failing to give adequate reasons why the  appeals  of  the  first  and
      second appellants should succeed under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  when  it
      was for them to show that there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
      integration for them in Nigeria where they  had  spent  30  years;  by
      failing to take into account that the third and fourth appellants  had
      not reached the age of 7 pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv)  as  at  the
      date of application; by failing to assess reasonableness on the  basis
      that the parents had no entitlement to be in the  UK  and  the  impact
      upon the children if returned to Nigeria, having regard  to  paragraph
      34 of EV (Philippines); and failing to give adequate reasons as to the
      relevance of Treebhawon and Others (s.117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674.


   5. Mr Clarke  submitted  that  the  Judge  treated  ties  to  Nigeria  as
      determinative  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  when  the  ties   test   was
      superseded by the test of "very significant obstacles to integration".
      The Judge failed to consider the 30 years they had spent  in  Nigeria,
      language, employment  opportunities,  skills,  church,  education  and
      critically their ability to form a private life.


   6. Whilst consideration of ties is  an  important  factor  to  take  into
      account he submitted that the Judge's approach was  inconsistent  with
      the jurisprudence in any event. He  referred  to  Bossadi  (Paragraphs
      276ADE; Suitability; Ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC). The  consideration
      of ties requires both  a  subjective  and  objective  assessment.  The
      Strasbourg jurisprudence requires not only that assessment of ties has
      an objective as well as  subjective  dimension,  but  also  that  such
      assessment must consider, as a relevant  consideration,  whether  ties
      that are dormant can be revived.


   7. Moreover, the Judge in effect reversed the burden of  proof  when  she
      stated that there is no evidence of any substantive  ties  in  Nigeria
      before her and this would impact negatively on the whole  family,  and
      in particular the children and their best interests.  She  found  that
      there is no evidence of any more than remote  and  abstract  links  to
      Nigeria and that she had no evidence of the continued connection  that
      ties this family to their home country, and that such  ties  are  "not
      limited to social, cultural and family circumstances" - at [28].


   8. He submitted that the Judge found in the alternative  that  the  first
      and second appellants succeeded under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act as  it
      would be unreasonable to expect the third  and  fourth  appellants  to
      leave the UK. It was incumbent upon the Tribunal to follow  the  facts
      on the ground  approach  as  set  out  in  EV,  supra,  at  [58].  The
      assessment of the best interests of the children must be made  on  the
      basis that the facts are as they are in the real world. If one  parent
      has no right to  remain  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
      background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If  neither
      parent has the right to remain, then that is  the  background  against
      which the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be:
      is it reasonable to expect the child to  follow  the  parent  with  no
      right to remain in the country of origin?


   9. He submitted that the assessment of reasonableness was to be  made  on
      the basis that the parents have no entitlement to be in the UK.


  10.  He  accepted  that  the  Judge  had  appropriately   considered   the
      connections of the third and fourth claimants to the UK. However,  the
      reasonableness  assessment  under   s.117B(6)   is   flawed   by   the
      determination's silence in respect of any kind of consideration of the
      impact upon the children if returned  to  Nigeria,  having  regard  to
      paragraph [34] of EV.


  11. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Burrett submitted that  any  errors  of
      law were not material.


  12. The Judge asked herself at [15]  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
      respondent to expect the two oldest children to leave the UK, both  of
      whom have resided here in excess of the required 7 years. That was the
      starting point for the Judge. The applications were made in 2013.


  13. When the appeals  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  they  were
      children who at that stage qualified under paragraph 276ADE.


  14.  The  Judge  has  however  considered  throughout  the  provisions  of
      s.117B(6) which in effect poses the same  question  of  reasonableness
      applicable under the Rules or under Article 8. There were no  material
      errors of law in her decision.


Assessment


  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge James had given a  detailed  decision  based
      upon a comprehensive  assessment  of  the  claimants'  documents,  the
      evidence given and the law which was to be applied.


  16. The secretary of  state  did  not  attend  the  hearing  and  was  not
      represented. Judge James noted that the secretary  of  state  made  no
      written representations. No  application  to  adjourn  was  made.  She
      decided under the overriding objective to proceed to hear the evidence
      on a submissions  only  basis  taking  into  account  the  documentary
      evidence and submissions.


  17. The claimants submitted  145  pages  of  evidence  including  numerous
      detailed school reports for each of the  children,  including  letters
      from  the  local  education  authority,   their   qualifications   and
      certificates  awarded  to  them.  There  was  reference  to   Daniel's
      appointment as school prefect and his imminent 11+ examination.


  18. She found that all four  children  were  born  in  the  UK  and  speak
      English. The two elder children were 10 and 8 respectively at the date
      of decision.


  19. She assessed the position of the parents under  paragraph  276ADE(vi),
      finding that they maintained remote and  abstract  links  to  Nigeria.
      There was no evidence of  any  continued  connection  which  tied  the
      family to Nigeria. I do not find that this constituted a  reversal  of
      the burden of proof as contended. That was the finding  based  on  the
      fact that the parents have been resident in the UK for 13 years and 11
      years respectively. Accordingly, stronger and  deeper  ties  had  been
      forged in the UK and the commensurate ties in Nigeria loosened.


  20. It is accepted Judge James erred in applying  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
      of the Rules. The two eldest children had not  lived  continuously  in
      the UK for at least seven years as at the  date  of  the  application,
      which was made on 3 April 2013.


  21. However, she proceeded to consider their appeal on the basis  of  s.55
      and in particular s.117B(6) of  the  2002  Act.  She  referred  to  MA
      (Pakistan), supra.  She  had  regard  to  the  basis  upon  which  the
      secretary of state refused  the  claimants'  applications.   She  also
      considered (and allowed) the appeals of the two eldest children  under
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules - [30].


  22. Judge James also stated at [18] that the question of whether it  would
      be reasonable to remove the children who have been in the UK for seven
      years under paragraph 276ADE(iv)  is  linked  to  s.117B(6)  regarding
      private and family life under the Human Rights Convention. The  public
      interest did not require a person's removal where they have a  genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child where  it
      would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.


  23. She took into account at [19] the decision of the Court of Appeal in R
      (on the application of) MA and Others v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  and
      in particular paragraphs 46, 49, 102-3. She noted that  the  Court  of
      Appeal went on to refer to the fact that  the  same  principles  would
      apply with regard to a s.117B(6) case.


  24. She also referred at [21] to PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 00108 - at [39-
      41], that the reasonableness test involves the balance of all material
      facts and considerations and is fact sensitive.


  25. She found that the two eldest appellants were born in the UK and  have
      never visited Nigeria. They are fully integrated into UK society.  The
      eldest child was  on  the  cusp  of  an  important  educational  stage
      regarding the imminent taking  of  his  11+  examinations  which  will
      impact on the rest of his life. To remove him at that  critical  stage
      could prove damaging to his future potential  outcomes  and  schooling
      which could not be recovered at a later stage.


  26. Judge James has assessed the cumulative factors, namely strong  family
      life in the UK; the children are settled into a British way  of  life;
      that it is in their  best  interests  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  in
      particular with regard to the two eldest children. This is  a  settled
      migrant family who have strong private life and connections to the UK,
      who have resided here for many years.


  27. She had proper regard to the position of the parents  'and  Article  8
      issues' - [26], noting that they are overstayers who have remained  in
      the UK in breach of the conditions of  their  business  and  visitor's
      visas. They also worked in the UK knowing they had no permission to do
      so. They were also always aware that their  presence  in  the  UK  was
      precarious and they proceeded to have their children in the UK knowing
      that they had no right to remain.


  28.  Against  that,  she  stated  that  there  were   few   countervailing
      countervailing arguments presented by  the  secretary  of  state.  She
      considered the absence of  countervailing  arguments  following  EM  &
      Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC). In the absence of
      countervailing factors, residence of over seven  years  with  children
      well integrated into the educational system in the UK is an  indicator
      that the welfare of the child favours regularisation of the status  of
      mother and children.


  29. She accordingly allowed the appeal for the two eldest children and the
      parents under paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv) and 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Rules
      respectively with regard to their private life -[30].


  30. In coming to that conclusion she found that it was not in  the  public
      interest to require the removal of the parents given their genuine and
      subsisting parental relationship with the qualifying children.  To  do
      so would be unreasonable in all the circumstances - PD and Others  and
      s.117B(6). The parents are fluent in English and the  family  is  self
      sufficient - [31].


  31.  She  referred  to  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD  regarding  the  "intertwined
      emotional and physical interdependency" of the  family  relationships.
      She undertook an assessment  under  Article  8  following  the  Razgar
      steps. She then had regard to sections 117A, 117B and 117D of the 2002
      Act. She has had  regard  to  the  relevant  considerations  regarding
      Article 8(2) and the "public interest question" - [35].


  32. She found in all the circumstances that Article 8 is engaged  in  this
      case in regards to the two youngest children and also  in  respect  of
      the parents - [33]. They should be granted  leave  in  line  with  the
      eldest children outside the Rules under Article 8.


  33. She found that  the  decision  of  the  secretary  of  state  was  not
      reasonable and  proportionate  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case.
      Accordingly, even though the appeals of the two youngest children were
      not  allowed  under  the  Rules,  she  concluded  that  it  would   be
      unreasonable to return them, having regard to s.117B(6)  of  the  2002
      Act.


  34. In summary, the Judge has given proper reasons regarding the  position
      of the eldest children and in particular the impact  that  removal  to
      Nigeria would have especially on the eldest child, at a critical stage
      of his educational development.  She also had regard to the cumulative
      factors relating to the strength and nature of family life in the UK.


  35. She properly took into account the  fact  that  the  parents  were  in
      breach of the Immigration Rules; they are overstayers who also  worked
      here without permission to do so. They at all times  knew  that  their
      presence in the UK was precarious but nevertheless proceeded  to  have
      children in the UK knowing they had no right to remain.


  36. I find that the Judge has provided proper  reasons  for  allowing  the
      appeals under Article 8. She had regard to the nature  and  extent  of
      the  private  and  family  life  of  the  claimants  as  well  as  the
      documentation regarding the educational achievements and  progress  of
      the eldest children.


  37. There were witness statements presented  in  which  the  private  life
      circumstances were set  out.   There  was  also  a  detailed  skeleton
      argument presented by the claimants' counsel. Reference  was  made  to
      the secretary of state's policy under Appendix FM in respect of family
      and private life.


  38. In the circumstances, the findings of the Judge were available to  her
      on the evidence produced.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity directions made.














      Signed                             Date 5 May 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









