

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/28506/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 15 July 2013                             |On 17 July 2013           |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                            Theophilus Acheampong
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms N Manyarara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This case comes before the Upper Tribunal following the grant of
      permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 13  May  2013
      against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge R J N B  Morris
      promulgated on 25 March 2013.  The  appellant,  a  Ghanaian  national,
      sought to appeal the decision of the respondent to refuse to issue him
      a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.  Judge  Morris  was
      not satisfied that the appellant had been free to  marry  the  sponsor
      nor that  they  had  a  durable  relationship  and,  accordingly,  she
      dismissed the appeal.

   2.       The appellant was born on 24 March 1978. It is not know when  he
      entered the UK and no evidence of lawful entry has  been  adduced.  He
      made his application for a residence card on 2102. It is maintained he
      married Nana Afua Fosuhemaah, a Dutch national of Ghanaian origin,  by
      proxy in Ghana on 24 March 2012.

The Hearing

   3.       The appeal came before me on 15 July 2013. The appellant did not
      attend the hearing as he was awaiting an  emergency  appendectomy  but
      the sponsor was in attendance. An application for an adjournment  made
      prior to the hearing on the basis of the  appellant's  hospitalisation
      was refused on the basis that the error of law issue could be resolved
      in his absence.

   4.       I heard submissions from the parties as to whether  or  not  the
      First-tier Tribunal had made errors of law.

   5.       Ms Manyarara relied on her skeleton  argument  which  sought  to
      bring some clarity to the grounds. She also relied upon  the  Tribunal
      decision of NA (customary  marriage  and  divorce  -  evidence)  Ghana
      [2009] UKAIT. She submitted that the judge's approach to the statutory
      declaration  (which  was  prepared  after  the  registration  of   the
      marriage) had been flawed  because,  contrary  to  what  was  said  in
      paragraph 9(1) of the determination, a declaration had been  submitted
      although she accepted this might be a typographical error as the judge
      had then proceeded to consider the declaration. She submitted that the
      judge had confused the names of the fathers of the  appellant's  first
      and  second  wives  and  on  that  basis  mistakenly  found  that  the
      declaration was unreliable because it contained the  wrong  name.  She
      submitted that,  in  any  event,  registration  of  the  marriage  was
      optional and so the matter of the  declaration  was  academic  to  the
      issue of a valid marriage even though the marriage had been registered
      in this case (which is how the declaration came to be issued).

   6.       Ms Manyarara submitted that in questioning the validity  of  the
      marriage certificate, the judge had gone  too  far;  this  was  not  a
      matter raised by the respondent in refusal where only the  declaration
      had been questioned. She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      properly  assess  the  evidence;  specifically   the   two   statutory
      declarations. That had led to the confusion  identified.  Further,  in
      paragraph 15 of  the  determination  the  judge  had  used  the  wrong
      standard of proof by rejecting the attestation  of  the  declarations.
      She had been  wrong  to  require  endorsements  on  the  authenticated
      documents.
   7.        It  was  submitted  that  evidence  of  cohabitation  had  been
      submitted in the form of oral evidence and one Virgin media bill.  The
      sponsor had not adduced additional evidence but it had been available.
       She submitted that despite the requirement  under  Ghanaian  law  for
      cohabitation to prove consummation of the marriage thereby  making  it
      valid, there  was  no  similar  requirement  under  Regulation  7,  as
      clarified by PM (EEA spouse - 'residing with') Turkey [2011]  UKUT  89
      (IAC. The only finding on  the  oral  evidence  was  as  contained  at
      paragraph 17. Ms Manyarara did not seek to make  additional  arguments
      in respect of Reg 8(5). She submitted  that  the  dissolution  of  the
      marriage was only relevant to that Regulation. The grounds set out the
      sponsor's position as to his faith and polygamous marriages but in any
      event, these were permitted under customary law. The judge  had  erred
      in considering Appendix FM as this was not applicable  in  this  case.
      The grounds referred to a typing error as  regards  the  date  in  the
      document regarding the dissolution of the marriage; this had now  been
      corrected  but  as  that  evidence  was  not  before  the  judge,   no
      submissions were to be made in that respect.

   8.        In  response,  Mr  Tufan  raised  a  preliminary  point   about
      admissibility of the application. He  submitted  the  application  for
      permission had been made out of time and this had not been dealt  with
      in the grant. At this point I examined the  file.  The  permission  to
      appeal application was indeed marked out of time by the Tribunal.  The
      endorsement on the file, presumably seen by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Chohan who initially refused  permission,  was  that  the  application
      should have been received by 5 April but had been received on 8 April.
      However the application form confirmed that the determination had been
      received late on 28 March. Good Friday fell on 29 March  and  1  April
      was Easter Monday so I calculate that  the  five  working  day  period
      ended on 8 April which was the date the application was  received.  As
      far as I could see, therefore, the application was not made  late  and
      Mr Tufan accepted this.

   9.       Mr Tufan submitted that if the evidence of the expert as set out
      in NA was to be relied on, then the Tribunal also had to consider that
      part of her evidence which  maintained  that  the  customary  marriage
      could only validly take  place  between  two  Ghanaian  nationals.  He
      submitted that the sponsor was a  Dutch  national  and  therefore  the
      marriage could not be valid. He also raised issues about whether  such
      a marriage would be accepted as valid in her  home  country  which  it
      needed to be if she was to rely on it in the UK. He maintained that he
      had documentary evidence to confirm that registration of the  marriage
      was necessary but did not seek to pursue that point  as  the  evidence
      had not been placed before  the  judge  (I  note  in  fact  that  some
      evidence had been submitted by the previous presenting officer  and  I
      refer to that later  in  this  determination;  at  paragraph  23).  He
      accepted there had been confusion over the names of the fathers in the
      declaration but submitted that was not material as  it  was  just  one
      point of many taken by the judge.

  10.       With regard to the submissions made as to the wrong standard  of
      proof being applied, he  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
      determination which suggested that the balance  of  probabilities  had
      not been  applied  properly.  He  submitted  it  was  plain  from  the
      determination that the Tanveer Ahmed principles had been  applied.  He
      submitted that with regard to the name of the Notary Public,  one  did
      not know whether the name Ose was correct or whether  it  should  have
      been Osei or indeed something else. The judge was entitled  to  reject
      the documents for the reasons she gave.

  11.       Mr Tufan further submitted  that  there  was  a  requirement  of
      cohabitation for customary marriages to be valid, as indicated by  the
      expert. Only one document to show cohabitation had been submitted  and
      the judge was entitled to reject  the  oral  evidence  where  no  more
      documentary evidence had been  adduced.  He  referred  to  TK  Burundi
      [2009] EWCA Civ 40 which held that "An immigration judge was  entitled
      to reject an applicant's assertion unsupported  by  readily  available
      independent evidence." He submitted that there was no error of law and
      the determination was sound.

  12.       Ms Manyarara briefly responded and relied on paragraphs  10  and
      15 of her skeleton which she submitted addressed all the issues raised
      by the respondent when refusing the application. She  complained  that
      new issues had now been raised. In any event, she stated that she  had
      just asked the sponsor about her nationality and had  been  told  that
      she was a dual Dutch and Ghanaian national.

  13.       That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing
      I reserved my determination. The parties were agreed that if errors of
      law were found, a further hearing would be required and that it should
      take place at Field House.

Findings and conclusions


  14.       I would note at the outset that the Tribunal  files  shows  that
      the Presenting Officer raised the issue  of  the  dissolution  of  the
      marriage as an issue at the commencement of the hearing  before  Judge
      Morris. There was therefore more than just the one issue which Counsel
      maintains was before the judge for determination.  Ms  Manyarara  also
      represented the appellant on that occasion and should have a  note  of
      this.

  15.       Permission was granted solely on the basis that "a Panel of  the
      Tribunal is about to consider the  whole  question  of  customary  and
      proxy marriages". That appeal (which I understand is  to  address  the
      situation in Nigeria) has been adjourned and is due to be heard in mid
      August. The grounds put forward by the appellant's representative have
      not been engaged with and it is difficult to know whether or  not  the
      Upper Tribunal Judge considered they disclosed an  arguable  error  of
      law. Notwithstanding the above, I have considered the grounds and  the
      submissions made and reach the following conclusions.

  16.       Four arguments are made. These are  that  the  judge  failed  to
      consider all the material evidence, that she misdirected herself as to
      the current position of Ghanaian law regarding customary marriage  and
      divorce, that she made irrational  credibility  findings  against  the
      appellant and, lastly, that she failed to adequately consider  article
      8 in respect of her (sic) right to private life. I deal with  each  of
      these points in turn and  I  am  grateful  to  Ms  Manyarara  for  the
      clarification provided in her skeleton argument.  I consider that  the
      third complaint is linked to the first. This will be made  clearer  by
      my reasoning below.

  17.       Both parties submitted fresh evidence that had not  been  placed
      before the judge. I made it clear that I would not consider  this  and
      that it would become relevant only if errors of law  were  found.  The
      documents remain on the Tribunal file. I have not looked at  them  and
      they do not form part of my reasoning.

  18.       It was clarified in submissions that the evidence the  judge  is
      alleged not to have properly considered consisted of two declarations;
      both appear in the respondent's bundle. The first is a document from a
      district court  in  Ghana  dated  2  April  2012  which  confirms  the
      dissolution of the marriage between the appellant and his first  wife,
      Gloria. In this document the names of the fathers of the appellant and
      his ex-wife are given as Akwasi Acheampong and Nana  Owusu  Acheampong
      respectively. The second is the declaration of 12 June 2012 in respect
      of the second marriage; the appellant's  father  is  named  as  Akwasi
      Acheampong and the sponsor's father as Nana Akua Fosuhemaah.  I  would
      point out that contrary to what is asserted in paragraph 5 (3) of  the
      grounds, the respective mothers did not contribute to the  declaration
      in any way.

  19.       At paragraph 13(iii) of the determination the judge  finds  that
      the credibility of  the  appellant  and  sponsor  is  damaged  because
      differing names are given  for  the  father  of  the  sponsor  on  the
      documents. Mr Tufan quite properly accepted that the judge  had  erred
      in this respect as claimed. Plainly  she  has.  She  appears  to  have
      failed to appreciate that the document relating to the dissolution  of
      the appellant's first marriage to Gloria bore Gloria's father's  name;
      there would have been no reason for it to refer to the father  of  the
      woman the appellant would later marry. That is plainly an error on her
      part. However it is not the only, and indeed  not  even  the  primary,
      reason she gave for finding the evidence  of  the  dissolution  to  be
      unreliable and for rejecting it.

  20.       Judge Morris also criticises the evidence because the  document,
      whilst referring to an affidavit, does not attach that  affidavit  and
      does not even indicate its contents. In addition, she found  that  the
      order  of  2  April  2012  predated  the  filing  of  the  appellant's
      application for dissolution.  In  her  view,  not  surprisingly,  this
      undermined its reliability as  evidence  of  the  dissolution.  It  is
      maintained in the grounds that the date of filing the application  was
      a typing error which has been corrected. That may well be so, but that
      is a post hearing event and no evidence of same was  therefore  before
      the judge. Oral evidence was given which  suggested  this  explanation
      but even if that were accepted at face value, I cannot  see  it  would
      have advanced the case to any large extent because the application for
      dissolution  and  the  dissolution  itself  took   place   after   the
      appellant's second marriage. The appellant's evidence,  as  emphasised
      in the grounds, is that he would not enter into a polygamous  marriage
      because he is a Christian. The documentary  evidence  shows,  however,
      that he did just that, contrary to what he  claimed  and  to  what  is
      maintained  in  the  grounds  at  paragraph  6  (2).  In   conclusion,
      therefore,  whilst  the  judge  did  confuse  the  identities  of  the
      appellant's two fathers-in-law, the other observations made in respect
      of the evidence of the dissolution are valid and sufficient to  enable
      the findings as a whole to stand.

  21.       It is also argued that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  as  to
      Ghanaian law regarding customary marriage and divorce. The last  point
      made in the  preceding  paragraph  touches  upon  this  argument  with
      respect to polygamous marriages and the appellant's  own  position  on
      same.  It is maintained that the law allows for  polygamous  marriages
      and that the appellant did not say that he would not be able to  enter
      into such a marriage but that he would not wish to enter  into  it  on
      account of his faith. With regard to the first complaint,  I  was  not
      referred to any evidence which supports this stance. I also note  that
      the claim made in the skeleton argument that the appellant was free to
      marry to his  second  spouse  because  his  first  marriage  had  been
      dissolved, is not an accurate representation of the facts, even on the
      appellant's evidence as the  dissolution  occurred  after  the  second
      marriage. The order is clearly dated 2 April  2012,  endorsed  with  a
      June 2012 date on the  back  (as  seen  in  court  from  the  original
      document) and reaffirmed  in  the  attestation  document.  It  cannot,
      therefore, be said that that is also an error. Moreover  according  to
      Judge Morris' Record of Proceedings, the appellant confirmed that  the
      date of 2 April 2012 was correct. I  note  that  this  court  document
      conflicts with the appellant's  marital  status  as  recorded  on  the
      current marriage  certificate  where  the  section  asking  for  other
      existing marriage is marked as 'nil'.

  22.       With respect to the second complaint, I cannot see that this  is
      more than semantics. As far as I can  see,  the  appellant  saying  he
      would not enter into a polygamous marriage because of his religion  is
      the same as saying he would not wish to do so. However I note from the
      Record of Proceedings that what the appellant is  recorded  as  having
      said when he was asked whether he was allowed to have  more  than  one
      wife was "Yes but I am a Christian so not  allowed  to".  The  judge's
      observation, as recorded in her determination, is clearly supported by
      that evidence.

  23.       There is also a complaint that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
      maintained that the declaration did not set out the place of residence
      of the parties when it in fact did. The judge had before  her  a  page
      setting  out  part  1  of   the   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
      (Registration) Law 1985 (CMDRA), submitted by the respondent  at  that
      hearing. That makes it plain that there is an obligation under law  to
      register  customary  marriages.  It  may  well  be  that  unregistered
      marriages are still recognised by friends, family and the community as
      claimed by the expert but nevertheless there is a legal obligation  to
      register them. I have carefully looked at the declaration and can  see
      no reference to the place of residence of the appellant and sponsor in
      it. I accept that the UK is recorded on the  certificate  of  marriage
      however according to the extract of the CMDRA before the  judge,  that
      information  "shall"  be  contained  in  the   statutory   declaration
      "accompanying" the application for registration of  marriage  (section
      3(1)). It is the evidence of the appellant, as confirmed  by  Counsel,
      that  the  marriage  was  registered  however  plainly   the   correct
      procedures were not complied with.  These  matters  were  put  to  the
      parties at the previous hearing but  remained  unresolved.  It  should
      also be noted that all the sections pertaining to the registration  of
      the marriage on the certificate remain blank.

  24.       The judge is also  criticised  for  the  reasons  she  gave  for
      rejecting the attestation of the declaration. It has to be  said  that
      it is not clear from the documents as to where  the  attestation  took
      place and which authority issued it. The document itself is headed the
      Ghanaian Judicial Authority in Accra but the appellant's evidence  was
      that it had been done by the High Commission in London. The judge  was
      entitled to note that the last name given for the notary public by the
      attesting authority did not accord with that on the  declaration.  She
      also found that the stamp of the Ghanaian  High  Commission  or  other
      issuing authority did not appear on the attested marriage certificate.
      She is criticised for this in submissions and in the grounds and it is
      also maintained that she had placed a higher standard of proof on  the
      appellant in so doing. This is, however, a  relevant  matter  as  that
      stamp can be seen on the declaration. On that basis she  was  entitled
      to question why it did not also appear  on  the  certificate.  If,  as
      would seem, the authorities endorse the  document(s)  being  attested,
      then endorsements should appear on all such documents. It may be  seen
      from the Record of Proceedings that this was a matter raised  in  oral
      evidence with the appellant.

  25.       Criticism is also  made  of  the  judge's  findings  as  regards
      cohabitation.  Whilst  cohabitation  is   not   required   under   the
      Regulations, it is required for the validity of a  customary  marriage
      according to the evidence of  the  expert.  The  grounds  assert  that
      documentary evidence had been adduced to confirm  same  but  the  only
      documentary evidence before the judge was from Virgin Media bill.  The
      judge was entitled to find that the appellant and sponsor could easily
      have adduced more evidence but chose not to do so. In that context the
      oral evidence alone was not sufficient to allow her to make a positive
      finding.

  26.       There is nothing in the determination which  points  to  a  high
      standard  of  proof  being  applied.  There  are  references  in   the
      determination to the standard of probabilities and I  see  nothing  to
      suggest that any other standard  was  applied.  The  approach  to  the
      documentary evidence shows a proper application of the  Tanveer  Ahmed
      principles.

  27.       The judge considered Article  8.  As  she  found  there  was  no
      reliable evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  lived
      together or had any kind of relationship, she found  family  life  was
      not engaged. She accepted there was private life  on  account  of  his
      long residence but no details of his date of arrival here  or  of  the
      nature of the private life he claims to have established have been put
      forward. No witness statements were adduced and no oral  evidence  was
      called as to private life other than with the sponsor. The  judge  was
      obliged  to  consider  Article  8  as  it  was  raised  in   Counsel's
      submissions and her skeleton argument. In view of her findings it  was
      open to her to find it was not engaged.

  28.       Ms Manyarara argued that matters such as the declaration and the
      dissolution of the marriage were irrelevant as it did  not  matter  if
      the appellant was divorced from his first wife or if the marriage  was
      registered/declaration properly prepared. I would agree with  her  had
      it not been  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  did  terminate  his
      marriage  before  remarrying  and  that  the  marriage  was   properly
      registered. Given the claim he has put forward, it  was  open  to  the
      judge to find that it was undermined by his own documentary  evidence.
      In that sense it is relevant as it raises doubts on the reliability of
      the evidence and the claim as a whole. Read as a  whole,  the  judge's
      findings are  sound.  She  was  entitled  to  find  as  she  did.  The
      determination does not show any error of law.

Decision

  29.       The Tribunal made no error of law. The decision to  dismiss  the
      appeal is upheld.



      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal                                         17
      July 2013
