

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28265/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 14 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                             omar givanni clarke
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu, instructed by JM Wilson, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of FtT Judge
    Fox that was issued on 2 September 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and there is
    no reason to make such an order in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Bhachu and Ms Aboni informed  me  that
    having discussed the case they were agreed that Judge Fox had failed to
    have proper regard to article 8 ECHR because  he  had  failed  to  make
    necessary findings; and that his failure  to  make  necessary  findings
    amounted to an error on a point of law.

 4. I was advised that Judge Fox did not make findings  about  whether  the
    appellant had resided in the UK for over thirteen and a half  years  as
    claimed, about whether the nature of the appellant's convictions  meant
    he did not meet the suitability requirements of the immigration  rules,
    or about whether the appellant's criminal  record  meant  his  personal
    circumstances were outweighed by the public interest.

 5. Having considered the decision and reasons statement,  I  am  satisfied
    Judge Fox has not given adequate attention to these  three  issues  and
    that they undermine his  decision.   I  find  his  decision  cannot  be
    sustained and I set it aside.

 6. Ms Bhachu and Ms Aboni were agreed that the nature of the  error  meant
    the appeal needs to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh
    hearing.  I agree.

 7. I order the appeal is to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    the following directions.

      a. The remitted appeal can be heard by any judge other than Judge Fox.

      b. No findings are preserved.

      c. The parties can  provide  further  evidence  in  support  of  their
         positions as  long  as  any  additional  documentary  evidence  are
         provided at least 14 days before the next hearing.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Fox contains an error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as per the  directions  in
paragraph 7 above.



Signed                          Date         12 June 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
