
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28926/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th May 2014                              |On 24th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Muahammad Irfan Jahangir
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kumar, Solicitor with Capital Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  who
    in this determination I shall refer  to  as  "the  claimant"  to  avoid
    confusion.  The respondent is a national of Pakistan who  was  born  on
    31st March, 1983.

2.   He first landed in the United Kingdom in  possession  of  a  visa  that
    conferred leave to enter until 28th May, 2013, subject to  a  condition
    restricting  employment  and  recourse  to  public  funds.    He   made
    application on 28th May, 2013, to the claimant for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
    points-based  system  and  for  a  biometric  residence  permit.   That
    application was refused by  the  claimant  on  28th  June,  2013.   The
    application was refused, because the claimant was  not  satisfied  that
    the respondent had a valid CAS, because the reference number  submitted
    with the application had been withdrawn by the sponsor.

3.   The respondent appealed  the  claimant's  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  M
    Phillips  at  Taylor  House  on  27th  February  this  year.   In   her
    determination, the First Tier Tribunal Judge refers to the  grounds  of
    appeal which submitted  that  the  application  should  not  have  been
    refused, because the CAS number was  valid  when  the  respondent  made
    application as that appears  on  the  face  of  the  CAS  letter.   The
    complaint was that the claimant failed to notify the  respondent  prior
    to the issue of the refusal decision, that the CAS had been  withdrawn.
    The judge noted that the respondent claimed to  have  been  in  contact
    with his college repeatedly, but appeared to have been unable to obtain
    any explanation for the withdrawal of the CAS number.

4.   In giving evidence to the judge the respondent claimed  that  he  still
    did not know why the CAS was withdrawn and claimed that  he  feared  he
    may have been the victim of a fraud by the college, which  he  believed
    was no longer a licensed sponsor.

5.   On behalf of  the  respondent,  submissions  were  made  that  Bradford
    Regional College, the college issuing the CAS letter, had been  removed
    from the list of highly trusted sponsors.  It was  suggested  that  the
    claimant should have notified the respondent  that  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn.

6.   At paragraph 18 of her determination the judge said this:

         "I find that the [claimant], whilst stating that the CAS  had  been
         withdrawn by Bradford Regional College has not provided any  reason
         for this withdrawal or any reason  why  the  [respondent]  was  not
         informed and was not treated in the same way as  an  applicant  who
         had submitted a CAS from a college whose  sponsorship  licence  has
         been withdrawn."


    The reason the  judge  said  that  is  perhaps  because  she  may  have
    misunderstood  the  situation.   The  CAS  was  not  withdrawn  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The college in question,  I  am  told,  remains  a
    highly trusted sponsor.

7.   The judge went on to note that the sponsor had not  sought  to  explain
    why the decision had been made without giving the  respondent  time  to
    seek another CAS or sponsor and found that fairness required  that  the
    claimant should have  contacted  the  respondent  before  refusing  the
    application to give him the opportunity  to  respond  and  rectify  the
    position with his CAS.

8.   The judge allowed the appeal to the  extent  that  she  said  that  the
    respondent should be given a reasonable time being no less than 60 days
    to provide a valid CAS  to  the  claimant,  the  application  remaining
    before the claimant for decision that is in accordance with the law.

9.    The  claimant  challenged  the  judge's  determination  and   in   the
    application explains that the Tier 4 application had  been  refused  by
    the Secretary of State, because the  CAS  had  been  withdrawn  by  the
    sponsor and as such the respondent did not possess a valid CAS.   As  a
    result, he did not meet the requirements for the  award  of  30  points
    under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  The challenge suggests that
    the withdrawal of the CAS was a matter between the respondent  and  the
    institution.  It was not a matter over which the Secretary of State had
    any say or control.  As a result, the grounds urged that the judge  had
    made a misdirection.

10.  The grounds also relied on the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Rahman [2014] EWCA Civ 11, where there the court  accepted  that  there
    was no duty on the Secretary of State  to  communicate  with  each  and
    every where there was some deficiency in the CAS.  If the deficiency in
    the CAS was a result of a mistake on the part of the sponsor, it was  a
    matter to be pursued between the respondent and sponsor.

11.  At paragraph 32 of the decision Lord Justice Richard said:

         "There was no obligation on the Secretary  of  State  to  give  the
         appellant an opportunity to seek an amendment to the CAS  before  a
         decision was taken on the application.  Indeed, the  importance  of
         all relevant information being provided as part of the  application
         was underlined by the Tribunal in Naved itself, in  the  passage  I
         have quoted from paragraph 21 of the determination."

12.  Before me, Mr Whitwell relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  and  on  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rahman,  distinguishing  Naved.   He
    pointed out that the submission recorded by the judge at  paragraph  12
    of the determination to the effect that the Bradford  Regional  College
    had been removed from the list of highly trusted sponsors, had no basis
    in fact, because  the  Bradford  College  is  still  a  highly  trusted
    sponsor.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department had no control
    over whether or not the CAS was withdrawn by the college, which  was  a
    matter for the college and the respondent.

13.  Mr Kumar sought to suggest that Rahman did not  apply.   He  relied  on
    Naved.

14.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  erred  in  law
    in allowing the respondent's appeal to the extent that she did,  namely
    that the respondent should be granted a reasonable time being  no  less
    than 60 days to provide a valid CAS to the Secretary of State.  It  was
    the responsibility of the respondent to provide a valid CAS letter from
    his sponsor with his application and that he failed to do.   The  issue
    of a valid CAS is  not  a  matter  over  which  the  claimant  has  any
    responsibility.  That  was  a  matter  solely  for  the  college.   The
    situation is not similar to one where  a  sponsor  loses  its  licence;
    indeed, this college still holds a trusted sponsor licence.

15.  I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phillips.   The
    respondent's appeal is dismissed.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
