
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA284522014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On               the               1st               June               2016
                    On the 10th June 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                          MRS BIBI VEENA AMMANTOOLA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Querton (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cassel promulgated on the 20th October 2015,  in  which
      she dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  Human  Rights  grounds  both
      under and outside of the Immigration Rules.

   2. Neither the Appellant nor her representatives  Messrs  Malik  &  Malik
      Solicitors appeared at the appeal hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Cassel on the 2nd October 2015 at Taylor House, and Judge Cassel
      at [6] noted that no further  correspondence  had  been  received  and
      there was no request to withdraw the appeal and that  although  giving
      time for the Appellant to arrive by considering the  appeal  later  in
      the day, she did not attend nor did her representatives, and  in  such
      circumstances Judge  Cassel  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
      Appellant's absence.

   3. The Appellant has sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal
      and permission to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Mark Davies on the 12th April 2016, when he stated that "There  is  no
      indication  in  the  papers  that  either   the   Appellant   or   her
      representatives were notified of the date of the hearing.  This  would
      have  been  obvious  to  the  Judge  had  the  papers  been   properly
      considered.  The Judge made an error of law in proceeding to hear  the
      appeal and dismissing it.  The Appellant had not had a  fair  hearing.
      The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error of law.".

   4. However, within the application for permission to appeal it was not in
      fact argued by the Appellant that she had  not  been  originally  made
      aware of the date of the appeal hearing on the 2nd  October  2015.  It
      was argued by the Appellant that the appeal had  initially  be  listed
      for hearing on the 20th March 2015 but by a letter from  the  Tribunal
      dated the 19th March 2015, the appeal hearing had been adjourned until
      the 2nd October 2015, but that on  the  29th  September  2015,  Mesrss
      Malik & Malik Solicitors received a call  from  the  Tribunal  stating
      that the appeal hearing on the 2nd October 2015 was adjourned and that
      a new appeal hearing date would follow and that they were surprised to
      receive the determination of Judge Cassel dated the 20th October  2015
      indicating that no parties attended.  It was argued that although  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge initially called the case on at 10.00am  but
      put  it  back  to  1.00pm  to  give  time   for   the   Appellant   or
      representatives to arrive, there was no indication that  the  Tribunal
      called the solicitors to ascertain if a representative  was  attending
      given that there was no letter from Malik & Malik  saying  they  would
      not be representing her or that they were  no  longer  instructed  and
      that a bundle had been served by the Appellant on the 16th March  2015
      and that the Appellant is an elderly lady who wants to  give  evidence
      before a Judge along with her daughter.  It is  argued  that  in  such
      circumstances where the Tribunal had phoned the solicitors saying  the
      appeal was to be  adjourned,  that  there  was  in  effect  procedural
      unfairness.  This is the basis of the Appellant's appeal.  It  was  on
      this basis that the appeal came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   5. Ms Querton on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  relied  upon  her  Skeleton
      Argument, which I have fully considered.  She further argued that  the
      solicitors had got a phone  call  saying  that  the  case  was  to  be
      adjourned and that they had told the Appellant that and that the point
      in the case was a point of  procedural  fairness  and  that  the  case
      should  not  have  gone  ahead  where  the  Tribunal  had  phoned  the
      solicitors to say that the case was being adjourned.  She argued  that
      the solicitors had been instructed from the outset and had  even  made
      the original application on behalf of the  Appellant  and  lodged  the
      bundle of documents in March.  She argued that the  decision  made  to
      adjourn seemingly had not been actioned and the appeal had remained in
      the list and that as this was a matter of procedural fairness, it  did
      not matter whether or  not  there  was  in  fact  any  material  error
      established, and that the decision should be set aside on the  grounds
      of procedural fairness.

   6. In his oral submissions on behalf of the Respondent  Mr  Tufan  agreed
      that materiality  did  not  matter  as  this  was  an  argument  about
      procedural fairness.  He noted that within the Grounds  of  Appeal  it
      was said that a statutory declaration could be provided from the  case
      worker who took the call at the solicitors should the Tribunal require
      it, but that no statutory declaration had been provided.  However,  he
      conceded that the Appellant's solicitors firm were a respectable  firm
      of solicitors and that he was not doubting what they said, but  argued
      that there was no evidence either way.  However he  accepted  that  if
      the Tribunal did accept what was being said by the solicitors, that it
      may have been unfair to the Appellant to proceed.

   7. In reply Ms Querton argued that the application for the permission  to
      appeal had been drafted by  the  solicitors  and  that  the  Appellant
      herself had not attended as she had been advised not to attend by  her
      solicitors, they having been told by the Tribunal that the case was to
      be adjourned.  She argued that in such circumstances the  case  should
      be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

   My Decision on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. It is clear having considered the file that the appeal  was  initially
      listed for hearing on the 20th March 2015, but by a  letter  from  the
      First-tier Tribunal  dated  the  19th  March  2015,  that  appeal  was
      adjourned until the 2nd October 2015.  That  notification  of  hearing
      was sent both to the Appellant and to her solicitors  Messrs  Malik  &
      Malik.  I also accept that the Appellant had filed a  bundle  for  the
      appeal on the 16th March 2015 and had indicated  that  she  wanted  an
      oral hearing.

   9. Although there is nothing within the file to indicate that in  fact  a
      phone call was made to Messrs Malik & Malik indicating that  the  case
      on the 2nd October 2015 was to be adjourned, I do accept and find as a
      fact having considered the permission to appeal application which  was
      drafted by the solicitors and having heard submissions from Ms Querton
      in this regard that in fact a phone call was made by the  Tribunal  to
      Malik & Malik Solicitors on the 29th September 2015,  indicating  that
      the appeal hearing on the 2nd October 2015 was  to  be  adjourned  and
      that a new hearing date would follow.  Although I have  not  seen  any
      statutory declaration from the case worker who took the call, that  is
      clearly the position of Messrs Malik & Malik as  set  out  within  the
      permission to appeal application drafted by them and also was  clearly
      the instructions of Ms Querton.  Mr Tufan on behalf of the  Respondent
      was not seeking to doubt what was being said  by  the  solicitors  and
      said that they were a respectable firm, and in such  circumstances,  I
      do accept and find as a fact that such a phone  call  was  made,  even
      though no record of it was apparent from within the file.  Clearly, if
      a record had been apparent of such a phone call on the  file,  and  it
      had been clear to Judge Cassel that in fact a phone call had been made
      indicating that the appeal was to be adjourned and that phone call had
      been actioned, such that the appeal had been taken out  of  the  list,
      then the case would not have been heard and considered by her.

  10. Absolutely no criticism can be made of Judge Cassel  in  this  regard,
      given the fact that there was nothing on the  file  to  indicate  that
      such a phone call had been made to  the  solicitors  by  the  Tribunal
      indicating the appeal was to be adjourned.   However,  the  fact  that
      such a phone call was made is also supported  by  the  fact  that  the
      solicitors had been involved  throughout  and  had  made  the  initial
      application on behalf of the Appellant, had filed the initial  Grounds
      of Appeal, had filed a bundle on behalf of the Appellant on  the  16th
      March 2015, and at no stage had indicated that  they  were  no  longer
      representing her or that they would not be attending.  Again, the fact
      that neither the Appellant nor her solicitors attended, fits with  the
      assertion that the solicitors had told the Appellant that she need not
      attend, having been told by the Tribunal  that  the  case  was  to  be
      adjourned.

  11. In such circumstances given that I have found that  someone  from  the
      Tribunal did make such a phone call indicating that the appeal was  to
      be adjourned, I do consider that there was  procedural  unfairness  in
      the case being heard in such  circumstances  in  the  absence  of  the
      Appellant and/or her solicitors.  A phone call having been  made  that
      the appeal was to be adjourned, a record of that should have been  put
      on the file, and a new hearing date sent  out.   It  was  procedurally
      unfair for that not to have happened, so that the case  then  remained
      in Judge Cassel's list and was considered by her on the  2nd  October.
      In considering procedural unfairness, this has  to  include  not  only
      fairness on the part of the Judge, but also fairness on  the  part  of
      the Tribunal service itself, in dealing with the appeal.  I do make no
      criticism of Judge Cassel, but in light of my findings  that  a  phone
      call was made by  the  Tribunal  Service  that  the  case  was  to  be
      adjourned, it was procedurally unfair in such  circumstances  for  the
      case to have proceeded.  As this amounts to  a  matter  of  procedural
      unfairness, I do find that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Cassel should be set aside, and the case remitted back to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a differently  constituted  First-
      tier Tribunal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cassel  having  been  reached  in
circumstances amounting to procedural unfairness,  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Cassel is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing  before
a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Signed
R F McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 4th June 2016

