
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/28007/2013
                                                               IA/28008/2013
                                                               IA/28009/2013
                                                               IA/28010/2013
                                                               IA/28011/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 20th May 2014                      |On 5th August 2014       |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Zamir Rauf
                                  Uzma Atta
                                 Hamza Zamir
                                 Iqra Zamir
                                Ibrahim Zamir
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                             Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel instructed by Parkview Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are a father, mother and  their  three  dependent
       children. Mr Rauf is a national of the Netherlands.  His  family
       members are  all  Pakistani.  They  have  permission  to  appeal
       against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hague) to
       dismiss their linked appeals against the  Respondent's  decision
       to refuse to issue them with a residence card  confirming  their
       permanent  rights  of  residence  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006.

    2. The Respondent had refused the applications on the grounds  that
       Mr Rauf had not exercised his treaty rights in the  UK  for  the
       specified five years. He had come to the UK as a worker but  had
       suffered  a  traumatic  brain  injury  and  was  suffering  from
       psychosis so was unable to continue. He contended that he was  a
       worker who had ceased activity.  The rest  of  the  family  were
       refused leave in line with Mr Rauf.

    3. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  Mr  Rauf  could  not  be
       considered a worker who had ceased activity within  the  meaning
       of the Regulations because he had ceased  work  only  15  months
       after his arrival in the UK. In order to qualify for that status
       he needed to have worked  continuously  for  2  years  prior  to
       stopping  work.  Judge  Hague  rejected  all  arguments  to  the
       contrary and dismissed the appeals.

    4. The Appellants now appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  ground
       that the Respondent, and  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  failed  to
       recognise the significance of the fact that two of the  children
       had started their education before their father ceased  work  in
       the UK.  Even if they were not entitled to a permanent right  of
       residence  under  the  Regulations  they   had   established   a
       "derivative right of residence" under Article 12  of  Regulation
       No 1612/68:  Ibrahim  (European  Citizenship)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-
       310/08.  Although the grounds of appeal concede  that  this  was
       not an argument put to  Judge  Hague,  it  is  submitted  to  be
       Robinson[1] obvious. It is further submitted that the First-tier
       Tribunal failed to consider any of the appeals under  Article  8
       ECHR, which had been specifically pleaded in the grounds.


Error of Law

    5. There is no dispute that Judge Hague was entitled to  reach  the
       conclusions he  did  about  whether  the  Appellants  should  be
       granted permanent residence cards.  The alleged error of law  is
       that he did not consider an argument that was not put to him.

    6. Unpalatable as that might seem,  Ms Khan was able to rely on the
       decision in Alarape and Anr (Article 12, EC Reg 1612/68) Nigeria
       [2011] UKUT 00413 (IAC)  in  which  the  Tribunal  consented  to
       considering this new point,  not raised  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in that case either:

         "Albeit the appellants' representatives did not raise Article 12 of
         Regulation No 1612/68 in their grounds of appeal to the FTT  or  at
         the hearing, it was raised in the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal and its  potential  relevance  to  the  EU  rights  of  both
         appellants was a point, given the state of the evidence before  it,
         that it was obliged to consider, even of its own motion" [35].

    7. See Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552  to  similar  effect.  Mr  Harrison
       agreed that as a matter of law these children either  have  that
       derivative right of residence or they don't.  I  therefore  find
       that it  was  an  error  of  law  not  to  have  considered  the
       derivative  rights  of  residence  of  the  Third   and   Fourth
       Appellants.

    8. In respect of Article 8 Mr Harrison agreed that  Article  8  had
       been raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
       and as such the failure to deal with it was an error of law.

    9. I therefore find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       contained errors of law such that it should be set  aside,  save
       for the findings relating to permanent residence are preserved.


The Re-Made Decision

   10. The uncontested facts are  that  Mr  Rauf  came  to  the  UK  in
       November 2006 and started work in April 2007.  In  September  of
       that year his wife and children joined him, having been  granted
       EEA family permits by the British Embassy in Istanbul.  The  two
       elder children started to attend school and within two months of
       arrival  had  been  granted  residence  cards.  Mr  Rauf  ceased
       employment in February 2008 as a result of mental incapacity.

   11. I find as fact that  the  children  entered  school  when  their
       father was in full time employment and was a worker  within  the
       meaning of the Regulations.   They  have  therefore  acquired  a
       "derivative right of  residence"  that  is  independent  of  any
       requirements  as  to  health  insurance   or   financial   self-
       sufficiency. See Ibrahim:

         40. The right derived by children from Article 12 of Regulation  No
         1612/68 is also not dependent on the right of  residence  of  their
         parents in the host Member  State.  It  is  settled  case-law  that
         Article 12 requires only that the child has lived with his  parents
         or either one of them in a Member State while at least one of  them
         resided there as a worker  (Case  197/86  Brown  [1988]  ECR  3205,
         paragraph 30, and Gaal, paragraph 27).


         41. To accept that children of former migrant workers can  continue
         their education in the host Member State although their parents  no
         longer reside there is equivalent  to  allowing  them  a  right  of
         residence which is independent of that conferred on their  parents,
         such a right being based on Article 12.
         ...
         50. It follows that the children of a national of a Member State
         who works or has worked in the host Member State and the parent who
         is their primary carer can claim a right of residence in the latter
         State on the sole basis of Article 12 of Regulation No 1612/68,
         without being required to satisfy the conditions laid down in
         Directive 2004/38.

   12.  The appeals of the Third and Fourth Appellants are  allowed  on
       that basis. They meet the requirements of Regulation 15A (3). Mr
       Harrison agreed that in those  circumstances  their  mother,  as
       their primary  carer,  qualifies  for  a  residence  card  under
       Regulation 15A(4) and  their  little  brother  under  Regulation
       15A(5):

           15A. (1) A person ("P") who is not  an  exempt  person  and  who
         satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or  (5)  of
         this regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

           ...

            (3) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA national
           parent");
           (b) P resided in the United Kingdom at a time when the EEA
           national parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a worker;
           and
           (c) P is in education in the United Kingdom and was in education
           there at a time when the EEA national parent was in the United
           Kingdom.



           (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in
           paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and
           (b) the relevant person would be unable to continue to be
           educated in the United Kingdom if P were required to leave.
           ...
            (5) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is under the age of 18;
           (b) P's primary carer is entitled to a derivative right to
           reside in the United Kingdom by virtue of paragraph (2) or (4);
           (c) P does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the United
           Kingdom; and
           (d) requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent P's
           primary carer from residing in the United Kingdom.
   13. I accept and find as fact  that  the  Second  Appellant  is  the
       primary carer of her children and that if she were compelled  to
       leave the UK they  would  have  to  go  with  her.  The  medical
       evidence indicates that the First Appellant  is  suffering  from
       psychosis, possibly paranoid  schizophrenia.  He  is  not  in  a
       position to care for his children on his own, and nor should  he
       be expected to do so.

   14.  The  appeals  are  therefore  allowed  with  reference  to  the
       Regulations.   It follows that I need not address Article 8.


Decisions

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside to the extent identified above.

   16. I re-make the decisions in the appeals by  allowing  them  under
       the Regulations.

   17. I make no direction as to anonymity. None was  in  place  before
       the First-tier Tribunal and I was not asked to make one  in  the
       Upper Tribunal.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             23rd  July 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Robinson v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 568.

