
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28372/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On the Papers at Field    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 17th September 2015               |On 14th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mrs Savitri Parey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
On the papers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago born on 14th  January
    1980.  The Appellant's appeal, along with that of her husband Mr  David
    Parey, has an extensive history and the matter finally came  before  me
    on 17th September 2015.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  6th
    November 2015 the appeal of Mr Parey was allowed  and  directions  were
    given with regard to Mrs Parey's appeal.

 2. Those directions indicated that Mrs Parey through her solicitors should
    serve the Secretary of State within fourteen days of receipt  of  these
    directions evidence upon which she seeks to rely in  order  to  satisfy
    her application with regard to the financial requirements she needs  to
    address pursuant to Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration  Rules  and  that
    the  Secretary  of  State  do  within  ten  days  of  receipt  of  that
    documentation either advise the first Appellant's solicitors that  they
    are satisfied with the evidence, and that  they  will  not  oppose  the
    appeal, or they set out their written reasons of objection.

 3. The matter is now brought back  before  me  on  the  papers  and  I  am
    referred to an exchange of correspondence between the Home  Office  and
    the Appellant's instructed solicitors.  By email  dated  16th  November
    2015 from Mr Kandola, who was the Home Office Presenting Officer at the
    hearing before me in September, the Secretary of State wrote to  inform
    the parties and the Tribunal that she no longer has  any  objection  to
    the appeal of Mrs Savitri Parey being allowed under Appendix  FM  as  a
    spouse of  a  settled  person  following  sight  of  the  documentation
    provided.  In such circumstances the matter is referred back to  me  on
    the papers and the Appellant's appeal is consequently allowed under the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

