
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28321/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 September 2014                            |On 15 October 2014         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr shafiq Hussain
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State who was  respondent  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as  the  Secretary  of
    State) against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Camp
    promulgated 14 April 2014.  Judge Camp allowed the appeal of Mr  Shafiq
    Hussain, the appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter
    referred to as the respondent) against refusal of his  application  for
    leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the determination on
    20 May 2014.  FTTJ Molloy granted permission to appeal in the following
    terms:

         "The grounds of appeal record Judge Camp making  reference  to  the
         decision in, inter alia, Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct
         approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 and argue that although  he  has
         indicated  that  he  is  determined  that  there  were   compelling
         circumstances which required him to consider Article 8 of the Human
         Rights Convention outside the Immigration Rules, he did not address
         specifically what those  compelling  circumstances  were.   A  true
         construction of the material paragraphs of his decision  show  that
         Judge  Camp  did  not  expressly  set  out  what   the   compelling
         circumstances are.  Accordingly there is an arguable error  of  law
         upon a material matter."

 3. Mr Hussain also sought permission to appeal albeit out of time.  On  30
    June 2014 as First-tier Tribunal Judge I granted permission  to  appeal
    in the following terms:

         "The grounds submit the FTTJ erred in law by failing  to  make  any
         findings  under  the  Immigration   Rules   (Appendix   FM).    The
         explanation for the delay in applying for permission is because the
         appellant's representative wrongly thought the appellant's concerns
         about the determination could be accommodated in a Rule  24  notice
         following grant of permission to appeal  following  an  application
         made by the respondent.  However that is incorrect following EG and
         NG (UT Rule 17: withdrawal: Rule 24: scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT
         00143.  Although the appellant's representatives were mistaken  and
         that  is  no  excuse  for  the  significant  delay  in  making  the
         application for permission to appeal, given that the FTTJ  arguably
         erred in law in failing to make any findings under the  Immigration
         Rules, and given that the  respondent  already  has  permission  to
         appeal in relation  to  the  Article  8  findings,  it  is  in  the
         interests of justice that time should be extended so as  to  permit
         all the arguable errors of law  to  be  addressed.   Permission  to
         appeal out of  time  is  granted  and  the  application  is  hereby
         admitted.  The grounds submit the FTTJ erred in law by  failing  to
         make findings on the appellant's suitability for leave  to  remain.
         It can be seen from paragraph 10  of  the  determination  that  the
         parties agreed that  the  only  live  issue  was  the  question  of
         suitability.  The FTTJ then failed to make any findings in  respect
         of that live issue.  In failing  to  make  any  findings  the  FTTJ
         arguably erred in law.  The grounds may be argued."

The Secretary of State's Application

 4. The grounds submitted the FTTJ erred in law by failing to  specify  the
    compassionate circumstances which meant the appeal  should  be  allowed
    under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  In so doing the FTTJ
    misdirected himself as to the  guidance  of  the  Tribunal  in  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640.  The FTTJ failed to give adequate reasons  and  case
    specific findings that justify a departure from the Immigration  Rules.



 5. Before me the Secretary of State sought permission to widen her grounds
    of appeal to rely upon the following matters

      i) A material misdirection in law regarding  the  false  documentation
         she used to obtain  the  appellant's  visa;  the  FTTJ  misdirected
         himself as to a matter of law in relation to  AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]
         EWCA Civ 773.

     ii) A material misdirection in law concerning delay in removal.

    iii) A material misdirection in law in  connection  with  ZH  (Tanzania)
         [2011] UKSC 4.

 6. The Secretary of State submitted that if permission to appeal was to be
    granted that the respondent wished to withdraw the concession  made  at
    the appeal hearing that family life existed between the  appellant  and
    his son.

The Appellant's Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal out of time on the basis that
    the FTTJ failed to make  any  findings  or  reasoned  findings  on  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. After hearing submissions from both sides  permission  was  granted  to
    each party to appeal the determination of FTTJ Camp which was then  set
    aside by me and the matter came back before me to remake the  decision.
    The findings of fact made in favour of Mr Hussain, that he did not know
    the visa in his original passport  was  false;  and,  that  he  enjoyed
    family life with his son, were preserved.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

 9. Mr Jarvis submitted that having seen the appellant's  mobile  telephone
    with recent photographs he accepted the relationship between parent and
    child was ongoing.

10. In terms of the Immigration Rules the Secretary of State made plain  in
    the refusal dated 19 June 2013, that suitability requirements were  and
    are in place, specifically S-LTR.1.6. which says that the  presence  of
    Mr Hussain is not conducive to the  public  good  because  his  conduct
    including character, associations, or other reasons make it undesirable
    to allow him to remain.  The conduct referred to is the  making  of  an
    application for an NTL visa supported by false documents.

11. Mr Jarvis submitted that EX. 1 only comes into play if someone does not
    fall for refusal under the suitability requirements of Appendix FM.  It
    is the Secretary of State's case that EX.1 does not apply in this  case
    because Mr Hussain  in coming to the United Kingdom with a  false  visa
    in his passport - something which is  not  denied-  and  in  making  an
    application to the Secretary of State supported by a copy of the  false
    visa endorsement and with a false letter falls within  the  suitability
    criteria at S-LTR.1.6.  This is relevant and it is not a  discretionary
    matter.  In order to succeed Mr Nasim  would  have  to  show  that  the
    reliance upon S-LTR.1.6. by the Secretary of State was unlawful.

12. Mr Jarvis referred to the guidance  submitted  by  Mr  Nasim  regarding
    paragraph 320(19) of the Immigration Rules.  This is guidance issued to
    Entry Clearance Officers.  Mr Nasim will say that this guidance can  be
    read into the in country Rules.  This guidance does not say that use of
    a false document cannot be raised.  It only gives a non-exhaustive list
    of scenarios.  It is the Secretary of State's case  that  this  is  not
    specific guidance on S-LTR.1.6.  It does at one  end  of  the  spectrum
    talk about war crimes and the hiring of illegal workers  and  dishonest
    dealings with the government.  But Section 3 of the same page does  not
    limit the application.  Mr Jarvis submitted that my  assessment  of  S-
    LTR.1.6. should take into account that it cannot be said the use  of  a
    false visa documents in this case a false endorsement  in  a  passport,
    can never be raised as a  suitability  matter  under  S-LTR.1.6.   This
    means that Mr Hussain does not have access to EX.1.

13. Mr Jarvis submitted that the fact that Mr Hussain did  not  know  false
    documents had been used in support of the 2009 application  misses  the
    point.  AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  looked  at  the  interpretation  of   a   false
    representation.  But where it referred to false documents the Court  of
    Appeal was quick to agree with the Secretary of State's rationale,  see
    for example paragraph 67 which states

         "First, 'false representation' is aligned in the rule  with  'false
         document'.  It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a
         lie about itself.  Of course it is possible for a  person  to  make
         use of a false document (for instance a counterfeit currency  note,
         but that example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         in perfect honesty.  But the document itself is dishonest.   It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  applicant  uses  in  all
         innocence a false document  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance, or leave to enter or to remain, it is because some other
         party, it might be a parent, or sponsor, or agent, has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document.  The response of  a  requirement
         of  mandatory  refusal  is  entirely  understandable  in   such   a
         situation.  The mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used
         for such an important application is  understandably  a  sufficient
         reason for a mandatory refusal.  That is  why  the  rule  expressly
         emphasises that it applies  'whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
         knowledge'."

14. What the Court of Appeal have said in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ  773
    when looking at the question of a false document is that even where the
    falsity occurred because of some other party such as a parent or  third
    party, the response of mandatory refusal is entirely understandable.

15. Whether Mr Hussain knew that the documents were false is  relevant  but
    it is immaterial because it is accepted that false documents were  used
    in connection with the 2009 application.  The Secretary of State has  a
    general prohibition against the use of those documents.  To dilute  the
    suitability Rule S-LTR.1.6. by a  mens  rea  assessment  would  not  be
    warranted.  Case law including Ahmed Benabbas  [2005]  EWCA  Crim  2113
    makes it plain the use of false passports  has  a  serious  detrimental
    effect on immigration control and the fact  that  Mr  Hussain  was  not
    convicted or sentenced for entry to the United  Kingdom  with  a  false
    visa in his passport  is irrelevant.

16. Overall as a matter of law Mr Hussain  cannot  show  the  Secretary  of
    State cannot rely on use of a false document  under  S-LTR.1.6.  l  and
    this carries weight outside of the Immigration Rules too.

17. EX. 1 through the Rules is not in play which is a further aspect of the
    public interest under the Secretary of State's policy.   If  there  are
    eligibility or suitable issues one  does  not  get  to  rely  on  one's
    relationship with a child.  It is plain and obvious why that  would  be
    the case.

18. If a person fails to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    they can still argue  that  their  case  has  compelling  features.  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  Haleemudeen [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  is
    binding and makes clear failure to meet the requirements of Appendix FM
    is not the starting point.  It is more than that, a  person  must  show
    very compelling matters indeed.

19. In terms of private life rights, representations made about  delay  and
    failure to remove do not benefit Mr Hussain.   AZ  (Bangladesh)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 158 applies.  A three year delay  was  small  when  placed  in
    context.  The delay in this case does not outweigh the public  interest
    in removal.

20. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of Shou Lin
    Xu) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (legacy  cases  -
    "conclusion" issue) IJR [2014] UKUT 375 (IAC) makes it clear  that  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  those
    unlawfully in the UK will leave of their own accord.  The Secretary  of
    State is not obliged to issue a removal direction decision.  Mr Hussain
    should have left but did not.

21. If an assessment of Article 8  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    required, recent legislative changes to  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 incorporates a new section 117B.   The Act is aimed
    at the Tribunal.  Section 117B(6) does not  act  as  an  absolute  rule
    which means removal would be disproportionate.  Taking into account the
    unlawfulness of Mr Hussain's stay in the United Kingdom and the use  of
    false documents and the precariousness of his position,  the  Secretary
    of State says that removal is proportionate in this  case  even  taking
    into account his relationship with his child.

Mr Nasim's Submissions

22. Mr Nasim submitted there  was  no  issue  with  regard  to  suitability
    requirement.  The only issue between the parties  was  the  suitability
    requirement and whether  Mr  Hussain  should  be  excluded  because  of
    paragraph 1.6 because of  the  use  of  the  false  ILR  stamp  in  his
    passport.  The only guidance Mr Nasim had  been  able  to  find  is  in
    relation to paragraph 320(19) which has the precise wording in relation
    to conduct and character.  The guidance is very much clear and outlines
    the sort of cases for which the particular provision is relevant.   The
    wording of Appendix FM in relation to exclusion is similar to paragraph
    320(19).  For refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability  there  has  to  be
    something of a serious nature.  When one talks about whether  something
    is conducive to the public good there are  examples  about  threats  to
    national security and war crimes.  These are matters  that  are  really
    serious which will have  an  impact  on  foreign  policy  and  national
    security.

23. Mr Hussain was 22 years old when he arrived on the instructions of  his
    father.  Mr Hussain first became  aware  that  the  ILR  stamp  in  his
    passport was false when he lost his passport and asked for  a  transfer
    to the new passport. He was then informed that the copy endorsement and
    the letter he supplied with his application were counterfeit.

24. AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 773 was concerned with paragraph  320(7A)  where  someone  produces
    false documents when seeking entry clearance.  Paragraph  320  (7A)  is
    directed at Entry Clearance Officers.   In this case we do not  have  a
    copy of the  application  completed  by  the  appellant.   He  made  an
    application for the transfer of the stamp  that  had  been  in  a  lost
    passport.  He did not pursue that application once he had been informed
    the stamp was not genuine.  He was shocked.  He had no idea it was  not
    genuine.  In order to have made false representations an applicant must
    have deliberately practised deception  or  by  someone  acting  on  his
    behalf.

25. In Ahmed Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113 there were aggravating  factors
    and a recommendation for deportation.  There is no  recommendation  for
    deportation here and no issue about a false passport.  The passport was
    a genuine passport in Mr Hussain's name.  He was not pretending  to  be
    someone else.  He left Pakistan on his own  passport  endorsed  with  a
    false visa.  In  Ahmed Benabbas [2005] EWCA  Crim  2113  passports  had
    been stolen in an armed robbery.  The Court of Appeal were also looking
    at  whether  the  Crown  Court  judge  got  it  right  by  recommending
    deportation.

26. It is the primary submission  of  Mr  Hussain  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is not made out at all under the  suitability  requirement
    which is intended to be geared towards different circumstances and  the
    only guidance Mr Hussain can find is in relation to paragraph  320(19).
    The burden is on the Secretary of State and this has not been made  out
    at all.  The consequence for Mr Hussain would be permanent exclusion.

27. Mr Hussain's case about delay is important.  He is not suggesting  that
    he can remain because of delay by the Secretary of State.   Mr  Hussain
    made his application in 2011 and eventually had  to  bring  a  judicial
    review application to get a decision.  He did not want to  be  left  in
    limbo forever and it is not right for the Secretary of State to say  it
    is not conducive for him to remain here when she was quite  content  to
    leave him in limbo.  R (on the application of Shou Lin Xu) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (legacy cases  -  "conclusion"  issue)
    IJR [2014] UKUT 375 (IAC) is a different matter altogether.

28. At pages 21 and 22 of Mr Hussain's  bundle  is  the  refusal  dated  21
    December 2011.  This predates the changes to the Immigration Rules.  No
    issue was taken by the Secretary of State in terms  of  suitability  at
    that time and no issue was taken with his passport and the  first  time
    this was raised as an issue was in the 2013 refusal letter.

29. Mr Nasim submitted the Tribunal should exercise discretion in favour of
    Mr Hussain.  There was no  intention  by  Mr  Hussain  to  deceive  the
    Secretary of State.  Mr Nasim  submitted  that  Mr  Hussain  meets  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  He is an individual who has ties  to  the
    United Kingdom because he has a  British  child  with  whom  he  is  in
    contact and he has brothers  and  sisters  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    explained in his witness statement.  Application  of  S-LTR.1.6.  would
    result in permanent exclusion from the United Kingdom which  cannot  be
    right.  And there was no prosecution of Mr Hussain by the Secretary  of
    State.  Section 117 lists factors to take into  account  but  they  are
    just factors to take  into  account.   The  court  has  always  had  to
    consider these factors under Article 8 in any event.

30. Mr Hussain has a well-established family life.  He is not  excluded  by
    suitability requirements.  He meets the requirements of Appendix FM and
    it would be disproportionate if he is removed.  He  has  been  involved
    with his child since the child was born and the child is now 3 years of
    age.  The mother  has  children  from  previous  relationships  and  is
    dependent upon Mr Hussain in relation to financial support for his son.
     It is in his son's best interests for Mr  Hussain  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

Decision

31. The suitability criteria relied  upon  by  the  respondent  is  in  the
    following terms:

    S-LTR. 1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not fall within paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 to 1.5,  character,  associations,
    or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to  remain  in  the
    UK.

32. On 4 September 2009 Mr Hussain applied to the Secretary of State for  a
    No Time Limit  (NTL) endorsement to be placed in his new  passport.  In
    support of this application he provided a copy of an  endorsement  from
    his previous passport  and  a  letter  which  were  both  found  to  be
    counterfeit. It is the Secretary  of  State's  case  that  Mr  Husain's
    presence is not conducive to  the  public  good  because  his  conduct,
    character, associations or other reasons make it undesirable  to  allow
    him to remain in the United Kingdom.

33. Reliance has been placed upon  R (on the application of Shou Lin Xu)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (legacy cases - "conclusion"
     issue) IJR [2014] UKUT 375 (IAC).  Mr Hussain did not leave the United
    Kingdom when he knew he had no lawful basis to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

34. In the First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp found that  Mr  Hussain  did  not
    know the endorsement in his previous passport was false. Had  he  known
    about it he would hardly have gone to the  Secretary  of  State  for  a
    replacement to be endorsed into his new passport.

35. The Secretary of State has a general prohibition on the  use  of  false
    documents in connection with applications for entry clearance something
    approved of in the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State
    for the Home department [2010] EWCA Civ 773 where the court found  that
    when looking at the question  of  a  false  document,  even  where  the
    falsity occurred because  of  the  action  of  some  other  party,  the
    response of mandatory refusal was entirely understandable.  By  analogy
    the Secretary of State was properly entitled to reject the  application
    for an NTL endorsement because two false documents  were  relied  upon.
    It does not matter that Mr Hussain did not know about the  falsity.   I
    find that the Secretary of State was entitled to rely on the production
    of two false  documents  in  support  of  an  application  for  an  NTL
    endorsement as  conduct  falling  for  refusal  under  the  suitability
    requirements of S-LTR 1.6.  I find that Mr Hussain's  conduct  includes
    remaining unlawfully in the United Kingdom once he knew he had no right
    to  remain  from  December  2009.  At  that  stage  he   was   not   an
    impressionable 22 year old young man sent away by  his  father  to  the
    United Kingdom, but an adult aged 27 who should  have  done  the  right
    thing and left the United Kingdom as soon as he knew he had no leave to
    remain.

36. I therefore  find that the Secretary of State is entitled to   rely  on
    the production of false documents in connection with an application for
    an NTL endorsement under S-LTR 1.6.

37. Having found that the Secretary of State was right to refuse Mr Hussain
    on grounds of suitability I find that EX.1 is not accessible under  the
    Immigration Rules  to Mr Hussain and in coming  to  this  conclusion  I
    apply  Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014]  UKUT  00063
    (IAC).

38. I find that the reliance by the Secretary of State on S-LTR 1.6 is  not
    unlawful. I find that the use of  false documents in an application for
    an NTL endorsement  can be  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    notwithstanding that Mr Hussain knew nothing of  the  falsity.  I  find
    that there is no route by which Mr  Husain  is  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM and the Immigration Rules.

Article 8

39. MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 makes it clear that failure  to  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules may not be  the  end  of  the
    matter. If Mr Hussain can show compelling circumstances he is  entitled
    to have his appeal considered outside of the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8.

40. At �40-47 of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 Beatson LJ found:
   1. I, however, consider that the FTT Judge did err in his approach to
      Article 8. This is because he did not consider Mr. Haleemudeen's case
      for remaining in the United Kingdom on the basis of his private and
      family life against the Secretary of State's policy as contained in
      Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. These new
      provisions in the Immigration Rules are a central part of the
      legislative and policy context in which the interests of immigration
      control are balanced against the interests and rights of people who
      have come to this country and wish to settle in it. Overall the
      Secretary of State's policy as to when an interference with an Article
      8 right will be regarded as disproportionate is more particularised in
      the new Rules than it had previously been. The new Rules require
      stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave will be given
      under them. The features of the policy contained in the Rules include
      the requirements of twenty year residence, that the applicant's
      partner be a British citizen in the United Kingdom, settled here, or
      here with leave as a refugee or humanitarian protection, and that
      where the basis of the application rests on the applicant's children
      that they have been residents for seven years.
   1. The FTT's decision on Mr Haleemudeen's Article 8 appeal is contained
      in [34]-[41], which I summarised and set out in part at [21] - [23]
      above. Those paragraphs do not refer, either expressly or implicitly,
      to paragraph 276ADE of the rules or to Appendix FM. None of the new
      more particularised features of the policy are identified or even
      referred to in general terms. The only reference to the provisions is
      in the FTT's summary (at [30]) of Mr. Richardson's submission that the
      reference to the new Rules in the refusal letter was of little
      relevance because at the time of Mr. Haleemudeen's application those
      Rules had not been promulgated and thus did not apply to his case.
      That submission could not succeed in view of the decision of the House
      of Lords in Odelola's case, to which I refer at [25] above.
   1. The authorities make it clear that the focus of any assessment of
      whether an interference with private life pursuant to the requirements
      of immigration control is proportionate should be whether the
      Secretary of State's decision is in accordance with those provisions.
      See in particular the decisions of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      of the Upper Tribunal, presided over by its then President, Blake J,
      in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45
      at [40] and [42]-[43], of Sales J in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State
      for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at [26] and [29]-[31],
      and of this court in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, reported at [2014] 1 WLR 544 at [44]-
      [46].
   1. In Nagre's case Sales J stated (at [26] and [29]) that it is necessary
      to find "particular factors in individual cases ... of especially
      compelling force in favour of a grant of leave to remain" even though
      those factors are not fully reflected in and dealt with in the new
      Rules and "to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not
      sufficiently recognised under the new rules to require the grant of
      such leave". In MF (Nigeria), albeit in the context of deportation and
      Article 8, this court stated (at [44]]) that the Rules are "a complete
      code", and that the provision in paragraph 398(c) that where the
      exceptions to mandatory deportation in paragraphs 399 and 399A do not
      apply, "it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
      interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors" involves
      the application of a proportionality test as required by the
      Strasbourg jurisprudence".
   1. Mr. Richardson's preferred position was that the Rules are only the
      starting point for an assessment of proportionality. It was with
      evident reluctance that he accepted that, at least in this court, in
      the light of the authorities, it is necessary to find "compelling
      circumstances" for going outside the Rules. But he argued that, even
      on that basis, it was wrong to criticise the decision of the FTT in
      this case. He submitted that the FTT was aware of the changes to the
      Rules in relation to the consideration of Article 8, had referred to
      the new Rules at [30] when summarising his submissions, and at [39]
      referred to their "apparent harshness". The FTT judge did this before
      considering the question of the proportionality of the interference
      with Mr Haleemudeen's Article 8 rights outside the Rules and under the
      general law.
   1. He submitted that the FTT then considered proportionality in
      accordance with the approach laid down by the House of Lords in Huang
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, reported
      at [2007] 2 AC 167 at [16] - [17]. It weighed the factors in favour of
      and against removal according "appropriate weight to the judgment of
      [the] person with responsibility for a given subject-matter and access
      to special sources of knowledge and advice".
   1. Mr Richardson also submitted that the penultimate sentence of [39] of
      the FTT's decision (set out at [23] above) showed that the reference
      to "apparent harshness" was a reference to the operation of the Rules
      and a reflection of the level of interference with Mr Haleemudeen's
      private life because of the particular factors in his case rather than
      to the Rules themselves. It was, he contended, a statement that, in
      the particular circumstances of Mr Haleemudeen and his family, the
      Rules worked harshly against them. He submitted that it was a
      statement which satisfied the "compelling" or "exceptional"
      circumstances requirement for going outside the Rules and was not an
      application of the impermissible "near miss" approach.
   1. I do not accept these submissions. The passages from the judgments in
      the cases of Nagre and MF (Nigeria) appear to give the Rules greater
      weight than as merely a starting point for the consideration of the
      proportionality of an interference with Article 8 rights. But, even if
      Mr Richardson is correct to characterise the relevance of the Rules as
      only a starting point, the single reference in [39] of the FTT's
      decision to "apparent harshness" does not in my judgment suffice. I do
      not consider that it is necessary to use the terms "exceptional" or
      "compelling" to describe the circumstances, and it will suffice if
      that can be said to be the substance of the tribunal's decision. In
      this case, as I have stated, the FTT gave no explanation of why this
      is so, or identified particular features of Mr Haleemudeen's case
      which justified considering proportionality outside the Rules.

41. This very recent Court of Appeal decision makes  it  clear  that  there
    must be particular features which justify  considering  proportionality
    under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

42. Mr Nasim submits those features are the contact that Mr Hussain  enjoys
    with his son, the assistance he provides for his  upbringing  which  is
    more than just financial and, the best interests of Thomas to  have  an
    ongoing relationship with his father. It  is  also  submitted  that  Mr
    Hussain has been prejudiced by delay in his removal and  delay  by  the
    Secretary of State in taking an appealable decision on his case. Lastly
    Mr Hussain did not know about the false visa in his passport.

43.  There  was  no  delay  in  taking  any  decisions  on   Mr   Hussain's
    applications. The Secretary of State refused his application for an NTL
    endorsement in December 2009  two  months  after  the  application  was
    made. In   October 2011 Mr Hussain applied for leave to remain  outside
    of the Immigration Rules which was properly refused with  no  right  of
    appeal in December 2011. Mr Hussain  chose  not  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and in due course made an application for  Judicial  Review  to
    force the Secretary of State to give him a decision which included  the
    right to an in-country right of appeal. The Judicial Review application
    was settled in March 2013 and the new  appealable  decision  issued  in
    June 2013. Any arguments that there have been delays by  the  Secretary
    of State are not sustainable. It is settled law  that  arguments  about
    delay and failure to remove do not assist Mr Hussain.  AZ  (Bangladesh)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 158  and R (on  the  application  of  Shou  Lin  Xu)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (legacy cases - "conclusion"
     issue) IJR [2014] UKUT 375 (IAC)apply.

44. Following the discovery that he was in the United Kingdom unlawfully in
    December 2009, Mr Hussain did  not  respect  the  laws  of  the  United
    Kingdom and leave and return to Pakistan as he should have done. In the
    full knowledge his  immigration  status  was  precarious  he  formed  a
    relationship with Lyndsey Kingston  and  conceived  a  child  born  3rd
    August 2011.

45. I find that there are no circumstances in  this  appeal  which  require
    consideration of proportionality outside of the Immigration  Rules.  Mr
    Hussain is not the first and will not be the last illegal immigrant  to
    foster a relationship and conceive a child in the  full  knowledge  his
    immigration status was precarious and that he had no right to be in the
    United Kingdom.  He does not live with his son. The  relationship  with
    the mother has broken down.  Thomas is still very young. There  was  no
    evidence before the Tribunal about Thomas's attachment  to  his  father
    from either Lyndsey Kingston or  any  professional  such  as  a  social
    worker. The best interests of Thomas do require his father to remain in
    the United Kingdom  but  there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  Mr
    Hussain's removal. The public interest and the respondent's  policy  is
    reflected in  the  Immigration  Rules.   They  take  into  account  the
    existence of children. Mr Hussain does not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.

46. It is not necessary for me to consider the new  Section  117B   of  the
    2002 Act because this is not a case where any consideration of  Article
    8 outside of the Immigration Rules is required.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Signed                              15 October 2014

Judge E B Grant
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

