
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28997/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th June 2014                               |On 9th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                           miss Syeda Rahela Begum
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pararajasingam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to vary  her  leave
    to remain was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  ("the
    judge") in a determination promulgated on 27th March 2014.  She entered
    the United Kingdom on 10th October 2012, with leave as a visitor  which
    was valid from 2nd September that year until 2nd March 2013.  On  about
    28th February 2013 she applied  for  further  leave  to  remain,  on  a
    discretionary basis.  The Secretary of State refused  that  application
    on 26th June 2013 and, at the same time, refused to vary her leave.

2.   The Secretary of State considered the application,  which  was  put  on
    the basis that the appellant was pregnant and could not  safely  return
    to Bangladesh, under Appendix FM of the rules.  The appellant could not
    succeed as she and her partner had not been in a relationship  akin  to
    marriage for at least two years and  she  was  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  She could not benefit from EX.1 as she failed to
    meet certain eligibility requirements contained in the rules.   In  any
    event, there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant enjoying
    family life outside the United Kingdom.  The Secretary  of  State  also
    found that the appellant could not succeed under  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the rules.  Insofar as her case amounted to a claim to be  entitled  to
    international protection, the Secretary of State advised the  appellant
    to approach the Asylum Screening Unit.

3.   The judge made  findings  of  fact,  having  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant, her partner and her partner's mother.  The judge noted  that
    the application for leave was  made  on  form  FLR(O).   The  appellant
    discovered that she was pregnant,  carrying  her  partner's  child,  in
    November 2012.  The judge accepted that the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her partner was a genuine one, as had  the  Secretary  of
    State.  By the time of the hearing, the appellant had given birth to  a
    daughter.  So far as the rules are concerned, the judge found that  the
    appellant could not meet the  requirement  contained  in  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.2.1 and that she was not a partner within the meaning  of  section
    GEN.1.2.  He went on to make an Article 8 assessment, noting  that  the
    appellant  still  maintained  that  as  she  had  given  birth  outside
    marriage, she would  be  ostracised  by  her  community  on  return  to
    Bangladesh and would have nowhere to return to because her  family  had
    disowned her.  The judge made a  clear  finding  that  the  appellant's
    claim to have become pregnant outside marriage  was  simply  not  true.
    She and her partner had gone through an Islamic marriage ceremony which
    was, found the judge, consistent with the norms of her culture  and  so
    she would be viewed as a married woman at the time she gave birth.  The
    judge disbelieved the appellant's claim that she had  not  had  contact
    with her family since  her  mother  left  the  United  Kingdom,  having
    accompanied the appellant on entry here in October 2012.   The  reasons
    given by the appellant for not wishing to  return  to  Bangladesh  were
    that her young child had to  remain  here  to  complete  a  vaccination
    course and that her husband was born  and  brought  up  in  the  United
    Kingdom and would not wish to  live  in  Bangladesh  permanently.   The
    judge found that any interruption in the appellant's family life caused
    by her removal to Bangladesh would be only for a minimal  period.   She
    could apply for a visa to return here with her child, from  Bangladesh.
    There would be no need for her husband or her child to remain there  in
    the long-term.  In view of the child's age, her welfare  would  not  be
    affected by return to Bangladesh with her  mother.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

4.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that  the  judge  "was  misdirected  in  evaluating"  the
    "violation to Article 8 rights" of the  appellant,  her  daughter,  her
    spouse and other relatives.  It was disproportionate  to  "insist  upon
    immigration control (removal) despite the degree of  interference  this
    would cause."  Immigration control in this context was described in the
    grounds as a bureaucratic exercise that would require the appellant and
    her child to return to Bangladesh simply  to  make  an  application  to
    return here.  The length  of  separation  of  the  family  members  was
    unknown.  The public interest in immigration control  amounted  to  "an
    appropriate and politically correct tag", whereas in fact  there  would
    be no positive benefit to immigration control.  Mention was made in the
    grounds of delay, in the light of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41  (although
    there has been no substantial delay, the Secretary  of  State  deciding
    the application only four months after it was made).

5.   The author of the grounds  noted  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    marriage was genuine.  The appellant lived  with  her  spouse  and  her
    spouse's mother and sisters.  Reliance was placed upon Chikwamba [2008]
    UKHL 40 and on Huang [2007] UKHL 27.  The author of  the  grounds  also
    drew attention to Article 20 of the TFEU, describing the appellant as a
    primary carer with nobody else able to provide care for  her  daughter.
    Precluding the appellant from remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  would
    hinder her daughter's right to exercise treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Reliance was placed upon Zambrano [C-34/0].

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 7 May 2014.  In a rule 24  response
    made by the Secretary of State in the same month, it was submitted that
    the judge directed himself appropriately and made no material error  of
    law.  The case of Chikwamba had been to an extent overtaken by  changes
    in the Immigration Rules and guidance from the Court of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Ms Pararajasingam  said  that  the  judge  found  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances showing  that  an  Article  8  assessment  was
    required.  The judge had  not  properly  considered  the  compassionate
    circumstances in the case, concerning the child, the marriage  and  the
    relationship.  Expecting the appellant to return to Bangladesh with her
    child would amount to a serious breach of their  human  rights.   There
    would be a separation of the appellant and her daughter from her spouse
    and the period of separation  would  be  uncertain.   The  child  would
    suffer.  The judge had erred  in  law.   Article  8  should  have  been
    considered outside the rules and the appellant should have been allowed
    to stay in the United Kingdom.  This was so even though she arrived  as
    a visitor.  It would be in  her  child's  best  interests  for  her  to
    remain.

8.   Ms Isherwood said that the  judge  had  made  no  material  error.   He
    assessed the best interests of the  child.   He  also  found  that  the
    appellant had not told the truth regarding contact with her  family  in
    Bangladesh and her family circumstances  generally.   Family  life  had
    been  established  in  this  case  while  the  appellant's  status  was
    precarious and this was legally relevant in the light of Nagre.  It was
    clear that the requirements of the rules were not met.   The  appellant
    put in her application for further  leave  on  a  discretionary  basis,
    while present as a visitor.

9.   Ms Isherwood said that Chikwamba was decided before the recent  changes
    in the rules and there was now  a  different  emphasis  on  the  public
    interest. The only salient feature in  the  appellant's  case  was  the
    birth of her daughter but the judge had  fully  considered  this.   Two
    reasons were offered by the appellant at the hearing, showing  why  she
    could not return to Bangladesh.  The judge dealt with both of them.  He
    concluded that the child would be viewed as the outcome of  an  Islamic
    marriage.  He was fully aware of the family circumstances and took into
    account the Secretary of State's finding that the requirements  of  the
    rules were not met and  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  leave  was
    justified outside the rules.   So  far  as  delay  following  an  entry
    clearance application was concerned,  there  was  no  evidence  showing
    precisely how long this would be.

10.  Ms Pararajasingam said that there were compassionate  circumstances  in
    the case.  If the judge had properly considered the  wellbeing  of  the
    child and the need to maintain the family as  a  unit,  he  would  have
    carried out  an  Article  8  exercise  outside  the  rules.   Moreover,
    Chikwamba was not displaced by the further codification of the rules in
    the Article 8 context.  Even if  there  were  no  delay  in  the  entry
    clearance application, no legitimate aim would be pursued.   Given  the
    birth of the child and her British  nationality,  the  guidance  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) had weight.  The mother of the child would  return  only  to
    make an application.  It would be in the best interests of her daughter
    to enable her to make that application here and to remain.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  Having considered the competing submissions carefully, I conclude  that
    no material error of law has been shown in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The determination is carefully reasoned and it is clear
    that the judge had all the salient features of the appellant's case  in
    mind.  The determination contains a careful  summary  of  the  evidence
    given by the appellant and her two witnesses.   He  accepted  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and her partner was genuine.  He was
    entitled to find, in the light of the evidence, that the appellant  and
    her partner were married in an Islamic ceremony and that the  appellant
    would be viewed as a married woman in Bangladeshi society.   The  judge
    disbelieved core claims made by the appellant  that  she  had  not  had
    contact with her family since her mother left the United Kingdom in the
    autumn of 2012.  Overall,  I  find  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude, as he put it, that the appellant invented a story  of  having
    given birth outside wedlock, to justify her desire  not  to  return  to
    Bangladesh for a visa.

12.  The judge's reasoning in relation to the rules  is  clear  and  cogent.
    He was entitled to find that the relevant requirements were simply  not
    met, not least because the appellant was a visitor when  she  made  her
    application for further leave.  There is  a  clear  and  strong  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control.   As  Ms  Isherwood
    submitted, since 9 July 2012 the rules have sought to  encapsulate  all
    relevant features of Article 8 and to make explicit  the  Secretary  of
    State's view of where the balance should lie when  competing  interests
    are weighed.  The guidance given in Chikwamba has  not,  however,  been
    superseded by the rules.  Nonetheless, that case does not  establish  a
    hard and fast rule and the nationality of the appellant's  partner  and
    her young daughter, although relevant factors, are  not  determinative.
    In  the  present  appeal,  the  judge's  assessment   of   the   family
    circumstances overall was, again, thorough and well-reasoned and he had
    clearly  in  mind  the  nationality  of  the  appellant's  daughter  in
    particular.  His  finding  that  any  period  of  separation  would  be
    temporary was manifestly open to him,  as  was  his  finding  that  the
    welfare of the child  would  not  be  adversely  affected.   The  judge
    carefully dealt with the two reasons offered by the appellant  for  not
    wishing to return to Bangladesh and he was entitled, for the reasons he
    gave, to find that neither had any real substance at all.   There  were
    matters of real weight to be placed in the balance  in  favour  of  the
    respondent, as the judge clearly found.

13.  So far as Ms Pararajasingam's submission that the judge  erred  in  law
    in failing to make  an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the  rules  is
    concerned, I find that even if he did err in this context, there was no
    material error.  This is because the careful assessment of the evidence
    at paragraphs 30 to 37, and the findings of fact  made  by  the  judge,
    show that even if he had  expressly  made  an  assessment  outside  the
    rules, the conclusion would have been the same.  The appellant and  her
    partner were Islamically married and so she would  not  be  seen  as  a
    person who  had  given  birth  out  of  wedlock,  following  return  to
    Bangladesh in order to apply for entry clearance.  He  disbelieved  her
    core claims  regarding  contact  with  her  family  and  there  was  no
    substance to the reasons she offered for not wishing  to  return.   Any
    period of separation would be temporary and there would be no  need  at
    all for her husband to relocate to Bangladesh long-term or permanently,
    should he wish to accompany her for a temporary period.  Her daughter's
    welfare would not be adversely  affected.   These  findings  show  that
    there was very little to put in the balance on  the  appellant's  side,
    against the Secretary of State's case that the strong  public  interest
    in maintaining immigration control justified the adverse  decision  and
    showed that it amounted to a proportionate response.

14.  In summary, I find that the judge made no material  error  of  law  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  error
    of law, shall stand.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
