
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th November 2017                 |On 8th December 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                               Mr Tahir Siddiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Elegant
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Onoufriou promulgated on 20th January 2017, in which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    dated 26th June 2014 to refuse his application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the grounds that to remove him  would  not  place
    the United Kingdom in breach of  its  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. At the appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the Appellant has been
    represented by Mr Richardson of Counsel and  the  Respondent  has  been
    represented by Mr Melvin, the Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    Permission to appeal had been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig  on
    20th September 2017, who found that it was arguable that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's finding that it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect
    the Appellant's child, who is a British citizen, to leave  the  UK  was
    inadequately reasoned.

 3. In considering this appeal I have considered all of  the  evidence  and
    the submissions before making any findings. I have fully taken  account
    of the grounds in  support  of  permission  to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission, the Rule 24 reply from the Secretary of State, the  further
    submissions made in writing on Section 117B by Mr Richardson,  together
    with the oral submissions made by both legal representatives today.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal state that the Appellant  and  his  wife  have  a
    British citizen child who was born on 27th August 2016.  It was  argued
    that the judge failed to take account properly of the  Zambrano  issue.
    It was argued that the judge, although he referred to the cases  of  AQ
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ
    250 and the case of Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 0048 and the case of Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)
    [2013] UKUT 0045, did not make a final ruling given the cases of CS and
    Marin, which were pending before the European Court of Justice.  It was
    argued that the judge misunderstood the ratios of CS and  AQ  (Nigeria)
    and the submissions made in respect of those cases and  that  this  was
    not a case involving deportation involving serious criminality.

 5. It was argued in the grounds of appeal that the  judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 22 that 'ignoring Zambrano for the moment' is a matter  which
    is said to be utterly irrational and that he  cannot  when  considering
    removing the child disregard important principles of law and  that  the
    judge has failed to deal properly with Zambrano.  It  was  argued  that
    the judge erred in finding that there were no exceptional circumstances
    in the case, as it involved a British citizen child, such  as  to  mean
    that Article 8 was clearly engaged.

 6. Within Mr Richardson's written submissions he goes further and seeks to
    argue that if an  Appellant  enjoys  a  parental  relationship  with  a
    British child, he in fact cannot be removed from the UK and relies upon
    the case of SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT
    120. He refers to Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, which states that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

 7. He argues that a qualifying child under Section 117D includes a British
    citizen or a child who has lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of
    seven years or more, and it was submitted that it the  public  interest
    did not require the Appellant's removal  as  he  is  the  father  of  a
    qualifying child and that it would not  reasonable  for  the  child  to
    relocate, because the child is a British citizen.   He  relied  on  the
    concession of the Secretary of State previously made  in  the  case  of
    Sanade, that it was not possible to require a  British  citizen  or  EU
    child to relocate outside  the  European  Union.  Mr  Melvin,  however,
    informs me that such concession has in fact since been withdrawn by the
    Secretary of State.

 8. It was argued by the Appellant that the case must be  assessed  on  the
    basis that it would be unreasonable to expect a British  citizen  child
    to leave the Union with that parent  or  primary  carer  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's  own  policy  under  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes"  from  August
    2015, was considered by the court in the case of SF and others and that
    the policy states that:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

 9. The policy it goes on to state:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

10. However, as was conceded by Mr Richardson, in this case the  policy  of
    the Secretary of State was not actually  referred  to  the  Immigration
    Judge in this case by either side  and  clearly  it  was  not  strictly
    therefore an argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
    policy in itself meant that it would not be reasonable to  expect  this
    British citizen child to leave the EU with his parents.

11. The judge at paragraph 22 noted that the Appellant did have  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a  child  who  is  a  British
    citizen in the UK under the age of  18  and  likewise  found  that  the
    Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner in
    the UK who is a British citizen.   However,  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    judge went on to find that in respect of his  marital  relationship  he
    did not consider that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing with his wife in Pakistan, as they  are  both  familiar
    with the culture and they have family  there  and  he  noted  that  the
    Appellant's wife was originally born and raised in Pakistan.

12. The judge went on to state:

         "Ignoring Zambrano for the moment I do not consider that  it  would
         not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   The  child
         is not yet 6 months old and there are no health  issues  that  have
         been raised so there would be no  difficulty  in  the  child  being
         raised in Pakistan as, in  effect,  it  currently  knows  no  other
         culture."

13. The judge then went on in paragraph 23 to find that:

         "In Zambrano the facts of the case were that the Appellant was  the
         primary carer of an EU citizen and therefore if that individual was
         required to leave the EU necessitating the EU citizen to leave with
         them, thereby depriving the EU citizen of their  rights  as  an  EU
         citizen then that requirement by the member state is prohibited  as
         determined in CS.  However, I note that the care of  the  child  is
         shared between the Appellant and his wife.   If  the  Appellant  is
         removed from the United Kingdom his wife does not  have  to  follow
         him and consequently nor does his child.  The child will still have
         a primary carer in the form of his mother.  I therefore distinguish
         the facts of the case before me with those in Zambrano and CS."

14. The judge then went on to consider the matter under Article  8  outside
    of the Immigration Rules and  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances and that the Appellant and his wife  were  aware  of  the
    precarious immigration status.  He noted that the family would be split
    if the Appellant was returned and his wife and child remained here, but
    he found that this was a regrettable result of  the  need  to  maintain
    effective immigration control, which he did not  consider  would  be  a
    disproportionate application in the case. The judge  found  that  there
    was nothing preventing the Appellant from applying for entry  clearance
    to return as the spouse of a person present and settled here.

15. He went on to find:

         "I have noted Section 117Bf(6) of  the  2002  Act,  but  I  do  not
         consider it would not be reasonable to expect his  child  to  leave
         the United Kingdom with him for the reasons I have  already  given.
         Likewise, I have already pointed out that his wife and child do not
         have to follow him to Pakistan."

16. In respect of the judge's findings regarding EX.1, Mr Richardson  quite
    properly concedes that EX.1 could not  be  met  in  any  event  as  the
    Appellant  did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  his  child  under
    paragraph E-LTRP.2.3 of the Immigration Rules and in  effect  therefore
    the judge was simply considering the appeal outside of the  Immigration
    Rules. But in respect of whether or not it is reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the UK it is clear from paragraph 22,  in  my  judgment,
    although at the start of that paragraph  the  judge  accepts  that  the
    Appellant does have a parental relationship  with  a  child  who  is  a
    British citizen in the UK and under the age of 18 when  considering  or
    not whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK he has
    then, as he stated, ignored the Zambrano issue and  simply  found  that
    "the child is not yet 6 months old and there are no health issues  that
    have been raised so there would be no difficulty  in  the  child  being
    raised in Pakistan as apparently it currently knows no other culture".

17. Those are the reasons given by the judge as to why he says it would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  He seems  to  fail  to
    take into account in that regard of  the  fact  that  the  child  is  a
    British citizen and that the mother also is a British citizen, so  when
    considering Section 117B(6) in terms of whether it would be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the UK and in fact the judge  relies  upon
    the reasons already given.  In that regard he  fails  to  take  account
    entirely of the fact that this was a British citizen  child.  The  fact
    that the child was a British citizen has to be taken into account  when
    considering reasonableness and one cannot simply ignore in that  regard
    when making the initial findings, the Zambrano issue.

18. The judge at paragraph 22 goes on to note that the care  of  the  child
    was shared between the Appellant and his wife and that if the Appellant
    is removed from the United Kingdom his wife does not have to follow him
    and consequently nor does his child.   The  child  will  still  have  a
    primary carer in the form of his mother.

19. However, in the case of Chavez-Vilchez and Others v  Raad  van  bestuur
    van de Sociale verzekeringsbank and Others C-133/15 it was held that it
    is important to determine which parent was the  primary  carer  of  the
    child and whether in  fact  there  was  a  relationship  of  dependency
    between the child and that parent.  As  part  of  that  assessment  the
    authorities should take into account the right to  respect  for  family
    life as per Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, to be  read
    in conjunction with the obligation to take into consideration the  best
    interests of the child.  That the other parent, a  Union  citizen,  was
    actually able and willing to take responsibility for the  child  was  a
    relevant factor, but was not a sufficient ground for a conclusion  that
    there was not as between the  third  country  national  parent  such  a
    relationship of dependency that the child would indeed be compelled  to
    leave the EU, if the third country national were refused the  right  of
    residence.   Such  an  assessment  must  take  into  account  the  best
    interests of the child concerned, of all  the  specific  circumstances,
    including the age of the child,  the  child's  physical  and  emotional
    development, the extent of his emotional ties to both parents  and  the
    risks which separation from the third country parent might  entail  for
    the child's equilibrium.".

20. In this case the question as to what the actual effects  on  the  child
    will be is in terms of any separation and  whether  in  fact  obviously
    that the child would in fact be forced to leave the EU if the Appellant
    were removed has not been considered by the judge.   The  judge  simply
    seems to find that the fact that the Appellant is married to a  British
    citizen wife who would stay with the child in  itself  means  that  the
    Appellant does not have to leave.

21. The judge's reasoning in that regard has not properly considered all of
    the circumstances and simply seems to make an assumption that the  fact
    that there is a British citizen mother simply means the child does  not
    have to leave the EU.  I find it is actually clear following the recent
    developments in the Zambrano principle that that  is  not  an  adequate
    consideration of that issue, and as  to  whether  or  not  the  British
    Citizen child would in fact be effectively forced to leave the EU.

22. Nor has the judge really considered the issue as to whether or  not  it
    is reasonable for the family to be split in order for the Appellant  to
    return to make an application for entry clearance.   The  judge  simply
    said that the family will be split if the Appellant were  returned  and
    his wife and child remained but "this regrettable result of the need to
    maintain effective immigration control in respect of  which  I  do  not
    consider would be a disproportionate application  in  this  case".   No
    adequate reason has been given in that regard  as  to  why  the  public
    interest would mean that when an Appellant does have a wife and British
    citizen child that following the Zambrano principle the child should be
    split from one parent  in  order  for  that  application  to  be  made.
    Adequate reasons have not been given in that regard.

23. I do find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou does
    contain material errors of law and I set aside that decision.  I  remit
    the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before any  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Onoufriou.
    However, the judge's findings regarding the ETS  scores  had  not  been
    dishonestly obtained and the judge's findings that  the  Appellant  was
    genuine and his test results were invalid because ETS  Global  UK  were
    unable to authenticate them and the judge's findings that the appellant
    did meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM  and  he  met  the
    eligibility requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.1.2 to 1.12 and 2.1 should
    be preserved, as those findings were not  challenged  before  me.   The
    findings that the Appellant had not utilised a proxy and therefore  not
    utilised deception in obtaining his ETS scores has not been  challenged
    by the Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal and are maintained.

24. I also preserve, as agreed by Mr Melvin on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State, the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant
    has a subsisting parental relationship with a child who  is  a  British
    citizen in the UK and who is under the age of 18 and that  likewise  he
    is a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner  who  lives  in
    the UK  and  a  British  citizen.   Subject  to  those  findings  being
    preserved I do not preserve any other findings of fact and  the  extent
    and nature of the relationship with the British citizen child  and  the
    effect on the child still need to be determined  when  considering  the
    Article 8 issue and the question of reasonableness  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou  does  contain  material
errors of law and I set  aside  that  decision,  subject  to  the  preserved
findings of fact stated within paragraphs 23 and 24 above.

The case is remitted back to the first-tier tribunal  for  rehearing  before
any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
Onoufriou.

No anonymity direction is made, no such order having been sought  before  me
and the circumstances of the case not meriting anonymity.

Signed                                  Date 14th November 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

