
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28715/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS AGNES SEWDAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel instructed by Pillai
                    & Jones Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal T Judge M R
    Oliver (hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ), promulgated  on  10  July
    2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Landes on 1 October 2015.

    Background


 3. The respondent was granted limited leave to enter the United Kingdom as
    a visitor from 24 February 2002 until 4 August 2002.  She  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a volunteer until 13 August  2004.  She  was
    refused further grants of leave on 18 October 2004 and 25 October 2004.
    An application made for leave outside the Rules  was  granted  until  5
    July 2006. A number of further applications  were  either  rejected  as
    invalid or refused thereafter. The last such application,  made  on  15
    February 2011, was refused on 26 June 2014.

 4. According to the reasons for refusal letter, there were no  suitability
    concerns and therefore the respondent's case was considered in relation
    to family life as a partner  or  parent.  Nonetheless,  the  respondent
    could not meet the eligibility requirements in either category, as  she
    had not informed the Home Office that she had a partner or  child.  The
    appellant's case was also said to fall outside paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Rules and there said to be no exceptional  circumstances.  In  essence,
    the respondent was considered to be an overstayer  who  ought  to  have
    returned to her country where there were no  circumstances  beyond  her
    control preventing her from returning there.

 5. In her grounds of appeal, the respondent argued  that  her  application
    was wrongly decided under the new Immigration Rules. Reference was made
    to the respondent's family life with the children of her  nephew,  whom
    she was said to have raised since birth and whose parents  depended  on
    the respondent in order to work. It was also said that  the  respondent
    had no ties to her country  of  origin  and  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE. In addition, she was described as "an  old  lady,  of
    fragile health with no  other  family  or  ties  with  her  country  of
    origin."

    The hearing before the FTTJ

 6. The FTTJ noted that the respondent had initially applied for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds on 3 December 2010. She had sent letters
    from her nephew, his wife and their children with the  application  for
    reconsideration of that decision. The FTTJ decided that the decision of
    26 June 2014 was not in accordance with the law because the application
    was made before the introduction of the new Article  8  Rules  of  July
    2012. He therefore remitted the matter to the  Secretary  of  State  to
    make a lawful decision.

    Error of law


 7. The grounds of  appeal  argue  that  the  FTTJ  materially  misdirected
    himself because of the effect of the decision in Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74. The decision in this case did  not  fall  within  the  two
    month

 8. FTTJ Chamberlain granted permission, finding there to  be  an  arguable
    error of law for the FTTJ not to consider the appellant's  family  life
    with his wife outside the Rules and also not to consider  section  117B
    of the 2002 Act (as  amended).  FTTJ  Chamberlain  was  disinclined  to
    reject the other grounds but noted that the birth of  the  child  post-
    dated the hearing.

 9. The Secretary of State's response of  23  June  2015  stated  that  the
    respondent opposed the appellant's application. The reply  argued  that
    the FTTJ considered the appellant's circumstances in some detail in the
    decision and rejected the appellant's assertions that it would  not  be
    possible for the couple to live in Lagos. The FTTJ also noted that  the
    adult  child  of  the  sponsor  was  pursuing  a  degree   and   living
    independently of her mother. It was also said that the FTTJ  noted  the
    absence of any exceptional grounds; that the conclusion was one open to
    the FTTJ that the grounds were no more than a  mere  disagreement  with
    the FTTJ's findings.

The hearing

10. Mr Bramble's submission was brief and to the point, in that in view  of
    Singh, the FTTJ got it wrong regarding which Rules were  applicable  in
    this case. Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli could  only  agree;  stating  that  the
    appeal hearing took place only around three weeks after the judgment in
    Singh was reported.

11. I briefly indicated that I accepted that the FTTJ had made  a  material
    error of law in finding that the Secretary of State had considered  the
    wrong version of the Immigration Rules and I therefore  set  aside  his
    decision in its entirety.

12. I would have been in a position to proceed to remake the  decision  had
    the appellant  and  her  witnesses  attended  the  hearing  before  me.
    Inexplicably, the appellant was said to be at home in Brighton and  her
    witnesses were also said to  be  not  available.  Mrs  Bassiri-Dezfouli
    asked me not to penalise the appellant, notwithstanding that the second
    of the standard directions, which accompanied  the  notice  of  hearing
    directs parties to prepare for hearings before the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the decision could be remade at the hearing. At the same
    time, I take into consideration the fact that the previous judge  heard
    no evidence from the appellant or her witnesses or any submissions.  In
    these circumstances, I considered that I had little option  other  than
    to remit the appeal to be heard de novo.

13. No anonymity direction was made by the  FTTJ  and  I  am  aware  of  no
    reasons for making such a direction now.

Conclusion

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    The appeal is to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  at  Hatton
    Cross, to be decided by any judge other than FTTJ M R  Oliver,  with  a
    time estimate of 2 hours.  No interpreter is required.


Signed      Date: 20 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
