
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28066/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015                 |
|                                              |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                             Sandy Almanza Sajul
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Narh, Legal Representative from Imperial Visas
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not  make,  an  order  restricting  reporting
    about this appeal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines.  He was born in May 1979
    and so is now nearly 36 years old.  His wife and  sponsor  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a work permit holder with leave to remain until 1 May
    2014.  The appellant was given permission to join her as a dependant on
    28 December 2011.  His leave lasted until 24 February 2014.

 3. The appellant made a timely application to extend that  leave  but  the
    application was refused on 17 June 2014 because he had not  produced  a
    prescribed certificate  of  competence  in  the  English  language  and
    although he has a child, who was born on 7 October 2013 in  the  United
    Kingdom and appears entitled  to  British  citizenship,  the  appellant
    could not rely  on  his  relationship  with  the  child  to  create  an
    exception under the Immigration Rules because  he  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the child. In the opinion  of  the  respondent,  the
    entire family could return to the Philippines and establish  themselves
    there.

 4. The respondent maintained that the decision had proper regard  for  her
    obligations  under  Section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 because the best interests of  the  child  lay  in
    staying with her parents.

 5. However it is important to emphasise that the primary  problem  in  the
    appellant's  application  was  that  he  did  not  have  the  necessary
    certificate to prove his English language competence.

 6. His explanation for that sets out a Kafkaesque scenario which, if  made
    out on the evidence, might well have illuminated  the  claim  on  human
    rights grounds.

 7. It is the appellant's case that, without  the  benefit  of  independent
    legal advice, he was advised by the respondent to make his  application
    in a particular way and it was only when the  application  was  refused
    that he realised that he should have supported the application  with  a
    prescribed certificate.  When the matter was drawn to his attention  he
    tried to pass an examination to be  awarded  a  certificate.   However,
    none of the colleges would accept his application to sit an examination
    without his passport as proof of identity.  As his leave had lapsed  on
    14 February 2015 the Home Office would not release the passport used to
    support the application.  It is not Home Office policy  to  return  the
    passport of a person known to be in the United Kingdom  without  leave.
    The Home Office provided a certified copy but none of the  colleges  he
    approached would accept it as acceptable evidence of his identity.

 8. The result is that the appellant could  not  provide  evidence  of  his
    competence in the English language of the prescribed kind.

 9. He did, however, produce evidence  that  he  had  taken  some  language
    courses organised by ESOL.

10. I find it a very significant feature of this case  that  the  appellant
    did not offer any evidence of his command of English.

11. Mr Parkinson for the respondent could not be  expected  to  comment  on
    advice that may have been given to the  appellant  by  an  unidentified
    Home Office  official  about  what  application  he  should  make.   Mr
    Parkinson said that much depended on what the appellant  actually  said
    that he wanted.  The appellant did not need a language  certificate  to
    extend his leave.  It only became necessary  to  prove  his  linguistic
    competence if he intended to settle.  Mr Parkinson could  see  how  the
    appellant could have gained the impression  that  he  did  not  need  a
    language certificate without  anyone  giving  incompetent,  still  less
    mischievous, advice.

12. I can also accept that a college would have been  reluctant  to  accept
    anything other than a proper national passport as proof of identity for
    the purposes of an examination although I  remain  uncertain  what  the
    refusal to accept a Home Office  certified  copy  tells  us  about  the
    colleges' attitude to the Secretary of State.

13. It is, I find, a very significant gap in the evidence  in  this  appeal
    that the appellant has not sought to prove his  competence  by  another
    means.   I  note  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  Record   of
    Proceedings that when the appellant gave evidence  at  the  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 21 October 2004 the appellant used an  interpreter  who
    spoke the Tagalog and English languages.  I do  not  draw  any  adverse
    conclusion from his use of an interpreter.  Many  people  with  a  good
    command  of  conversational  English  would  want  an  interpreter   in
    circumstances where the precise use  of  language  might  be  material.
    However, his use of an interpreter does nothing whatsoever to  persuade
    me that he has achieved any particular standard in his use of English.

14. I make it plain that the  evidence  before  me  does  not  support  the
    conclusion that the appellant would have passed the language test if he
    had been allowed to sit it and the Kafkaesque  circumstances  indicated
    above have not been made out.

15. The First-tier Tribunal  agreed  with  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    appellant  had  not  made  out  his  case.   He  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules and had not made out an exception  under  the
    Rules or at all.

16. The appellant was given permission to appeal  because  it  was  thought
    arguable that the absence of insurmountable obstacles to returning  had
    not been established properly, insufficient weight had  been  given  to
    the appellant's relationship with a British citizen child and Chikwamba
    (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 was not  applied  properly  with  regard  to
    applying from overseas and that the principle in Zambrano (C-34/09) was
    ignored. It was also said that there was a failure to  show  why  there
    were  not  insurmountable  obstacles  and  Section   117B(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had  not  been  considered
    properly.

17. I have been considerably assisted by the  reported  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill in R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix
    FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation  -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]
    UKUT 00189 (IAC).  For the reasons given there I find that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not err by ignoring or misapplying  the  decision  in
    Chikwamba.  The appellant did not make out a case to show that he  did,
    or at least was likely to, satisfy the requirements of the  Rules  and,
    as Chen explains, that is a precondition for appellants seeking to rely
    on Chikwamba.

18. Further the appellant did not make out in any but the most sketchy  way
    his  reasons  for  not  returning  to  the  Philippines  to   make   an
    application.  His wife is  in  regular  work,  so  different  childcare
    arrangements would have to be made  if  the  appellant  did  leave  the
    United Kingdom but I am not  persuaded  that  that  is  a  particularly
    compelling aspect of the case.  The  decision  in  Chikwamba  does  not
    operate to override the ordinary requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    but to sound a note of caution when the  person  to  be  removed  would
    satisfy the Rules and return promptly.  I do not know if this is such a
    case.

19. Ms Narh relied on her grounds and I consider them more carefully below.
     The first point taken in the grounds is that the appellant is  married
    to a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom  and  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his child.  She suggested that
    it follows from this that it would be unreasonable for the appellant to
    continue his family life in the Philippines and it is not reasonable to
    separate a family involving a British child.

20. It may be that Section 117B(6) will attract guidance  from  the  higher
    courts.  It says in its material parts:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

21. Read literally this could mean that there  is  no  public  interest  in
    removing a parent when it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Given that  a  child  who  is  a  British
    citizen has a right to live in the United Kingdom it is hard to make  a
    case that it is ever "reasonable" to expect such a child to leave (see,
    for example, Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)
    [2012] Imm AR 597.

22. This argument, although seductive, is fallacious.  It is in the  public
    interest to remove someone to maintain  effective  immigration  control
    and the fact that that person cannot speak English (as may be the  case
    here) is a further illustration of how the public interest is served by
    refusing an application from such a person.  This is  unremarkable  and
    has statutory force.  I do not read Section  117B(6)  as  meaning  that
    there is no public interest in removing a person such as the appellant.
     Rather the public interest is diminished to so that it is not required
    in the way that it is required, for example, in deportation cases.   In
    other words, there is a lower hurdle for the appellant  to  leap.   The
    fact is that the child would  be  cared  for  properly  in  the  United
    Kingdom by its mother.  Of course it is right to think carefully before
    making a decision that either breaks a family or  requires  the  parent
    and child to uproot, particularly when that child  is  a  UK  national.
    However, there is no suggestion in this case that  the  appellant  will
    never be able to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   Possibly
    because he was not properly advised (this  has  not  been  proved)  his
    application was refused. There is no reason to  think  that  he  cannot
    organise his affairs to be able to make a successful application in the
    reasonably near future and that he can keep  in  good  contact  in  the
    meantime.  The child was born in October 2013. She is not yet two years
    old. I have no doubt that the appellant's wife would greatly appreciate
    his support and the child  will  probably  sense  some  change  in  her
    domestic arrangements but there is no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    absence would be harmful rather then merely less than ideal.

23. I see nothing to support and argument that the First-tier Tribunal  has
    somehow misdirected himself or reached a conclusion not open to him  it
    in the way suggested in the grounds.

24. The grounds then go on to assert  there  is  no  "sensible  reason  for
    expecting the claimant to return to  the  Philippines"  to  seek  entry
    clearance but, as explained above, he has not shown  he  satisfies  the
    Rules and that is a very good  reason  indeed  for  insisting  that  he
    removes and make a proper application to prove that he can.

25. The grounds also complain that the  Tribunal  has  wrongly  applied  an
    insurmountable obstacles test but I cannot see that that is  made  out.
    Rather the Tribunal has applied the Rules and then,  correctly,  looked
    for  "any  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  which  are   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules" but found none.

26. The grounds also allege perversity but this is not made out.  The  fact
    that small children are generally best off with both parents might be a
    reason for the appellant's wife and  child  to  accompany  him  to  the
    Philippines.  It is not a reason in the context for  the  rest  of  the
    case to say the appellant is entitled to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    He has not shown he satisfied the Rules.

27. There is absolutely no  evidence  that  the  appellant's  inappropriate
    application was the result of malicious advice from  the  Secretary  of
    State and this was not suggested.  I find Mr Parkinson's explanation of
    how there could have been an honest misunderstanding is  likely  to  be
    right although the explanation is based on speculation rather than hard
    evidence. However, in the absence of evidence that the appellant  would
    have satisfied the Rules if he had appreciated that he had  to  give  a
    certificate of competence in  the  English  language,  the  point  goes
    nowhere.

28. It follows that I see no material error made out on  the  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and I dismiss the appeal.

29. I do add this rider.  If the appellant had been able to  show  that  he
    would have satisfied the Rules had  he  not  misunderstood  the  advice
    given by the Secretary of State and that, but for that error, he  would
    have met the requirements of the Rules to remain I may well have  found
    the Article 8 balancing exercise richly illuminated  to  the  appellant
    advantage.  That is not the case on the evidence before me but if he is
    able to produce evidence to the Secretary of State of  his  ability  to
    satisfy the language requirements of the Rules before  he  is  made  to
    leave the United Kingdom it may be that the  Secretary  of  State  will
    need to look at it again.

30. For the avoidance of doubt I dismiss the appeal before me.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 April 2015                  |



