
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice,     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Belfast                                   |                                 |
|On 13 February 2020                       |On 2 March 2020                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                          Mrs Karina Sousa Pinheiro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Helena Wilson, BL
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Karina Sousa Pinheiro, is a citizen of Brazil born on 27
    May 1985. She appeals against a decision of  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Murray promulgated on 12 May  2017  dismissing  her
    appeal against a decision  of  the  respondent  dated  13  August  2015
    refusing to grant her a permanent residence card as the  family  member
    of an EEA national. The appellant was originally refused permission  to
    appeal by Designated Judge Woodcraft of the First-tier Tribunal and  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch. On 27 September 2019,  Mrs  Justice  Keegan
    sitting in the High Court of Justice in Northern Ireland, quashed Judge
    Finch's decision, on grounds which I shall outline below, remitting the
    permission decision back to the Upper Tribunal. On 6 November 2019,  Mr
    CMG Ockelton, Vice President, granted permission to appeal.

Factual background

 2. The appellant married her dual British-Irish husband, Paul Jenkins,  on
    20 July 2008. He is the sponsor in these  proceedings.   Shortly  after
    their marriage, the appellant was issued with a  residence  card  under
    regulation 17 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"), which would have  been  valid  for  five
    years.

 3. On 16 March 2015, the appellant applied for a permanent residence  card
    on the basis  that  she  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous  period  of  five  years.   The   respondent   refused   the
    application because she considered there to have been no evidence  that
    the sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights for a  continuous  period
    of five years.  The term "exercising  Treaty  rights"  is  a  shorthand
    description for a person who meets the requirement to be  a  "qualified
    person" contained in  regulation  6  of  the  2006  Regulations,  which
    reflects the rights enjoyed by EEA nationals under the EU  Treaties  to
    work and reside across the EU.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the
    refusal to Judge Murray,  and  it  is  that  decision  which  is  under
    consideration in these proceedings.

 4. By the time of the hearing before Judge Murray, the appellant had  been
    absent from the United Kingdom for over two years. That does  not  seem
    to have been a point taken against the appellant by the respondent, and
    nor does it appear to have been problematic under the 2006 Regulations.
    Their successor  regulations,  the  2016  Regulations,  now  feature  a
    residence requirement for those seeking  residence  documentation:  see
    regulation 21(3). In view of the decision I have reached,  I  need  not
    say more about the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. It was common ground at the hearing below,  and  before  me,  that  the
    appellant had not  provided  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  been  a
    "qualified person" for a continuous five year  period.  The  judge  was
    therefore invited to allow the appeal on the basis that,  even  if  the
    appellant could not demonstrate five years' continuous residence, there
    was  sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that,  at  that  time,  she
    nevertheless enjoyed an extended right to reside under regulation 14 of
    the 2006 Regulations. That submission  was  based  on  MDB  and  others
    (Article 12, 1612/68)  Italy  [2010]  UKUT  161  (IAC)  which  said  at
    paragraph (v) of the Headnote:

         "In a case concerned with an EEA decision  the  tribunal  judge  is
         obliged by s.84(1)(d) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 to  decide  whether  the  decision  breaches  any  of  the
         appellants' rights under the  Community  Treaties   in  respect  of
         their entry to  or   residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  (emphasis
         added); see also s.109(3). Where the decision is a refusal to issue
         a permanent residence card that may necessitate, in the event  that
         refusal is found correct, considering  whether  the  appellant  was
         entitled nonetheless to an extended right of residence."

 6. In relation to that submission, the judge made the following  operative
    findings, at [26]:

         "I have considered... MDB and others when reaching my  decision.  A
         new application for a residence card will have to be  made  is  the
         question of the sponsor exercising treaty rights for five years  is
         still an issue. The sponsor told the tribunal that he has been self-
         employed for over five years but the only real evidence of this  is
         at page 81 of the appellant's  first  bundle,  being  the  national
         insurance document and there is also the sponsor's and  the  second
         witness's oral evidence it is puzzling that if this is the case  he
         did not bring them to this hearing. This issue was  made  plain  in
         the refusal letter and the sponsor knew that  this  was  an  issue,
         however if a new application is made for a  residence  card,  under
         the EEA  regulations  2006,  all  his  relevant  documents  can  be
         submitted with that application."

Permission to appeal

 7. When refusing permission to appeal, both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the Upper Tribunal considered that the judge had considered and applied
    MDB unarguably correctly and that no arguable error of law  arose  from
    the manner in which she did so.  By contrast, Keegan J  held  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred on that basis; at [19]:

         "In my view it is blatantly clear from a reading  of  the  decision
         [of  the  First-tier  Tribunal]  that  having  accepted   that   an
         alternative of extended residence arose and having  considered  the
         case of MDB the [First-tier  Tribunal]  failed  to  apply  the  law
         properly to determine the application."

 8. Mrs Justice Keegan considered that the operative reasoning of the judge
    was focused on, and restricted to, the issue  of  whether  the  sponsor
    could demonstrate that he had  been  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years, rather than a discrete  assessment  of
    whether the appellant met the requirement for a residence card  at  the
    date of the hearing. She added at [21]:

         "I cannot see that the judge actually considered  the  requirements
         for an extended residence card or that  there  was  an  explanation
         given for rejecting it  contrary  to  the  requirement  to  provide
         reasons..."

 9. At [23], Mrs Justice Keegan concluded by  holding  that  there  was  an
    arguable error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    quashed the decision of Judge Finch, and remitted the  matter  back  to
    the  Upper  Tribunal  for  reconsideration  of  the   application   for
    permission to appeal. The Vice President granted permission  to  appeal
    in these terms:

         "Permission to appeal is now granted on the ground submitted to the
         Upper Tribunal on 21 November 2017. Reasons: Permission is  granted
         in light of the comments of Keegan J. The parties are reminded that
         the Upper Tribunal's task is that set out  in  section  12  of  the
         [Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007]."

10. Although the 2006 Regulations were amended to reflect the  decision  of
    the Court of Justice in McCarthy Case C-434/09, the sponsor enjoyed the
    protection of the transitional provisions  made  when  the  Regulations
    were amended on account of when the appellant was first issued  with  a
    residence card.  McCarthy  held  that  in  certain  circumstances  dual
    citizens of the host Member State and another Member  State  would  not
    enjoy free movement rights under the EU free movement regime.

Discussion

11. Ms Wilson provided a helpful skeleton argument. The respondent did  not
    provide a rule 24 notice.

12. The essential issue for my  consideration  is  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred  by  not  conducting  a  contemporaneous  assessment  of
    whether the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights, by reference  to  the
    position as at the date of the hearing.   I  accept  that  there  is  a
    degree of confusion at [25] where the judge states that  the  appellant
    will have to make a new application for a "residence card" (as  opposed
    to a  permanent  residence  card)  "as  the  question  of  the  sponsor
    exercising treaty rights for five years is still an issue." The  reason
    this sentence lacks clarity  is  because,  by  definition,  it  is  not
    necessary  for  there  to  be  five  years'  continuous  residence   in
    accordance with the Regulations in order for a person to be issued with
    a residence card. All that is required is evidence that, at the time of
    the application, the sponsor is exercising Treaty rights.

13. However, read as a whole, the paragraph does not disclose an  error  of
    law.

14. As Ms Wilson realistically accepted  at  the  hearing,  the  judge  did
    conduct a contemporaneous assessment of the sort necessary for a normal
    residence card.  The judge said, again at [25]:

         "The sponsor told the Tribunal that he has the  required  documents
         to prove that he is self-employed and has been for over 5 years and
         is and has been exercising Treaty rights.  It is puzzling  that  if
         this is the case,  he  did  not  bring  them  to  this  hearing..."
         (emphasis added)

15. The words emboldened in the above extract demonstrate  that  the  judge
    was concerned both with the historical position over the previous  five
    years, and with  the  contemporaneous  position  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. The references to the sponsors evidence  being  that  he  "is"
    exercising Treaty rights can only be to the present position.  That  is
    reinforced  when  one  looks  at  the  opening  words  to  [25],  which
    specifically concerned the MDB point, that is to say whether there is a
    "fallback" position that a residence  card  should  have  been  issued,
    rather than a permanent residence card.

16. In the same paragraph, the judge re-summarised the presenting officer's
    submissions (which she had already outlined at [15]) that there was  no
    documentary  evidence  to  demonstrate  where  the  sponsor's   claimed
    national insurance payments, which had been submitted in support of his
    contention that he was exercising Treaty rights, came from.  She  noted
    that the sponsor's evidence had been that he  had  the  full  range  of
    documents to support his case on behalf of the appellant  that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights, but that he  had  not  brought  them  to  the
    hearing. The judge described this as  "puzzling".  Mrs  Justice  Keegan
    also considered that omission to be strange: see [8] of  her  decision.
    The overall context in which the judge was addressing  the  absence  of
    documentation going to the Treaty rights issue was, in this  paragraph,
    when considering the MDB point.

17. Properly understood, therefore, at [25] the judge was  considering  the
    alternative submission advanced on behalf of the appellant, namely that
    she was entitled to a residence card because the sponsor was,  at  that
    time (c.f. "is") a qualified person. She found that he was not.   There
    was a puzzling absence of documentation  concerning  that  very  issue,
    even though the sponsor and appellant had  been  on  notice  since  the
    refusal decision that those very issues  were  due  to  be  considered.
    Contrary to what is stated in the grounds  of  appeal,  the  judge  did
    conduct a contemporaneous assessment, and found that the appellant  was
    not entitled to a residence card.

18. It follows that, although Mrs Justice Keegan, and the  Vice  President,
    identified an arguable error of law, pursuant to the  analysis  I  have
    conducted  there  was  no  actual  error  of  law.  This  appeal  must,
    therefore, be dismissed.

Postscript

19. In pre-hearing directions, I invited  the  parties  to  address  me  on
    whether MDB remains good law, in light of the amendments  made  to  the
    appeals regime in the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  by
    the Immigration Act 2014, as applied to the  2006  Regulations.   I  am
    grateful  to  the  parties  for  their  submissions  on  these  points.
    However, it is not necessary for me  to  make  any  findings  on  those
    issues as, even assuming that MDB is good law,  the  judge  below  gave
    sound reasons for dismissing the appeal on MDB-compliant grounds.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 13 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

