
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29015/2013
     IA/29020/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                           mohammad akbar hossain
                                maryna akther
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr F Junior, Legal Representative, UK Immigration
Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan. Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellants appeal a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge, Mr  R  G
    Walters, in which he  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeal  against  the
    refusal of their application for a  Tier  1  visa.   The  decision  was
    promulgated on 6th March 2014.  The Appellant was granted permission on
    renewal to the Upper Tier on 19th May 2014 and the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    make two contentions.  I deal with the second  contention  first  as  I
    find it logical to do so.

 2. The grounds contend that the bank letter dated 27th  August,  a  letter
    which the judge found  did  not  include  a  reference  to  a  landline
    telephone number, should have been read in conjunction  with  a  second
    document submitted with the application which is a  transaction  docket
    which carries the telephone number of the account  holder.   The  first
    point I make on that matter is that the specified document  requirement
    has, as has been recently discussed in the case  of  Akhter  &  Another
    (paragraph  245AA:  wrong  format)  [2014]  UKUT  00297,  set   out   a
    requirement that needs  to  be  interpreted  as  it  is  written.   The
    requirement set out  at  SD-41(a)(i)(10)  is  a  requirement  that  the
    specified document i.e.  each letter as  described  in  the  Rule  must
    carry that number.  On the face of it the  judge's  finding:  that  the
    letter itself  does  not  carry  that  landline  telephone  number,  is
    correct.  The Appellant's argument that the document should be read  in
    conjunction with the transaction docket falls  away  in  light  of  the
    finding in Akhter that the requirement must  be  met  by  the  document
    specified, and that the failure to meet a requirement in the context of
    that document does not mean that it is in the wrong format, giving  the
    Appellant the possibility of benefiting from the application of  245AA.
    It follows that the  judge  in  directing  himself  that  despite  that
    failure he would be entitled to find that the Rule was met  is  plainly
    in error.  It is not however an error which I find requires me  to  set
    the decision aside because if properly directed it would have  resulted
    in a refusal and the judge has in any event  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    other grounds.

 3. The second contention is that the specified  documents  requirement  in
    respect of availability of funds has been too narrowly construed by the
    judge.

 4.  The Judge found  that  the  evidence  of  availability  of  funds  was
    inadequate on two  counts  the  specified  document  from  the  Sponsor
    qualified the availability of funds describing them as being  available
    following the grant of a visa. The qualification is  reflected  in  the
    confirmatory letter from the bank.  The requirements of the  Rules  are
    directed most particularly  at  the  question  of  the  Sponsor  making
    available the funds as evidenced by declaration,  and  consistent  with
    that   a confirmatory letter from the bank.   The  two  are  consistent
    with each other. The difficulty with the qualification in the  evidence
    provided in this case is  that the requirements at in SD-41 (a) (i) (9)
    and at (b) (i)) requires that the funds are available and at   (b)  (9)
    remain  the present tense position is fortified by the  Sponsor  having
    to  confirm that the funds will   remain  available  to  the  point  of
    transfer. Remain in this context necessarily infers availability prior.
    A plain reading of the rules undermines the contention before me  today
    that the qualification in terms of when the fund becomes  available  is
    not relevant in the context of the requirements of  the  Rules  is  not
    sustainable.

 5. Accordingly, both the letter from the bank and  also  the  third  party
    declaration  failed  to  meet  the   specified   documentary   evidence
    requirements.  Neither are matters which  the  Appellant  can  look  to
    paragraph  245AA  or  any  evidential  flexibility  policy  to  provide
    assistance in the context of the guidance set out in the case of Akhter
    to which I have already referred.   It  follows  accordingly  that  the
    judge's decision dismissing the appeal contains no  material  error  of
    law and it stands.

 6. Counsel also sought to rely on a  matter  not  raised  in  the  grounds
    namely an assertion that another Appellant, a business associate of the
    Appellant, has benefitted from a less restrictive reading of  the  rule
    by a different judge. That is an argument which  is  not  open  on  the
    grounds upon which  permission  has  been  granted  but  in  any  event
    cannot reveal a material error of law in the judge's  determination  in
    respect of this Appellant. The judge in the earlier case would not have
    had the benefit of the guidance of the case of Akhtar but in any  event
    it is a well established point that even  when  another  Appellant  has
    benefitted from an erroneous legal decision it does not operate to mean
    that an appeal lawfully dismissed is flawed by legal error requiring it
    to be set aside and remade in the Appellant's favour.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


