
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/29456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 25th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             Secretary of State
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                suhayb ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Vaughan instructed by NBS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Dickson made following a hearing at Bradford on 1st October 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 31st December 1973.  On
    9th February 2007 he married a citizen of the Netherlands and  came  to
    the UK.  He was subsequently granted  a  residence  card  as  a  family
    member of an EEA citizen valid from 3rd July 2008 to 3rd July 2013.

 3. On 8th May 2013 he applied for a permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 5 of the Immigration (EEA Regulations) 2006.

 4. The facts of this case are not in dispute.  The claimant is the husband
    and main carer of the sponsor who has had  a  long  history  of  mental
    health problems and suffers from a  psychotic  illness.   She  has  not
    worked at least from the time when she  entered  the  UK,  following  a
    personal injury while she was living in the Netherlands, and from  that
    time she has been physically and mentally unfit.

 5. The couple have a 6 year old son.  The claimant  works  as  a  tandoori
    chef, part-time, 24 hours a week.

 6. The judge wrote as follows:

         "The Sponsor and the Appellant have  both  been  granted  residence
         cards.  At the time the Sponsor would have established that she was
         a qualified person under regulation 6.  She was not a jobseeker,  a
         worker, a self-employed person or a student.   She  must  therefore
         have been a self-sufficient person under Regulation  1(i)(d).   Her
         brother and his family were living  in  the  UK  when  the  Sponsor
         joined them after her marriage broke down in the  Netherlands.   It
         is not realistic to expect the Sponsor and her family to return  to
         the Netherlands.

         The Sponsor is in my view still a  self-sufficient  person  as  her
         brother continues to live here  and  furthermore  the  Sponsor  now
         works as a  tandoori  chef  in  a  restaurant.   The  Appellant  is
         therefore a family member of an EEA national and has resided in the
         UK with an EEA national in accordance with the  Regulations  for  a
         continuous period of five years (Regulation 15(i)(c).   It  follows
         in my view that the Appellant is entitled to a residence card."

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the EEA spouse had failed to demonstrate that she had been a  qualified
    person as defined in Regulation 6 for a continuous five year period  or
    a worker or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased  activity  as  per
    Regulation 5.  Since she has not worked since arriving in  the  UK  she
    has never qualified as a worker,  jobseeker,  self-employed  person  or
    student.

 8. So far as self-sufficiency is concerned,  no  up-to-date  documentation
    showing the EEA Sponsor's continuous self-sufficiency for the last five
    years has been produced.  Neither has it been shown  that  the  sponsor
    has comprehensive sickness cover as required under Regulation 5C(2).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler for the reasons stated
    in the grounds on 27th November 2014.

Submissions

10. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds.

11. Mr Vaughan accepted  that  the  claimant  did  not  have  comprehensive
    sickness cover.  However he said that as a matter of  fact  the  couple
    were self-sufficient because they relied on his earnings as a  tandoori
    chef and support from the wider family.

12. He relied on The National Health Service (Charges to Overseas Visitors)
     Regulations 2011 exemption which states -

         "9. No charge may be made or recovered in respect of  any  relevant
             services provided to an overseas visitor who  has  entitlement
             to the provision of the  services  in  question  under  or  by
             virtue of any of the following -

             (a)  Regulations made under Article 48 of the  Treaty  on  the
                  Functioning of the European Union;

             (b)  An agreement entered into between the European Union  and
                  any other country;

             (c)  Any other enforceable EU right."

13. He said that the couple had been allowed to live in  the  UK  for  five
    years which ought to count for something and there was  an  element  of
    fairness if they were denied the right to remain in the UK.

Findings and Conclusions

14. Regulation 4(1)(c) of the 2006 Regulations states -

         "(c) Self-sufficient person means a person who has -

             (i)  sufficient resources not to become a burden on the social
                  assistance system of the United Kingdom during his  period
                  of residence; and

             (ii) comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  United
                  Kingdom."

15. Regulation 4(2) provides -

         "For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where the family members  of
         the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom and  their  right
         to reside is dependent upon their family members of that person -

         (a)  the requirement for that person to have  sufficient  resources
             not to become a burden on the social assistance system of  the
             United Kingdom during his period of residence  shall  only  be
             satisfied if his resources and those of the family members are
             sufficient to avoid him and his family members becoming such a
             burden;

         (b)  the requirement for that person to have comprehensive sickness
             insurance cover in the United Kingdom shall only be  satisfied
             if he and his family members have such cover."

16. The issue relating  to  sickness  insurance  cover  has  recently  been
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Ahmed v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  988.



17. The Court of Appeal  rejected  the  argument  that  the  condition  was
    satisfied because of an entitlement to use the national health  service
    and  there  was  no  need  to  have  private  insurance  cover.   In  a
    comprehensive judgment the Court of Appeal  concluded  that  there  was
    clear and consistent case law from the CJEU, and specifically  did  not
    accept the present argument that an entitlement to free  NHS  treatment
    satisfied the requirements under the Regulations to have  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover.

18. That is determinative of this appeal.  The claimant does not have  such
    cover and therefore cannot establish that the  EEA  family  member  was
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years  in  the
    UK as a self-sufficient person.  Accordingly he does not qualify for  a
    permanent residence card.

19. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the refusal letter  states  that  the
    claimant should make arrangements to leave which is the consequence  of
    the decision to refuse a residence  card.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    position seems to be that Article 8 does  not  fall  to  be  considered
    because the claimant has not made  a  separate  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules in reliance on family and private life established in
    the UK.

20. Whether or not that is the Respondent's position, it  does  not  fetter
    the Tribunal's obligations to consider whether the  claimant's  removal
    from the UK would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

21. However in this case there can be no such breach.  The EEA national has
    not established that she  has  been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years but that does not in itself demonstrate
    that she has no right to reside here under the Regulations.

22. If she does not a removal decision may be taken that she return to  the
    Netherlands where the claimant could join her.  They have a 6 year  old
    child but he would not be required to leave the EEA and no evidence has
    been put forward to establish that it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    him to return with his parents to the  Netherlands  should  it  not  be
    possible for his mother to establish a right to reside here  under  the
    Regulations.

Notice of Decision

23. The judge erred in law.  This decision is set aside and  re-made.   The
    claimant's appeal is dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 5th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
