
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/29291/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th July 2017                         |On 02nd August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                              ANINE SUTHERLAND
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born 15th October 1976.  She
    appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  FtTJ  A.  W.  Khan,
    promulgated on 2nd December 2016, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 13th August 2015 refusing her leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of ten years lawful residence.   The
    Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  fulfilled  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because her continuity  of  leave
    had been broken by a gap of 94 days from 1st December 2007 to 5th March
    2008 when, it was said, the Appellant was here without valid leave.

Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th  February  2002  and
    was given leave to enter as a  working  holidaymaker  valid  until  6th
    February 2004.  She made an in-time application for  further  leave  to
    remain as a work permit holder which was granted on 1st  December  2003
    until 1st December 2007.

 3. On 31st August 2007 her employer, Homerton School, closed  and  on  7th
    September 2007 her new employer, the  Skinners'  Company's  School  for
    Girls, applied to the Home Office for her work permit to be transferred
    to them.

 4. On 15th October 2007 the Home Office initially refused the  application
    for transfer,  but  by  5th  February  2008,  after  receiving  further
    information pointing out that the refusal had been made on an erroneous
    basis, the decision to refuse was reversed and  the  transfer  granted.
    On 19th February 2008 the Appellant made an out of time application for
    further leave to remain as a work permit holder which  was  granted  on
    5th March 2008 until 31st December 2008.  It is this sequence of events
    which causes the gap in the Appellant's immigration history.

 5. On 21st January 2009 the Appellant submitted an application for further
    leave to remain under Tier 2 which was granted to 1st January 2012. She
    was then granted further periods of in-time leave under  Tier  2  valid
    until 14th April 2015. By this time the Appellant had been in the UK 13
    years employed as a school teacher.

 6. On 30th March 2015 the Appellant made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the  basis  of  her  length  of  residence.   It  is
    accepted that she made an error in her application, in  that  she  made
    her application on the wrong form.  She intended to apply for ILR under
    paragraph 245HF of the Rules on the basis  of  five  years'  continuous
    leave as a Tier 2 Migrant.  The  application  for  long  residence  was
    refused in  a  decision  dated  13th  August  2015  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the Rules on the basis that continuity of leave
    was broken on account of the fact that the Appellant was without  leave
    between 1st December 2007 and 5th March 2008 (94 days).

 7. The Appellant appealed against this refusal and her appeal came  before
    FtTJ A.W. Khan.

 8. FtTJ Khan heard the Appellant's appeal on 4th November  2016.   He  set
    out the history of the Appellant's application for leave to  remain  at
    paragraphs 1 and 2 of his decision. He noted at  [14]  that  under  the
    Respondent's Long Residence Policy, she must consider any  evidence  of
    exceptional circumstances which prevented an  applicant  from  applying
    within the first 28 days of overstaying.  It has always  been  accepted
    that the relevant period of "overstaying" in this Appellant's case is a
    gap  of  94  days.   In  considering  the  LR  policy  on   exceptional
    circumstances, the judge said at [15] "the only factor which could help
    the Appellant would be serious illness." At [16] he  said,  "Since  the
    gap was more than 28 days, I do not find that the  Appellant  made  out
    that exceptional circumstances exist whereby the Respondent could  have
    exercised discretion in her favour in granting leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276B because I simply  cannot  see  that  such  circumstances
    exist."

 9. At [18] somewhat in contradiction of  the  above,  the  FtTJ  expressly
    accepted that the original decision by the  Respondent  to  refuse  the
    application for a work permit (referring to the refusal on 15th October
    2007), was "incorrect as to the law" but  went  on  to  find  that  the
    Respondent  "corrected"  the  situation  by  eventually  granting   the
    application.  The judge then dismissed the appeal.

Onward appeal

10. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    FtTJ had misdirected himself  and/or  misinterpreted  the  Home  Office
    policy on Long Residence.  Firstly, he had erroneously stated that  the
    only factor which could help the Appellant would be serious illness and
    secondly, although he  accepted  that  the  original  decision  by  the
    Respondent to refuse the application for a  work  permit  in  2007  was
    incorrect as to law, he erroneously  failed  to  take  into  account  a
    material consideration which is that the Respondent's  refusal  of  the
    work permit application was not only incorrect as to the  law  but  was
    the sole reason why the Appellant became an overstayer.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Astle in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds argue that the Judge misapplied or  misinterpreted
             the Respondent's policy on long residence saying that the only
             factor that could excuse a period of overstaying  was  serious
             illness.  He noted that the Respondent was incorrect in law in
             refusing an earlier application but corrected the  problem  by
             subsequently granting it.  He failed to take  account  of  the
             fact that the first  refusal  was  the  sole  reason  why  the
             Appellant became an over stayer.  Secondly it is  argued  that
             the Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  proportionality  and
             misunderstood the test under the Rules and  where  the  public
             interest lay.

         3.   The first ground is arguable and permission is  granted.   The
             second ground may be argued at the same time  although  I  see
             less merit in this."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether  the  FtT's  decision
    contains such error of law, as to require it to be set aside and be re-
    made.

Error of Law Hearing

12. I heard submissions from Ms Chapman on behalf of the Appellant  and  Mr
    Avery for the Respondent.  Ms  Chapman's  submissions  centred  on  the
    judge's  failure  to  properly  appreciate  that  the  Respondent   had
    improperly considered her own policy set out  in  the  Policy  on  Long
    Residence version 13, updated May 2015.  She drew my attention  to  the
    relevant provisions which say as follows:

         "3.3.    'any evidence of exceptional circumstances which prevented
             the applicant from  applying  within  the  first  28  days  of
             overstaying.

             The threshold for what constitutes 'exceptional circumstances'
             is high but could include delays resulting from unexpected  or
             unforeseeable causes.  For example:

                .  serious  illness  which  meant  the  applicant  or  their
                  representative was not able to submit the  application  in
                  time - this  must  be  supported  by  appropriate  medical
                  documentation

                . travel or postal delays which meant the applicant or their
                  representative was not able to submit the  application  in
                  time

                . inability to provide necessary documents - this would only
                  apply in exceptional or unavoidable  circumstances  beyond
                  the applicant's control.  For example:

             ?    it is the fault of the Home Office  because  it  lost  or
                  delayed returning travel documents

             ?    there is a delay because  the  applicant  cannot  replace
                  their documents quickly because of theft, fire  or  flood.
                  The applicant must send evidence of the date of  loss  and
                  the date replacement documents were sought.'

13.  She  submitted  that  it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant's   specific
    circumstances can properly  be  considered  under  the  heading  of  an
    'inability to provide necessary documents' which amounted to  an  error
    on the part of the Home Office. There was an undue delay  of  nearly  5
    months in issuing  the  Appellant  with  her  work  permit.   The  FtTJ
    expressly accepted  that  the  reasons  for  this  delay  were  legally
    unsustainable.  The Respondent herself subsequently accepted  that  the
    original refusal to issue the work permit was incorrect.  She  said  so
    when eventually issuing  the  permit.   The  error  was  compounded  by
    requiring the Appellant to make an out of time application for  renewal
    of the work permit.  What should have happened is that the Home  Office
    should simply have backdated the grant and thereby the appellant  would
    not have been deemed to have a  gap  of  94  days  in  her  immigration
    history.

14. She emphasised that it follows that the appeal should have been allowed
    by the FtTJ on the basis that the Respondent's decision in the  present
    case was not in accordance with the law (the third of the  five  Razgar
    tests) because it was not in accordance with the Long Residence Policy.
     It was, for the same reason, not proportionate.

15. This she submitted had resulted in the judge failing to  appreciate  it
    was  the  Respondent's  own  error  when  refusing  to   transfer   the
    Appellant's work permit from Homerton School to Skinners' School.   The
    Respondent had  wrongly  thought  that  the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    eligible for a work permit because she was an overseas trained  teacher
    and thus needed to have obtained a qualified teacher status within four
    years.  This was an error.  It was  rectified  by  a  letter  from  the
    Institute of Education dated 17th  January  2008  explaining  that  the
    Appellant is not an overseas  trained  teacher  and  therefore  such  a
    restriction did  not  apply  to  her.   Instead  she  was  required  to
    undertake the graduate  training  programme  (which  she  commenced  in
    January 2008 and completed in December 2008).  Critically  however,  as
    set out in the Institute of Education's letter, there was no time limit
    by which she was required to do this and therefore no reason to  refuse
    the transfer of her work permit.

16. This factor was  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  high  threshold  in  the
    Respondent's own policy when looking at the third bullet point in  what
    constitutes exceptional circumstances, namely an inability  to  provide
    necessary documents.

17. She said it was clear that the Appellant's specific  circumstances  can
    properly be considered under that heading  and  it  was  a  failure  to
    consider this heading, both by the Respondent and by  the  FtTJ,  which
    led to the material error in the judge's decision.

18. Mr Avery, although filing a Rule 24 response  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission and whilst not conceding the issue, quite sensibly  did  not
    seek to press the points strongly.

Consideration

19. I am satisfied that the decision of FtTJ Khan contains a material error
    in that he confined himself when considering the Home Office Policy  to
    saying that only serious illness could help  the  Appellant.  For  some
    reason he failed to properly identify that the  appellant  could  bring
    herself within the exceptional circumstances (bullet point 3)  set  out
    in the Policy.  I find that this was a material error and is one  which
    requires the decision to be  set  aside.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision preserving the finding that the Respondent  was  incorrect  in
    law in refusing the transfer of the Appellant's work permit in  October
    2007.  I find I am in a position to remake the decision.

20.  I  find  that  there  are  good  grounds  demonstrating  that  in  the
    Appellant's  case  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  beyond  her
    control such as to bring her within the  Home  Office  policy  on  Long
    Residence.  I am satisfied that the Home Office error in  refusing  the
    Appellant's application for a work permit in 2007 was the  sole  reason
    for the 94 day gap in her continuity of residence. This was  compounded
    by the Appellant being informed that she needed  to  make  an  "out  of
    time" application for further leave to remain  and  that  somehow  this
    "corrected" the error  made.  It  did  not.  The  Appellant's  transfer
    application should have been backdated which would have placed  her  in
    her rightful position.

21. It follows for the foregoing reasons that the Appellant's  appeal  must
    be allowed on the basis that the decision to refuse her application for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain is not in accordance with the  law,  because
    it has  been  made  without  proper  regard  to  the  Respondent's  own
    published policy.

22. Following discussion with Ms Chapman and Mr Avery both were of the view
    that I can only allow or dismiss the appeal. Both agreed it will now be
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State  to  make  a  fresh  decision  in
    respect of this Appellant.  By way of general comment I was informed by
    Ms Chapman that the delay in these proceedings has had an  impact  upon
    the health of the Appellant.  It is therefore hoped that the Respondent
    will make a fresh decision in this matter sooner rather than later.



Decision

23. Appeal allowed.

24. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date          01 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts






