
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29498/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 November 2017                      |On  29 November 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SERWA BONSU
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Mr A Kaihiva, Counsel


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS


1.          This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid allowing the appeal of Mrs Serwa  Bonsu
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 16 June 2015 refusing
    to grant her a Permanent Residence Card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 (as they then were), on the basis that  she  had
    not proved she had retained a right  of  residence  and  had  lived  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.

2.         The Secretary of State challenges  that  decision  on  the  basis
    that Judge Majid misdirected himself in law and  failed  to  take  into
    account and resolve conflicts of facts on material matters.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  on
    18 September 2017 on all grounds in the following terms:

         "The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  are  clearly  arguable  in
         complaining that the judge in allowing the appeal,  has  failed  to
         address the core reason for refusal that  the  respondent  was  not
         satisfied that the appellant's EEA  former  spouse  was  exercising
         free movement rights in the United Kingdom at the time of  divorce.
         The respondent complains  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  and
         address the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the  appellant's
         application. The respondent is entitled to know why the appeal  has
         been allowed. The judge's decision contains much self-direction and
         recitation of case law it does not appear to engage with  what  the
         respondent decided in  refusing  the  appellant's  application  for
         leave to remain. At paragraph 20 the judge has said:

         "20. A  review  of  all  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant
         convinces me that her appeal should be allowed. Wherever one  feels
         that the case misses the point marginally the  judicial  discretion
         should help her in light of the facts as detailed in  paragraph  12
         above."

    Paragraph 12, however, does not engage with the respondent's reason for
    refusing and it had not been shown the appellant's EEA  former  husband
    had been exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.  Under  the
    heading "The Relevant Law" the  judge,  at  paragraphs  18-27  set  out
    several paragraphs end with the judge saying that he has given "respect
    to the intention of the House of Commons dictated by the  supremacy  of
    Parliament" and then said that there are  good  reasons  to  allow  the
    appeal as detailed in  paragraph  12  of  the  decision.  There  is  no
    reference to these paragraphs to EEA Regulations 2006  which  both  the
    respondent's decision was made and  the  appellant's  appeal  brought."
    (sic)

4.          Since the grant of permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal  has
    issued the decision in MM & Ors v The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department, The Secretary of State & Ors AA/06906/2014. That  decision,
    although unreported, is relevant to the circumstances  of  this  appeal
    since it contains a comprehensive criticism of the  decision  style  of
    Judge Majid:

         "It seems to us  that  the  complaints  made  about  Judge  Majid's
         decisions are entirely  well-founded.  Nobody  reading  them  could
         detect how the judge reached the conclusion he did,  acting  within
         the law and applying the relevant substantive law to the  facts  as
         found. That is partly because the law and the facts are  never  the
         subject of any detailed reference, disputes on the  facts  are  not
         identified, and there are next to no  findings  of  relevant  fact;
         more  seriously  it  is  because  the  Judge's  statements  in  his
         decisions, either by direct assertion or  by  disquisition  on  the
         irrelevant, give real reason to suppose that he is not even  trying
         to act within the law and apply the relevant substantive law to the
         facts as found.

         47.  We regard the body of his work that we have examined  in  the
         course of these appeals as wholly failing  to  meet  the  standards
         that are demanded by the office of a  judge  and  expected  by  the
         parties. As a result, every one of the decisions under appeal shows
         error of law, in most cases serious error, in most  cases  multiple
         serious errors. Whether the decisions are  looked  at  together  or
         separately, they show that nobody should assume  that  Judge  Majid
         has an adequate knowledge of the law or of his task as a judge.  If
         his decisions continue to have the features we have  identified  in
         the foregoing examination, they are clearly open to criticism."

5.          This decision  contains  similar  standard  paragraphs  that the
    Upper Tribunal were critical of, but    even without that criticism, I
    am satisfied for the reasons accurately  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission that the reasoning of Judge Majid in this appeal is  unsound
    and his decision unsustainable. Mr Kaihiva's defence of the Decision on
    the basis that the Secretary of State's grounds raise factual conflicts
    that were not raised in the refusal and that Judge Majid dealt with the
    evidence is totally without merit. Mr Kaihiva was not able to make good
    his submissions by reference to the Decision and the evidence and  upon
    scrutiny it transpired  that  his  submissions  were  founded  upon  an
    earlier refusal not the subject of this appeal.

 6.   In the circumstances, there is no alternative to setting the  decision
    aside and remaking it afresh.

Conclusions

 7.          For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error
           on a point of law.

    (ii)   I set aside the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The  appeal
           will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal before a  Judge  other
           than First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.




    Signed:                                  Dated: 27 November 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


