
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29174/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 August 2017                     |On 05 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            mohammed belal uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  M  A  Khan  sitting  at  Harmondsworth  on  25  November  2016)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 10 August 2015 to refuse to grant him leave  to  remain  as  a
    student (the appellant having applied on 5 May 2014)  and  against  her
    concomitant decision to make directions for his removal  under  Section
    47 of the 2008 Act. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that such a direction is required  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On  6  July  2017  Designated  Judge  McCarthy  granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal on "the second ground only"  which  was  that  the
    Judge had failed to identify, and  resolve,  "the  key  issue"  in  the
    appeal, which was whether the Respondent had issued the Appellant  with
    a 60 day letter so as to be able to find a new sponsor,  and  obtain  a
    new CAS.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. The appeal was listed for an oral hearing. However, the day before  the
    hearing Universal Solicitors notified the Upper Tribunal  that  neither
    they nor their client would be attending, and they requested  that  the
    appeal should be decided on the papers.

 4. In a notice issued on 18 July 2017, the Upper Tribunal had notified the
    parties that it did not have the complete Home Office bundle  that  was
    before the Judge, and  had  directed  the  parties  to  file  with  the
    Tribunal and serve upon the other party "any documentary evidence  upon
    which reliance is placed, even if that  material  has  previously  been
    served".

 5. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  I  informed  Ms  Isherwood  of  the
    Appellant's non-attendance and the reason for it. She said she had  not
    seen the letter from the Appellant's solicitors. She produced a  bundle
    of documents  pertaining  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  that  had  been
    compiled by the Home Office. It was unclear when this bundle  had  been
    put together, but her understanding  was  that  it  had  been  compiled
    pursuant to the direction of 18 July  2017.  The  bundle  included  the
    application form, an  undated  letter  to  the  Home  Office  from  the
    Appellant's previous representatives  and  "a  statement  to  vary  the
    application" apparently signed by the Appellant on 16 July 2015.

Discussion

 6. Ground 1 is that the Judge  erred  in  law  in  refusing  to  grant  an
    adjournment.  Reliance is placed  on  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC), where the UT said that:

         "In practice, in most  cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the
         refusal (of an adjournment) deprived  the  affected  party  of  his
         right  to  a  fair  hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal   is
         challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to  recognise  that
         the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether  the  FtT  acted
         reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is  that  of  fairness:
         was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to  a  fair
         hearing?"

 7. As was held by  Designated  Judge  M    cCarthy,  this  ground  is  not
    arguable, and the Appellant has not sought to  challenge  his  decision
    refusing him permission to pursue it. I mention it, however, because it
    has a bearing on Ground 2.

 8. As noted by the Judge at paragraph [5] of his decision,  the  Appellant
    and his legal representatives did not attend the  hearing  before  him.
    The non-attendance was sought to be justified on the  ground  that  the
    Appellant was ill. But another Judge had earlier refused  to  grant  an
    adjournment as the evidence provided only showed that he was unfit  for
    work, not that he was unfit to attend.

 9. When granting permission on Ground 2, Designated  Judge  McCarthy  held
    that the problem over the 60 day letter dispute was exacerbated by  the
    fact that neither party had submitted documents  in  support  of  their
    respective positions. He said that no documents were  provided  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by either party, other than the refusal letter  and
    the notice of appeal.

10. If that is right, the  Appellant's  appeal  on  common  law  unfairness
    grounds (failure by the Respondent to serve a 60 day letter) was  bound
    to fail, as the burden of  proof  rested  with  him,  and  he  had  not
    provided any evidence, oral or documentary, to discharge the burden  of
    proof. Mere assertion in the grounds  of  appeal  was  and  is  plainly
    insufficient.

11. The directions made by  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  the  Appellant  the
    opportunity to provide documentary evidence to support the case pleaded
    in the Grounds of Appeal, such as correspondence with the  Home  Office
    complaining about the absence of a 60 day letter. The Appellant has not
    seized this opportunity, and  has  also  eschewed  the  possibility  of
    giving oral evidence in support of his appeal at the  second  stage  of
    the hearing before me, assuming  that  he  was  able  to  surmount  the
    preliminary hurdle of showing that the Judge had made a material error.



12. Conversely, the Respondent  has  provided  documentary  evidence  which
    tends to indicate that the case pleaded in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  is
    based upon an asserted fact which the Appellant knows to be untrue; and
    that there was not and is not a genuine dispute of fact  about  the  60
    day letter which the Judge erred in not resolving. For in the statement
    signed by him on 16 July 2015 the Appellant acknowledged (a)  that  the
    licence of his sponsor was to his knowledge revoked on 20 May 2015, two
    weeks after he had made his application; and (b) that the  Home  Office
    had issued him with a 60 day letter so he could find a new sponsor  and
    obtain a new CAS.

13. He went on to say that no college would issue him with a new  CAS;  and
    so he wished to vary his application for leave to remain as  a  student
    to an application for leave to remain outside the rules for a period of
    10 to 11 months approximately, while  he  awaited  the  outcome  of  an
    application to be granted  entry  clearance  to  Canada  on  a  skilled
    migrant programme.

14. The Judge rendered himself vulnerable to  a  successful  error  of  law
    challenge by not engaging  with  the  common  law  unfairness  argument
    pleaded in the Grounds of Appeal, and by using a template which did not
    fit the reality of the particular case before him. Thus,  for  example,
    at paragraph [12] he stated formulaically - and clearly  erroneously  -
    that he had considered the appellant's "written witness statement,  the
    oral evidence and the oral submissions of his legal representative".

15. However, the conduct of this appeal by the Appellant has been such that
    he has not shown that the errors made by the  Judge  are  material.  No
    reasonable Tribunal properly directed  could  have  reached  any  other
    conclusion than that the Appellant's appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


