
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29186/2014
                                                               IA/29193/2014
                                                               IA/29199/2014
                                                               IA/48067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th July 2015                    |On 6th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Kirikankanange Lalindra Naomal de silva
                           Arsi Chandhima de silva
                    Kirikankanange Dhanul Yanaka de silva
                   Kirikankanange Ishari Ayodhya de silva
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr G Davison of Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Fowell (the judge)  promulgated  on  11th  February
    2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of Sri Lanka born  24th  January  1964,  2nd
    January 1964, 30th January 1999, and 12th March 1989 respectively.  The
    first and second Claimants are married and are the parents of the third
    and fourth Claimants, who are brother and sister respectively.

 4. The Claimants contend that they arrived in the United Kingdom  lawfully
    on 17th May 2002 with leave to remain until 17th November 2002.

 5. On 27th March 2003 the Claimants applied for further leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom which application was refused on  1st  August  2003.
    The decision was reconsidered and maintained on 30th January 2004,  and
    again on 5th April 2005 following further reconsideration.

 6. On 10th July 2009 the Claimants made a further application for leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom, which was refused on 12th March 2010.

 7. On 27th September 2012 the Claimants made another application for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom which was refused on 1st October  2013.
    Judicial review proceedings were commenced as it was contended that the
    Claimants did not have a right  of  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    agreed by way of a consent order dated 26th February 2014 to reconsider
    the applications made by the Claimants, and if  the  applications  were
    refused, the Claimants would be granted an in-country right of  appeal.



 8. The applications were reconsidered which  resulted  in  a  reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 7th July 2014, which related to the first,  second
    and third Claimants.  The fourth Claimant was issued with a reasons for
    refusal letter dated 10th November 2014.

 9. The Secretary of State made decisions to remove the first,  second  and
    third Claimants on 17th July 2014, and a removal decision was  made  in
    relation to the fourth Claimant on 10th November 2014.

10. In summary the reasons for refusal letter dated 7th July 2014 contended
    that none of the Claimants could succeed with reference to Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules in relation to family life.

11. It was not accepted  that  the  Claimants  could  satisfy  any  of  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life, nor was  it
    accepted that any exceptional circumstances  existed  which  merited  a
    grant of leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).

12. The  refusal  letter  of  10th  November  2014  considered  the  fourth
    Claimant's private life pursuant to paragraph  276ADE,  the  Respondent
    not accepting that the fourth Claimant could benefit from  any  of  the
    provisions of that paragraph.  It was  not  accepted  that  the  fourth
    Claimant was entitled to remain in the  United  Kingdom  by  reason  of
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, outside the Immigration Rules.

13. The Claimants appealed and the appeals were heard together by the judge
    on 9th February 2015.  The judge found that the third Claimant's appeal
    succeeded under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) on the basis that he was  under
    the age of 18 years and  as  at  the  date  of  application  had  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years.

14. In relation to the first and second Claimants the judge  allowed  their
    appeals with reference to section EX.1(a) of Appendix FM  finding  that
    they had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  child,
    that being the third Claimant, who had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for seven years, and it would not be reasonable to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.

15. In relation to the fourth Claimant the judge allowed her  appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) finding that she was aged 18  years  or  above,
    had lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  less  than  twenty
    years, but had no ties to Sri Lanka.  In the  fourth  Claimant's  case,
    the judge went on to consider, in the alternative,  Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules and also allowed her appeal on that basis.

16. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

17. In relation to the first and second Claimants it was contended that the
    judge had erred in allowing the appeals under EX.1, because they  could
    not meet the requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4 and therefore EX could
    not apply.

18. It was also submitted that the judge had erred in  law  by  failing  to
    take into account the public interest considerations in section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

19. In relation to the fourth Claimant it was contended that the judge  had
    failed to adequately explain why it was found that she had no  ties  to
    Sri Lanka.  It was contended that the judge had given no  consideration
    to the fact that the Claimants had remained unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  thereby  undermining  the  public  interest  in   immigration
    control.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  M
    Davies.  The appeal came before me on 22nd May 2015.

21. A preliminary issue  was  raised  that  although  the  application  for
    permission to appeal  had  referred  to  the  third  Claimant's  appeal
    number, the grounds did not contain any  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal findings in  relation  to  the  third  Claimant,  and  it  was
    therefore submitted that the grant of permission to appeal  should  not
    have referred to the appeal number or the name of the  third  Claimant.
    Mr Tarlow, who appeared for the Secretary of State, agreed.

22. After hearing submissions from both representatives, I agreed that  the
    grounds contained within  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    disclosed no challenge to the conclusions  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal regarding the third Claimant, and I found that in the  absence
    of any challenge, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appeal of the third Claimant  succeeds  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    must stand.

23. I found that the judge had erred in his consideration of the appeals of
    the first and second Claimants, by treating EX.1 as freestanding.   The
    Upper Tribunal made it clear in Sabir [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) that this
    was not the case.  EX.1(a) should not have been considered in  relation
    to the first and second Claimants, because they could not  satisfy  the
    requirements set out in E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4.

24. The judge having allowed the appeals of the first and second  Claimants
    under EX.1(a) did not go on to consider in relation to  the  first  and
    second Claimants, paragraph 276ADE or Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules.  I found that the decision made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the first and second Claimants must be set  aside  and  re-
    made.

25. In relation to the fourth  Claimant,  the  judge  considered  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) on the basis of the Claimant having to establish that she
    had no ties to Sri Lanka, although this version of  the  paragraph  was
    amended on 28th July 2014, and replaced with a  different  test,  under
    which an individual must prove that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration back into the country he or she would have  to
    go if required to leave the UK.  I found that the judge  had  erred  in
    considering the "no ties" by not giving adequate reasons as to  why  it
    was found that the fourth Claimant had no ties to Sri  Lanka.   I  also
    found that the consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, which was only applied  to  the  fourth  Claimant,  was  legally
    flawed, because the judge had not demonstrated that the  considerations
    set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act had been taken into account.

26. I therefore concluded that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the first, second and fourth Claimants must be  set  aside.
    The hearing was adjourned for further evidence to be heard so that  the
    decision could be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.



Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

27. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Secretary of  State's  bundle  which  related  to  the  first  -  third
    Claimants, and a separate bundle that related to the  fourth  Claimant.
    I had a bundle submitted on behalf  of  the  Claimants  comprising  152
    pages.

28. Although I had found that the First-tier Tribunal decision in  relation
    to the third Claimant had not been challenged and must stand, the third
    Claimant was still listed as a party to the appeal.  With the agreement
    of both representatives I indicated that  I  would  include  the  third
    Claimant in my decision and reasons, and would make it clear  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in his case had not been challenged
    and would stand.

29. Mr Clarke submitted that the  appropriate  test  to  be  considered  in
    relation to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  was  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Claimants'  integration  into  Sri  Lanka,
    rather than the 'no ties' test which had been  replaced  on  28th  July
    2014, and referred to paragraph 39 of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ  1292
    in support of this submission.  Mr Davison agreed.

30. I asked for clarification of the issues.  Mr Davison confirmed that  no
    reliance was placed upon Appendix FM by the  Claimants.   Reliance  was
    placed  upon  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  Article  8   outside   the
    Immigration Rules in relation to both family and private life.

31. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

32. I heard evidence from  the  first  Claimant  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement dated 4th February 2015, the second Claimant who adopted  her
    witness statement of the same date, and the fourth Claimant who adopted
    her witness statement also of the same date.   I  also  heard  evidence
    from Kirikankanange Dhanul Yanaka De Silva  (Dhanul)  who  adopted  the
    contents of his letter of 4th February 2015.  All gave  their  evidence
    in English.

33. The witnesses were all cross-examined.  I have recorded  all  questions
    and answers in my Record of Proceedings and  it  is  not  necessary  to
    repeat them in full here.  The evidence may be summarised as follows.

34. The first and second Claimants confirmed that they are married and that
    they arrived in the United Kingdom lawfully with their son and daughter
    on 17th May 2002.  They confirmed that they had made  applications  for
    leave to remain which had been refused.

35. Both indicated that they have adapted to  the  culture  of  the  United
    Kingdom, and have a number of British friends.  They  do  not  wish  to
    return to Sri Lanka.  They have never  had  recourse  to  public  funds
    during their stay in this country and have no criminal convictions.

36. They have established their family and private lives here  and  do  not
    have ties to Sri Lanka.

37. The only relative that they have in Sri Lanka is the  first  Claimant's
    elderly mother.  The first Claimant has worked in the catering industry
    in the United Kingdom, and also as a carer, and the second Claimant has
    undertaken some voluntary work.  Both the first  and  second  Claimants
    felt that they would be unable to find employment in Sri Lanka and that
    their son's education would suffer if he  had  to  return.   The  first
    Claimant's mother has a small home, but this would  not  be  enough  to
    accommodate the Claimants as a family.  There was  a  conflict  in  the
    evidence as the first Claimant stated that his mother was looked  after
    by a relative, whereas the  second  Claimant  indicated  that  she  was
    looked after by a maid who was not related to her.

38. The fourth Claimant gave evidence after her  parents.    She  confirmed
    that she was 13 years of age when she arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She regards herself as British without any  ties  to  Sri  Lanka.   She
    regards English  as  her  first  language.   She  cannot  speak  fluent
    Sinhalese.   She  was  educated  to  A  level.   She  has  subsequently
    undertaken courses and is a trained wedding planner and  masseur.   She
    plans to establish her own businesses  in  these  fields.   The  fourth
    Claimant is in a relationship with  her  partner  and  they  have  been
    together for approximately three years.  They have talked  of  marriage
    but the fourth Claimant indicated that she wished  to  wait  until  her
    immigration status was regularised.

39. The fourth Claimant stated that she could not  imagine  living  in  Sri
    Lanka.

40. I then heard evidence from Dhanul.  He confirmed that he moved  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2002 when he  was  3  years  of  age.   He  has  been
    educated in this country and  has  just  completed  his  GCSEs  and  is
    looking to progress to study  A  levels.   He  wants  to  study  Sports
    Medicine.  He is  fully  integrated  into  the  British  way  of  life.
    English is his first language.  He cannot read or write Sinhalese.   He
    has not visited Sri Lanka or any other country since he  moved  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He regards this country as his home.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

41. Mr Clarke submitted that none of the three  Claimants  could  meet  the
    high threshold set by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

42. It was accepted that Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules should  be
    considered, as it was accepted that Dhanul would be  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom because his appeal had succeeded  and  had
    not been challenged.

43. I was asked to note that the first and  second  Claimants  were  highly
    resourceful individuals who came to the United Kingdom with nothing but
    found employment, and worked illegally.  It was submitted that it would
    be easier for them to integrate back into Sri Lanka, than  it  was  for
    them to integrate into this country.

44. In the past both have worked and they have skills which they could  use
    in Sri Lanka.  I was asked to find that they could obtain accommodation
    with the first Claimant's mother, and the circumstances  of  this  case
    did not show that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  their
    integration back into Sri Lanka.

45. The fourth Claimant was described  as  being  very  well  educated  and
    focused on what she wishes to do with her career.  Mr Clarke  submitted
    that she could pursue those interests in Sri Lanka.

46. When considering Article 8,  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  section  117B
    considerations must be taken into  account.   In  relation  to  section
    117B(6) it was accepted that Dhanul is a qualifying child.   Mr  Clarke
    submitted that it was not  determinative  that  he  was  likely  to  be
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  I was referred to paragraph 58  of
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874.   Mr  Clarke  pointed  out  that
    neither the first nor second Claimants had a right to  remain  in  this
    country, and submitted that it was reasonable for Dhanul to return with
    them to Sri Lanka, even though he was entitled to be granted  leave  to
    remain in this country.  There would be education available for him  in
    Sri Lanka, which is described as a primarily English speaking  country.
    I was asked to dismiss the appeals of the three Claimants.

The Claimants' Submissions

47. Mr Davison submitted that the fact that the son of the family is  going
    to remain in the United Kingdom, amounts to a very significant obstacle
    to reintegration of the Claimants into Sri Lanka, which means that  the
    appeals should be allowed pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

48. Mr Davison accepted that paragraph 58 of  EV  (Philippines)  posed  the
    following question;

         "Thus the ultimate question will be is it reasonable to expect  the
         child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country
         of origin?"

49. Mr Davison observed that Mr Clarke  had  submitted  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for Dhanul to return to Sri Lanka, notwithstanding  that  he
    was entitled to remain in the United Kingdom, but pointed out that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had made findings,  in  allowing  Dhanul's  appeal,
    that it would not be reasonable for him to return to Sri Lanka,  and  I
    was referred to paragraph 40 of the First-tier Tribunal decision  which
    contained that finding.  I was reminded that the Secretary of State had
    not made any challenge to the findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to Dhanul.

50. Therefore there was a finding that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  for
    Dhanul to return, and the fact that he would be remaining in the United
    Kingdom, therefore presented a very significant obstacle to his  family
    members returning to Sri Lanka.

51. If the Claimants' appeals were not allowed  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) I was asked to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules and to allow the appeals under Article 8.  Mr  Davison  submitted
    that although the fourth Claimant is now 26 years of age, she still has
    family  life  with  her  parents  and  brother.   She  is  not   living
    independently and her life with her family members, amounted to  family
    life that would engage Article 8.

52. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

53. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral and  documentary,
    placed before me.  I have also taken into account the submissions  made
    by both representatives.  I have considered the evidence in  the  round
    and taken into account the circumstances as at  the  date  of  hearing.
    The burden of proof when considering the Immigration rules  is  on  the
    Claimants, and the standard is a balance of probability.

54. Although, Dhanul is listed as a Claimant in this decision,  I  wish  to
    reiterate that his appeal should  never  have  been  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, as there was no challenge in the grounds contained within the
    application for  permission  to  appeal,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    findings in relation to him.   That  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State at the error  of  law  hearing  on  22nd  May  2015.
    Findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  third
    Claimant stand, which includes the finding that it  is  not  reasonable
    for him to leave the United Kingdom.

55. I accept Mr Davison's submissions that it is appropriate to  take  that
    into account when considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and whether there
    are very significant obstacles to reintegration back into Sri Lanka.

56. Dealing firstly with the first and second Claimants, I accept that they
    came to the United Kingdom lawfully on 17th May 2002, and that they had
    leave to remain until 17th  November  2002.   I  find  that  they  have
    overstayed  without  permission.   The  first   Claimant   has   worked
    illegally.  The family as a whole  have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully since 17th November 2002.

57. I find that the first Claimant's mother still lives in Sri Lanka.   She
    is looked after by a maid and has her own  accommodation.   I  did  not
    hear  any  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  Claimants   support   her
    financially.

58. The second Claimant indicated in her evidence that  she  was  in  touch
    with friends in Sri Lanka, who told her that private schools  are  very
    expensive.  Both the first and second  Claimants  speak  Sinhalese  and
    English.  They have lived longer in Sri Lanka than  they  have  in  the
    United Kingdom.  They are citizens of Sri Lanka, not British citizens.

59. If this case related only to the first and second  Claimants,  I  would
    have no hesitation in finding that they have not proved that there  are
    very significant obstacles to their integration back  into  Sri  Lanka.
    There are no relevant health issues.  There would  be  no  language  or
    cultural issues.  I find no reason why the  first  Claimant  could  not
    find employment in Sri Lanka, and I did not  hear  any  evidence  which
    would indicate that  the  second  Claimant  would  be  unable  to  find
    employment.

60. However it is not the case that I have only to consider the  first  and
    second Claimants.  They have a 16 year old son who is entitled to  stay
    in the United Kingdom.  It was indicated before me  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, that he was likely to be granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  It was also  argued  before  me  that  notwithstanding  his
    entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom, it would be reasonable for
    him to return to Sri Lanka with his parents.   I  find  that  I  cannot
    accept that argument, in view of the findings made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that it would not be reasonable for him to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

61. I accept the fact that the first and second Claimants' son, who has not
    yet completed his education, will remain in the United  Kingdom,  is  a
    very significant factor that has to be taken into account when deciding
    whether there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  parents
    leaving him in the United Kingdom and integrating into Sri  Lanka.   In
    my view this factor proves on a balance  of  probabilities  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the first and  second  Claimants
    integrating into Sri Lanka, because they would be leaving  their  minor
    son in the United Kingdom.  I therefore  conclude  that  their  appeals
    succeed with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

62. I next consider the fourth Claimant and  her  case  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  In view of my findings  in  relation  to  her
    parents, and her brother, I conclude that if she returns to  Sri  Lanka
    she would be returning without  those  family  members.   Although  the
    fourth Claimant is 26 years of age, she still lives  with  her  family,
    and has done so, certainly since arriving in the United Kingdom as a 13
    year old in 2002.

63. I accept the fourth Claimant's evidence that she has not been  back  to
    Sri Lanka since she arrived in  this  country,  and  that  she  has  no
    friends in Sri Lanka.  I accept her evidence that her  friends  are  in
    the United Kingdom and that she has integrated into this country.

64. Although there was no evidence from the fourth Claimant's boyfriend,  I
    accept her evidence that she is in a relationship and that  the  couple
    have discussed engagement.

65. I find that the fourth Claimant was aged 13 years  2  months  when  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom.  She has now lived in the United Kingdom
    for just over thirteen years two months.  She has therefore lived  just
    over half her life in the United Kingdom, although she  cannot  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) which involves proving that an  individual
    is between 18 and 25 years of age and has spent  at  least  half  their
    life living continuously in the United Kingdom, because that period  of
    time has to be satisfied as at the date of application, not the date of
    hearing.

66. The fourth Claimant speaks fluent English and  I  accept  her  evidence
    that she does not speak fluent Sinhalese.  I accept her  evidence  that
    when she speaks with her grandmother in Sri  Lanka  by  telephone,  she
    speaks English.

67. Having carefully considered the evidence, I  am  satisfied  the  fourth
    Claimant has fully integrated into this country, and that  she  regards
    herself as being more British than Sri Lankan and that other  than  her
    Sri Lankan citizenship, she does not  have  any  strong  ties  to  that
    country.

68. While I accept that the fourth Claimant has lived here unlawfully since
    November 2002, I accept that she was a child when she arrived, and that
    she cannot be blamed for her unlawful status, which initially  was  the
    responsibility of her parents.

69. In conclusion, I find on the balance of probabilities, that the  fourth
    Claimant has proved that the factors referred  to  above,  particularly
    the length of time that she has spent in this  country,  and  the  fact
    that if she returned to Sri Lanka, she would be  returning  alone,  the
    fact that she has no friends or close  family  members  in  Sri  Lanka,
    other  than  her  elderly  grandmother,  proves   on   a   balance   of
    probabilities that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into Sri Lanka.  Therefore her appeal  also  succeeds  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

70. I will go on to consider  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    notwithstanding that the appeals are allowed under paragraph 276ADE.

71. I have followed the principles outlined in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  which
    involves answering the following questions;

    (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

    (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

    (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

72. I find that the Claimants  have  established  family  lives  with  each
    other, and with Dhanul.  Although the fourth Claimant is an adult,  and
    the Court of Appeal  in  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  indicated  at
    paragraph 25 that family life is not established between an adult child
    and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something exists more
    than normal emotional ties, I have also considered more recent case law
    such as Ghising (family life - adult - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160
    (IAC).  In summary the Upper Tribunal found that there was  no  general
    proposition that Article 8  of  the  1950  Convention  could  never  be
    engaged when the family life it is sought to establish is between adult
    siblings living together.  Rather than applying  a  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children, each case  should  be  analysed  on  its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists within  the  meaning
    of Article 8(1).  Whilst some generalisations are possible,  each  case
    is fact-sensitive.

73. Ghising was specifically approved by the Court of Appeal in Gurung  and
    Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8, in relation to the discussion of family  life
    between adults.  The Court of Appeal found that  whether  there  was  a
    sufficient dependence and in particular sufficient emotional dependence
    between adult siblings and adult parents,  to  justify  the  conclusion
    that they enjoyed family life was a question of fact.  It is  important
    that there is emotional dependence.  In this case I am satisfied  there
    is emotional dependence demonstrated between the four  family  members.
    The fourth Claimant has not moved away, and although she may in  future
    move away if she does become engaged  to  a  partner  and  subsequently
    married, at the date of hearing she is not leading an independent  life
    and the evidence indicated that she is extremely close to  her  parents
    and younger brother.

74. I therefore proceed on the basis that the Claimants have established  a
    private and family life that would engage  Article  8.   Answering  the
    question whether the  proposed  interference  with  their  private  and
    family life is in accordance with the law, my primary finding  is  that
    it is not.  This is because I have found that the appeal succeeds  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE.  However, if that finding is wrong, then
    the interference would be in accordance with the law.

75. Proceeding on that basis, the proposed interference with the Claimants'
    private and family  lives  would  be  necessary  in  the  interests  of
    maintaining effective immigration control, and the final question to be
    considered  is  whether  the  interference  is  proportionate  to   the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

76. In considering proportionality I take into account  the  considerations
    set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Sub-section  (1)  states  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
     Sub-sections (2) and (3) state that it is in the public interest  that
    persons seeking to remain the United Kingdom can speak English and  are
    financially independent.

77. The Claimants can speak English, and I accept their evidence that  they
    have never claimed funds from the state.  They  have  been  financially
    independent because the first Claimant has worked  illegally.   However
    the Upper Tribunal decided in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)  that
    an individual can obtain no positive right  to  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain from either section 117B(2)  or  (3),  whatever  the  degree  of
    fluency in English or strength of financial resources.

78. In my view the first and second Claimants succeed with their Article  8
    family life claim, because of section 117B(6)  which  states  that  the
    public interest does not require a person's removal where  that  person
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

79. It is accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  first  and  second
    Claimants do have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child, and the First-tier Tribunal found that it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

80. I do not find that the Claimants could  succeed  with  a  private  life
    claim under Article 8.  This is because  section  117B(4)  states  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when the person is in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   The
    Claimants have been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  November
    2002 and therefore I attach little weight to  the  private  lives  they
    have established during that period of time.

81. The fourth Claimant cannot succeed with  her  family  life  claim  with
    reference to paragraph 117B(6) because she does not have a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her brother.  The  question  that
    must be decided in relation to the fourth Claimant's  family  life,  is
    whether if she was removed from the United Kingdom, this  would  result
    in unjustifiably harsh consequence.

82. I find that it would.  This is on the basis that the fourth  Claimant's
    parents and brother with whom she had lived all of her life,  would  be
    remaining in the United Kingdom.  The fourth Claimant would  be  living
    in Sri Lanka, a country where she has not lived since 2002 when she was
    13 years of age, and where she has no friends, and  her  only  relative
    would be her elderly grandmother.  In those circumstances I  find  that
    the Secretary of State's decision to remove would  be  disproportionate
    and would breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of  law  in
relation to the third Claimant and the decision in  relation  to  the  third
Claimant stands.

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law  in
relation to the first, second and fourth Claimants and was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeals of the first, second and  fourth
Claimants are allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds in relation to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no  anonymity  order
is made.


Signed   Date: 25th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the Claimants' appeals have been  allowed  I  do  not  make  a  fee
award.  Evidence was given to the Tribunal that was not  made  available  to
the initial decision maker.


Signed   Date: 25th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

