
ST

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29406/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 28th January 2015                          |On 2nd February 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES


                                   Between

                           MR MOHAMMAD AFZAL SHAH
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Details of the Appellant and Proceedings


 1. The appellant was born on  10th  January  1968  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  He was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Stott  (the  Judge)
    who, in a determination promulgated on 16th October 2014, dismissed his
    appeal under the EEA Regulations 2006 for a residence card on the basis
    of being the spouse of a  qualified  person.   The  central  issue  was
    whether the marriage was one of convenience.

 2. The grounds on which permission to appeal  were  granted  included  the
    assertion that the Judge did not have before  him  the  record  of  the
    marriage interview in a case where the  respondent  conceded  that  the
    majority of questions  were  answered  correctly.   The  case  depended
    heavily on credibility findings and it was found to  be  arguable  that
    the Judge erred in making his decision without having before him a full
    record of interview. The matter accordingly came before me to determine
    whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an  error  of
    law.

 3. Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may, at the request of the parties but only  if
    it considers it appropriate, make a  consent  order  disposing  of  the
    proceedings and making such other appropriate provision as the  parties
    have agreed. Mr Kandola for the  respondent  indicated  to  me  at  the
    outset of the hearing, having already discussed the matter with  Mrs  S
    Bassiri-Dezfouli for the appellant, that he  accepted  that  there  was
    nothing to show that the Judge had a full record  of  interview  before
    him in making his decision.

 4. Mr Kandola accepted that this amounted to a material error of  law,  by
    way of procedural unfairness or otherwise; the decision had  been  made
    in the absence important evidence going  to  the  core  of  the  issues
    involved. He accordingly did not  oppose  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    agreed that the decision should be set aside  and  remade.  Mr  Kandola
    submitted a full record of interview and accepted  that  the  appellant
    would need time to consider the evidence which had not been  previously
    made available.

 5. Both Mr Kandola and Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli agreed that in  the  light  of
    the  new  evidence  served  which  was  absent  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in the light of the necessary fact finding involved in the re-
    making of the decision and having regard to  the  overriding  objective
    that the matter would be most appropriately remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade.

 6. This course of action was in my view appropriate in the  light  of  the
    Practice Statement on the disposal of appeals  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    made by the Senior President of Tribunals on  25th  September  2012  as
    follows:

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

 7. By consent, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The
    case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Birmingham  on
    5th May 2015 for reconsideration on the basis that none of the findings
    shall stand.


Summary of Decisions


 8. It is conceded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a
    material error of law. That decision is set aside.

 9. With the consent of both parties, in accordance with  Rule  39  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the case is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  on  5th  May  2015  for
    reconsideration on the basis that none of the findings shall stand.

Directions

10. The case shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Stott.

11. Any other directions will be for the First-tier Tribunal  to  consider,
    but it may assist to know that 3 witnesses are to  be  called  and  the
    services of a Russian interpreter will be required.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no  order  for  anonymity.   There  is  no
    application to make such an order and there is nothing to suggest  that
    such a direction is needed.



Signed

J Harries
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 30th January 2015
