

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29201/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 15 June 2015                               |on 23 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS TANG CHENG YUEN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Sharma, of Matthew Cohen & Associates Limited,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia, born  on  8  May  1988.   In  a
    "reasons for refusal letter" dated 9 July 2014 the  respondent  advised
    her that her application made on 26 April 2014 for leave to remain  was
    refused in respect of family life under Article 8 in terms of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules; in respect of private life under Article 8
    and  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules;  and  that  no  exceptional
    circumstances were found to warrant consideration of a grant  of  leave
    outside the requirements of the Rules.

 3. The decision on exceptional circumstances is made  under  reference  to
    the appellant suffering from epilepsy, the medication to control  which
    is also available in Malaysia.  The point  was  not  addressed  in  the
    Upper Tribunal nor as far as I can see in the First-tier Tribunal,  but
    this part of the decision may reflect a misunderstanding.   It  is  not
    the appellant but her husband who suffers from epilepsy.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  D'Ambrosio
    allowed her appeal by determination promulgated on 27 October 2014.

 5. In her grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  said
    at ground 2 that her case should succeed under paragraph EX of Appendix
    FM, based on insurmountable obstacles to family life with  her  husband
    continuing outside the UK, a criterion not to be interpreted literally.
     Ground 3 maintained that even if the case failed under the Rules, then
    based on circumstances such as her husband's  epilepsy,  his  need  for
    support of family members, and the appellant  and  her  husband  living
    with her immediate family members who had acquired UK citizenship,  the
    interference would be disproportionate.

 6. (The papers on file do not make made  it  clear  whether  or  when  the
    appellant's  relatives  moved  from  indefinite  leave  to  remain   to
    citizenship status, but the distinction is not material.)

 7. After a thorough discussion  of  the  circumstances  the  determination
    finds that although the appellant and her husband may  experience  some
    degree of hardship and difficulty in leaving the UK for Malaysia,  that
    does not amount to insurmountable obstacles.  The appeal was  therefore
    not allowed under reference to paragraph EX.

 8. The Judge found a good arguable case to determine  outside  the  Rules.
    He gave his reasons at paragraph 90:-

           ...  it  is  relevant  ...  to  consider  the  interests  of  an
           applicant's relatives who are entitled to remain in the UK.  The
           evidence ... indicates ... that the appellant's ... removal  ...
           potentially could  have  serious  adverse  consequences  on  the
           private and family life of the appellant and also of her husband
           and his parental family members (all British  citizens  residing
           in the UK) and also of her  own  parental  family  members  (all
           residing in the UK with indefinite  leave  to  remain)  ...  the
           refusal decision failed to investigate those potentially serious
           adverse consequences ... so they remain live  Article  8  issues
           which this Tribunal can and should determine.

 9. Following  a  further  extensive  discussion  the  Judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 140:-

           ... albeit on a fine balance, I find ... that  the  interference
           with private and family life in the UK  of  the  appellant  (and
           that of  her  husband,  and  their  respective  paternal  family
           members in the UK) which would result by the appellant's removal
           to  Malaysia  is  of  sufficient  importance  to  outweigh   the
           interests of the British community in implementing a fair system
           of legitimate immigration control for the appellant and others.

           ... the respondent's  decision  that  the  appellant  should  be
           removed from the UK to Malaysia would not be  proportionate  and
           would not be lawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998
           ... her forcible removal would be incompatible with  the  rights
           of the appellant (and those of her husband, and their respective
           paternal family members in the UK) under Article 8 of ECHR.

10. The thrust of the SSHD's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    that there was  no  evidence  of  compelling  circumstances  such  that
    refusal of leave was unjustifiably harsh; that family and private  life
    matters were addressed through the Rules; and that the Tribunal:

           ... impermissibly substituted its own decision for that  of  the
           SSHD as to where the public interests lies in the income ...  to
           be shown, and from where it should be derived,  to  achieve  the
           aims  of  preventing  burdens  on  the  taxpayer  and  promoting
           integration; the circumstances did not disclose an unjustifiably
           harsh outcome for the appellant and her husband;  the  test  was
           "insurmountable obstacles", which the case  had  been  found  to
           fail; the correct assessment would have been that  no  grant  of
           leave was warranted outside the Rules.

11. On 27 March 2015  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted, on the view that arguably the circumstances identified by  the
    Judge at paragraphs 128 to 139 of his  decision  were  insufficient  to
    amount to the type of compelling circumstances  that  might  warrant  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules.

12. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission, the appellant says in
    summary that there is no intermediate  threshold  of  a  good  arguable
    case,  and  that  the  Judge  reached  a  sustainable   conclusion   on
    proportionality.

13. Mrs O'Brien said that the Judge after careful  examination  within  the
    Rules found no particular  circumstances  amounting  to  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being carried  on  in  Malaysia.   After  that
    thorough analysis in relation to paragraph EX1, the Judge pointed to no
    further evidence which  might  show  a  disproportionate  breach,  even
    although the requirements of paragraph EX1 were not met.  There was  no
    reason for embarking on a further  Article  8  assessment.   Everything
    which the Judge rehearsed had already been considered  under  paragraph
    EX1.  Nothing was left out of the count in that context, including  the
    preferences and the support of the wider families of  both  appellants.
    The Judge simply looked at the same matters but reached another outcome
    on a practically identical  factual  matrix.   There  had  to  be  some
    feature separate from the Rules,  something  missing  from  the  Rules,
    before the Judge could properly allow the appeal under Article 8.   The
    Judge  made  much  of  the  appellant's  ability  to  be  supported  by
    themselves and their families, but the financial criteria  were  to  be
    taken from the Rules.  It was not permissible to allow an appeal  under
    Article 8 by considering matters on which they had fallen short of  the
    requirements of the Rules.  There  could  only  have  been  one  proper
    outcome to this case.  The determination should be reversed.

14. The appellant presented a line of argument under her  first  ground  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, framed as a response  to  a  Section
    120 notice, which she maintained at the hearing and which is  discussed
    at paragraphs 7, 23, 26 and 27 and 37 to 40 of the First-tier  Tribunal
    determination.  She seeks to deduce from her  immigration  history  and
    from the grants of leave she had in the past that she somehow ought  to
    qualify for a grant of leave within the Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal
    found nothing in this line of argument. It was also taken by Mr  Sharma
    in his submissions in the Upper Tribunal, although it does  not  appear
    to be raised in the Rule 24 response  as  a  point  on  which  she  was
    previously unsuccessful but again seeks to argue.

15. As to the Article 8 outcome Mr Sharma said that the Rules did not cover
    all cases.  The Rules did not take into account the family  life  which
    the appellant had with her parents and her brother, nor  the  situation
    of her mother-in-law who was recovering from cancer.   Her  husband  is
    epileptic and needs to be near his parents.  The Judge  had  considered
    all relevant circumstances.  He should have allowed the  appeal  within
    paragraph EX1 on a consideration of insurmountable obstacles but in any
    event his decision outside  the  Rules  was  properly  reasoned  having
    considered the relevant case law and the requirements of  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  The determination should stand.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. The point stemming from the first ground of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is one which, as presented, I also  find  impenetrable.   What
    does emerge from it is that the appellant  came  to  the  UK  with  her
    parents and brother in 2006, has always lived  with  them,  even  after
    forming her own family with her husband, and that the family  intention
    was always to remain  together.   The  appellant  meanwhile  became  an
    adult, married, and fell into a different route within the  immigration
    regime, while the other three are now settled here.  Any  challenge  to
    the respondent's decision making at earlier stages comes too late,  and
    Article 8 is not for "near  misses";  but  this  is  an  important  and
    somewhat unusual family context.  Both  spouses,  not  just  one,  have
    their families of origin close to them in the  UK.   The  appellant  in
    particular may be said, despite her marriage,  scarcely  to  have  left
    that family.  The case was not presented  as  one  in  which  an  adult
    retains her family relationships within  the  strict  Article  8  sense
    after leaving childhood but the case at least came close to  that.   In
    any event, such relationships remain important in terms  of  Article  8
    whether classified as family or as private life.   These  are  features
    which the judge recognised.

18. Section EX of Appendix FM aims only at difficulties and hardship to  be
    encountered by a couple outside the UK.  It is not concerned  with  the
    interference with family  and  private  life  relationships  among  the
    couple and their relatives who are likely to remain  in  the  UK.   The
    judge was correct to deal with that aspect as  one  separate  from  the
    Rules.  There is a distinction drawn between the factual  matrices  for
    those two purposes.  An appeal succeeding on such a basis would  always
    have to be based on Article 8 outside the Rules.

19. The Presenting  Officer  argued  that  impacts  on  relationships  with
    relatives in the UK are always likely in cases like  this  and  so  are
    within the ambit of what  the  Rules  anticipate  and  do  not  justify
    looking outside.  I agree that it is  readily  foreseeable,  and  built
    into the Rules, that they draw lines and impose family separation where
    that is highly unwelcome to those affected, but that cannot be taken to
    the point of governing every case.  There is a category of cases  where
    the Rules have not sufficiently addressed all  relevant  issues;  cases
    which the Rules seek to  reduce  to  a  minimum  but  which  cannot  be
    entirely eliminated.

20. I agree with the submission  for  the  respondent  that  the  financial
    limits set by the Rules are not generally to be overridden by  a  broad
    based assessment based on the principle in Section  117B(3).   However,
    in a case which for reasons not related to finance calls for  appraisal
    outside the Rules, then it becomes relevant  that  although  the  Rules
    cannot be met, there are not likely to be  adverse  effects  on  public
    funds.  The judge was entitled to find that once  he  did  embark  upon
    consideration of the public interest question the factors specified  in
    section 117B were not  significantly  against  the  appellant;  indeed,
    there would be no good reason to find otherwise.

21. The appellant's case rather exaggerated the  adverse  consequences  for
    her and her husband of removing to Malaysia, and  the  significance  of
    the health condition of her husband,  which  is  well  controlled;  but
    those are not the issues on which her case succeeded.

22. The respondent's grounds of appeal  are  not  very  accurately  framed.
    They are largely a repetition of the case in terms of paragraph EX,  on
    which the judge found for the respondent. Paragraph 12 of  the  grounds
    says that the determination amounts to a finding that  the  Rules  will
    never be proportionate in a case involving a British citizen, but  that
    misrepresents the determination.  The criticism was better put  by  the
    Presenting Officer along the lines that there was no justification  for
    going outside the Rules.  But some cases do call for  that,  the  judge
    explained why he thought this was one, and he went on to  explain  why,
    although on a fine balance he struck the proportionality balance on the
    appellant's side.  I do not think that  the  respondent's  grounds  and
    submissions have shown that conclusion to be legally erroneous.

23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




