
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29044/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2014                           |On 12 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                         mr adeniyi olumide akinfusi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nwami, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 22 March  1965.   He  has
    been given permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ruth dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to issue  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence as the spouse of a Hungarian and therefore EEA national, Miss
    Ildiko Hering.

2.   The appellant was granted permission on the basis that a panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal was to consider the whole issue of  customary  marriages
    by proxy and therefore it was appropriate to grant  permission  on  his
    application pending the  outcome  of  the  panel  hearing.   The  Upper
    Tribunal has now published its decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).

3.    The  appellant's  immigration  history  is  not  entirely  clear.   He
    officially entered the UK on 10 June 2005 on  a  visitor's  visa  valid
    until 11 November  2005.   According  to  the  respondent  however  the
    appellant had been refused entry clearance in Lagos on 25 August  2006.
    It was therefore not clear when the appellant last entered the  UK  but
    he was encountered by the respondent on 18 May 2007 and has been in the
    UK since that date without leave.

4.   On 9 July 2012 the appellant made an application to the respondent  for
    a residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA  national.   The  respondent
    rejected the application in  a  letter  dated  5  December  2012.   The
    respondent took the view that the appellant's  alleged  proxy  marriage
    carried out in Nigeria was not valid.  The evidence submitted  did  not
    establish that the appellant was in a durable relationship with his EEA
    sponsor.  On that basis the respondent concluded that the appellant did
    not satisfy the definitions of  a  family  member  or  extended  family
    member contained in regulations 7 and 8 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

5.   The judge  had  before  him  copies  of  documents  the  appellant  had
    submitted to the respondent in support of his application and copies of
    documents the appellant had submitted in support of his  appeal.   They
    included a Nigerian divorce decree, a certificate  of  registration  of
    customary marriage from  Nigeria,  an  affidavit  apparently  from  the
    father of the sponsor, the opinion of a Nigerian solicitor  as  to  the
    validity of proxy marriages in Nigeria and  a  letter  from  the  Ilaje
    Local Government where the proxy marriage was registered.

6.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant,  Miss  Ildiko  Hering  and
    her daughter.

7.   In determining the validity of the appellant's customary marriage,  the
    judge had regard to the Nigerian Federal Marriage Act 1990 and came  to
    the view that customary marriages  are  not  governed  by  the  Federal
    Marriage Act.  The appellant's grounds  accepted  that  the  judge  was
    correct to form that view but argued that the judge materially erred in
    law in his finding that the appellant's proxy marriage  was  not  valid
    under Nigerian customary law.  Ms Nwami argued that the judge was wrong
    at paragraph 35 to adopt the respondent's assertion in the Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter that there are  four  essential  elements  for  a  valid
    customary marriage in Nigeria and was wrong to conclude at paragraph 35
    that there was no valid marriage because the requirements had not  been
    satisfied.  The four requirements relied on  by  the  judge  were:  the
    consent of the parties; capacity; the giving of a dowry; and the formal
    giving away of the bride. Ms Nwami argued that there was no evidence to
    substantiate these four elements.  She  relied  on  head  note  (d)  of
    Kareem which held:

         "In appeals where there is no such marriage  certificate  or  where
         there is doubt that a marriage certificate has  been  issued  by  a
         competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
         other evidence.   This  will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine
         whether a proxy marriage was contracted."

8.   Ms Nwami submitted that in the appellant's case a  competent  authority
    issued  the  marriage  certificate  and  therefore  the  marriage   was
    registered according to customary law in Nigeria.  She argued that  the
    judge's findings must be set aside because of the helpful  guidance  in
    Kareem.  Because there was a valid marriage certificate  there  was  no
    need for other evidence to assess whether the  marriage  was  conducted
    according to customary law in Nigeria.

9.   Mr Bramble on the other hand argued that the judge did not err  in  law
    in that the requirements relied on by the  judge  formed  part  of  the
    criteria upheld by the Upper Tribunal at  paragraph  54  of  Kareem  as
    follows:

         "54. The balance of the evidence before us is that  a  dowry  is  a
             requirement of a customary marriage  in  Nigeria,  and  indeed
             there appears to be no evidence to the  contrary.   Similarly,
             and  to  the  contrary,  we  conclude  on   the   balance   of
             probabilities that a customary marriage will not  be  regarded
             as a marriage in Nigerian law unless there is evidence of  the
             parties' consent, that they have the  capacity  to  marry  and
             that there has been a formal giving away of  the  bride  (i.e.
             parental  consent   to   the   marriage).    Unless   evidence
             demonstrates that these  requirements  do  not  apply  in  the
             relevant community these criteria will be the  usual  starting
             point for deciding if a marriage has been contracted."

10.  We have considered the judge's findings  and  come  to  the  conclusion
    that he did not err in law.  The judge noted that the validity  of  the
    marriage, discounting the evidence of the appellant and  sponsor  which
    he did not accept to be credible, was very limited.   It  consisted  of
    photocopies of his certificate of registration of customary marriage in
    the  Chief  Magistrates'  Court  of  Ondo  State,  a  letter  from  the
    Commissioner for Oaths from that state, an alleged affidavit  from  the
    sponsor's father and a letter from the Ilaje Local  Government.   These
    documents, all of which were photocopies, said nothing about whether or
    not a dowry was paid and whether or not there was a formal giving  away
    of the  bride.   Furthermore,  it  was  not  entirely  clear  from  the
    affidavit of the alleged father of the sponsor whether or not he was in
    Nigeria at the time of the marriage.  Ms Nwami  who  was  also  Counsel
    below had suggested that although the  documentation  did  not  provide
    these details as to these matters, the judge should accept  on  balance
    that the essential four requirements must be satisfied as the documents
    would not otherwise have been  issued.   The  judge  said  he  was  not
    prepared to accept  that  submission  given  his  findings  as  to  the
    credibility of the witnesses.  In his overall assessment of credibility
    in the round, he considered the  failure  of  any  of  the  documentary
    evidence  to  support  the  satisfaction  of  all  the  four  essential
    requirements for a valid customary marriage to be suspicious.

11.  In paragraph 55 the Tribunal recognised  that  this  could  not  be  an
    exhaustive  list  because,  as  Nigerian  case   law   indicates,   the
    requirements for a marriage to be accepted as having been contracted by
    custom and native law varies within Nigeria.   In Kareem the  applicant
    was an Ibo.  The appellant in the instant appeal  is  Yoruba.   Counsel
    was unable to tell us what variation, if any, there was between an  Ibo
    customary marriage and a Yoruba customary marriage.

12.  The appellant had submitted the opinion of a Nigerian solicitor  as  to
    the validity of proxy marriages in Nigeria.  We accept that  the  judge
    did not make any finding on this opinion but we find that  his  failure
    to do so does not materially undermine his decision. The solicitor said
    that customary marriage is contracted in accordance  to  the  customary
    laws (native traditions, customs and cultures) of the  parties  to  the
    marriage.  It is governed by rules which  are  largely  unwritten.   In
    paragraph 16 he said there are  five  identifiable  requirements  of  a
    customary marriage and  they  are  -  relationship  (consanguinity  and
    affinity); age, payment of dowry; capacity; and consent.  We note  that
    he does not include the formal giving away of the bride.  In any event,
    we find that these requirements were taken into account  by  the  judge
    who noted that the marriage certificate  did  not  say  anything  about
    whether or not a dowry was paid.  In the circumstances we find that the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 35 was not flawed.

13.  Counsel then argued  that  the  judge's  credibility  findings  on  the
    durability of the marriage were flawed.  This  was  because  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's daughter who had said that she was in a  similar  situation
    to her mother when she herself had a relationship with a  Nigerian  man
    with whom she has two children.  Her evidence was that the language was
    not  an  essential  element  by  which  to  gauge  the  genuineness  or
    durability of the relationship.

14.  We note that at paragraph 36 the judge said that he did  not  find  the
    evidence of the appellant and his partner in relation to their marriage
    and relationship to be credible.  He considered it  necessary  for  the
    parties wishing to show that they are in a durable relationship  to  be
    able to demonstrate a relationship of mutual affection and  support  in
    one way or another.  He said there was simply no attempt to set out any
    aspect of the lives this alleged couple lived together in their witness
    statement or  in  examination-in-chief.   In  cross-examination,  their
    evidence in this regard was very limited.  The only information he  was
    able to glean from either was that they sometimes go to parties at  the
    week-end and attend church.  Otherwise they remained at home.  He found
    it very strange indeed that neither the appellant nor the  sponsor  was
    able to describe any other aspect of their mutual lives together.

15.   In  his  view  the  most  significant  aspect  which  undermined   the
    credibility of both the appellant and the sponsor  was  the  fact  that
    neither the appellant nor the sponsor are able to speak to  each  other
    in a common language.  The appellant confirmed he does  not  speak  the
    Hungarian language  and  the  sponsor  speaks  only  extremely  limited
    English and does not speak any language  spoken  in  Nigeria.   Despite
    claiming to have been  with  the  sponsor  in  a  loving  and  mutually
    dependent relationship since 2010,  he  has  not  been  able  to  speak
    directly to her since her English is too  poor.   The  judge  found  it
    impossible to accept that a genuine relationship could  be  carried  on
    over three years by reference only to Google translates,  a  dictionary
    and interpretation by the daughter. He found  that  this  fact  fatally
    undermined the credibility  of  the  appellant,  the  sponsor  and  her
    daughter.

16.  Counsel submitted that there was other evidence of  durability  in  the
    form of the sponsor's payslips, bank statements and utility bills which
    all go to the same address but this evidence was not considered by  the
    judge.   She  also  said  that  there  were  letters  of  support  from
    witnesses, none of whom attended the hearing to support the appellant's
    appeal.

17.   We  agree  with  Mr  Bramble's  submission  that  the  judge  did  not
    unnecessarily focus on the language difficulty.   At  paragraph  37  he
    considered the day to day relationship of the  couple,  their  language
    and at paragraph 45 noted  that  there  were  a  number  of  supporting
    letters  in  the  bundle  attesting  to  the  genuine  nature  of   the
    relationship.  However none of  the  persons  preparing  those  letters
    attended to give  evidence  so  that  the  evidence  could  be  tested.
    Furthermore, the documentation, such as the tenancy agreement, did  not
    of itself show a genuine relationship and did not lead him to alter his
    conclusion.

18.  We find that the judge considered all the evidence  in  the  round  and
    his conclusion that the appellant and the sponsor are not in a  durable
    or genuine relationship was one that was open to him on the evidence.

19.  Finally we note what  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  in  paragraph  17  of
    Kareem.  It said:

         "Spouses; rights of free movement and residence are derived from  a
         marriage having been contracted and depend on it.  In light of  the
         connection between the rights of free movement  and  residence  and
         the nationality laws of the Member States, we conclude that,  in  a
         situation where the marital relationship is disputed, the  question
         of whether there is a marital relationship is  to  be  examined  in
         accordance with the laws of the Member State from which  the  Union
         citizen obtains nationality and from which therefore  that  citizen
         derives free movement rights."


20.  At paragraph 18 the panel goes on to find  that  "given  the  intrinsic
    link between nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we
    conclude that the legal system of the nationality of the Union  citizen
    must itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted".

21.  In this case we have no evidence from Hungry to determine  whether  the
    customary marriage between the appellant  and  his  Hungarian  wife  is
    valid in accordance  with  Hungarian  law.   In  the  absence  of  such
    evidence, we do not find that the judge erred in law.

22.  The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
