
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29277/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 and 24 November 2015            |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR KASHIF SHAHZAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mrs H Price, Counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Eban)   sitting   at   Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 29  May  2015)  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  issue  him
    with a residence card on  the  ground  that  his  marriage  to  an  EEA
    national was one of convenience.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    an anonymity direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  the  claimant
    requires to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 14  September  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "3.  It is arguable that Judge Eban may have erred in finding there
             were insufficient grounds for the respondent  to  suspect  the
             marriage was  one  of  convenience.   The  appellant  was  the
             subject  of  a  previous  decision  that  he  provided   false
             documents in support of an application (recorded at  paragraph
             20 of the refusal letter).

         4.   It is also arguable that the evidence may have been lacking on
             which to make a finding that  the  interviews  amounted  to  a
             systemic check by the respondent prohibited by  the  Community
             treaties."

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In the hearing before Judge Eban, the claimant was represented  by  Mrs
    Price of Counsel,  and  there  was  no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The judge received oral evidence from the claimant
    and his EEA sponsor.

 4. In her subsequent decision, she summarised  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case as being based on an assessment of the marriage  interviews  which
    had been conducted with the claimant and his EEA  sponsor  on  12  June
    2014.  She went on to pose this question: was there enough evidence  to
    support suspicion that the marriage was one of convenience?   She  said
    that Mrs Price argued that the parties'  interview  should  never  have
    been undertaken, because there was no well-founded suspicion  of  abuse
    which warranted investigation.  The Secretary of State did not set  out
    any basis for seeking  to  verify  the  authenticity  of  the  parties'
    relationship.  The judge continued:

         "7.  Mrs Price drew my attention to the Guidance quoted at Appendix
             A of Papajorgji which provides that:

                  'The  Directive  does  not  prevent  Member  States   from
                  investigating individual cases  where  there  is  a  well-
                  founded  suspicion  of  abuse.   However,  Community   law
                  prohibits systematic checks.'

             Mrs Price urged me to find that as there was  no  well-founded
             suspicion of abuse, the parties' interview  was  a  systematic
             check based solely on the  appellant's  nationality,  and  was
             prohibited.  As a result the interview should not  have  taken
             place and should not be taken into account, and the  appellant
             is not required to prove that  his  marriage  is  not  one  of
             convenience.

         8.   The European Commission's Handbook on addressing the issue  of
             alleged marriages of convenience between EU citizens and  non-
             EU nationals in the context of EU law on free movement  of  EU
             citizens deals with investigation techniques.   It  formulates
             the  threshold  for  interviewing  suspected  spouses  in  the
             following terms:

                  'As  any  other  investigation  technique,  interviews  of
                  suspected spouses should only be launched  where  national
                  authorities - on the basis of  the  information  available
                  and using the double-lock safeguard mechanism  -  consider
                  that their serious doubts about  the  genuineness  of  the
                  marriage have not been sufficiently dispelled.'

         9.   I have also noted that regulation 20B of the  EEA  Regulations
             provides as follows (emphasis added):

             'Verification of a right of residence

             20B. (1) This regulation applies when the Secretary of State -

                      (a)  has reasonable doubt  as  to  whether  a  person
                           ('A') has a  right  to  reside  under  regulation
                           14(1) or (2); or

                      (b)  wants to verify  the  eligibility  of  a  person
                           ('A') to apply  for  documentation  issued  under
                           Part 3.

                  (2)  The Secretary of State may invite A to -

                      ...

                      (b)  attend an interview with the Secretary of State.

                  (3)  If A purports to be entitled to a right to reside  on
                      the basis  of  a  relationship  with  another  person
                      ('B'), the Secretary of State may invite B to -

                      ...

                      (b)  attend an interview with the Secretary of State.

                  ...

                  (7)  This regulation may not be invoked systematically.'

         10.  The parties supplied the  respondent  with  all  the  relevant
             documents which had been requested and the respondent referred
             to no factors whatsoever, based on these documents or on other
             information received concerning the parties,  which  supported
             suspicions  for  believing  that  the  marriage  was  one   of
             convenience.  Accordingly based on  the  refusal  letter,  the
             respondent did not have the basis for a  reasonable  suspicion
             of abuse before the marriage interview took place, and  should
             therefore not have invited the parties to interview.   In  the
             light of Papajorgji, the Handbook and regulation 20B  I  agree
             with Mrs Price's submission that the interview should not have
             taken place.

         11.  Notwithstanding that the decision to  interview  was  arguably
             taken with a  view  to  detect  and  prevent  possible  abuse,
             without evidence to justify it, the decision raises  questions
             about whether it was taken on a  discriminatory  or  automatic
             basis.    If   so   this   would   be   an   unjustified   and
             disproportionate  intrusion  into  the  private  life  of  the
             parties.   I  accept  Mrs  Price's  submissions  that   absent
             indicative criteria that the marriage was one of  convenience,
             there  should  not  have  been  an  investigation   into   the
             circumstances of the appellant's marriage in the  form  of  an
             interview.  I find that in this case  based  on  the  evidence
             before me, the  interview  amounted  to  a  systematic  check,
             prohibited by Community law.

         12.  Accordingly I find that the respondent has not  satisfied  the
             evidential burden of showing  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
             convenience and  as  a  result  there  is  no  burden  on  the
             appellant to demonstrate that  his  marriage  is  not  one  of
             convenience."



    The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. In the application for permission to appeal, it was pointed out that at
    paragraph 20 of the decision letter it was asserted that this  was  not
    the first instance in which the claimant had been deemed to  have  made
    false representations  to  an  immigration  department  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  In a refusal for his application for leave  to  remain  under
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  dated  27  September  2012,  he  submitted  a
    document purporting to have been genuinely issued by Kensington College
    of Business, confirming his completion of a course at the college.  The
    college was contacted by a representative of the Secretary of State and
    the document was confirmed as a fraudulent document which had not  been
    issued by the Kensington College of Business.

 6. But even if it was true that no reason had been given in  the  decision
    letter which would justify interviewing the claimant and  the  sponsor,
    there was still nothing to  indicate  that  Regulation  20B  was  being
    invoked systematically.  It was not sufficient  simply  to  assert  the
    Regulation was being invoked systematically, without a solid  basis  of
    evidence with which to back  up  that  assertion.   To  prove  such  an
    assertion, it would be necessary to make reference  to  more  than  one
    case. The judge had not provided adequate reasons for finding that  the
    interview amounted to a systematic check.

The Error of Law Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mrs Price mounted  a  robust  defence  of  the  judge's  decision.
    Although the judge had not referred to  paragraph  20  of  the  refusal
    letter, the allegation made in that paragraph had not  been  proved  by
    the Secretary of State, and therefore the judge was entitled to  ignore
    it.

 8. There was also no material error of law for another reason,  which  was
    that the judge had heard oral evidence from the claimant  and  his  EEA
    sponsor, and had clearly found it to be credible.  The judge  had  also
    taken into account her submissions about the unsatisfactory  nature  of
    the questioning in the marriage interviews, which were  a  memory  test
    rather than a test of  genuineness.   Mrs  Price  referred  me  to  her
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  which  this
    point had been taken.

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  Judge
    Eban  had  misunderstood  the  guidance  contained  in  Appendix  A  of
    Papajorgji. Anyway, of greater relevance was the domestic  guidance  in
    the EEA Marriage Casework IDIs of 2 July  2014,  a  copy  of  which  he
    produced for my perusal.



Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

Timing

10. When the claimant and his  wife  were  invited  to  attend  a  marriage
    interview, they were informed that the reason for the  invitation  was,
    "to dispel concerns that  the  Home  Office  has  as  to  whether  your
    relationship is genuine or not as  well  as  to  investigate  the  full
    details of your pending application".

11. If it was going to be argued that there were not reasonable grounds  to
    justify an investigation into  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship,
    arguably it was at this juncture that the point needed to be  taken  by
    way of judicial review, rather than taking it after the event when  the
    Secretary of State was relying on the couple's performance in interview
    as engendering suspicion that their marriage was one of convenience.

Triggers for investigation versus grounds for suspicion

12. Another preliminary observation  is  that  the  guidance  contained  in
    Appendix A of Papajorgji is misleading, in that some of the  indicative
    criteria  which  are  to  be  considered  as  possible   triggers   for
    investigation are criteria which would only emerge as a result  of  the
    interview, and would not in the ordinary course of events  be  apparent
    before the interview.  Criteria in this category include:

         .    the couple are inconsistent about  their  respective  personal
             details, about the circumstances of their  first  meeting,  or
             about other important personal information concerning them;

         .    the couple do not speak a language understood by both.

    On analysis, criteria of this  type  engender  reasonable  grounds  for
    suspecting a marriage of convenience. They are not merely triggers  for
    an inquiry into whether the marriage is one of convenience.

The domestic guidance

13. The guidance given in the domestic IDIs is superior in this  regard  in
    that both the core criteria and additional  criteria  for  assessing  a
    marriage as one of convenience are more clearly focused on  what  would
    be apparent to a caseworker from the contents of  the  application  and
    from the applicant's immigration history, as distinct from  what  might
    become  apparent  to  the  caseworker  after  the  couple   have   been
    interviewed.

14. Paragraph 3.5 of the guidance states that in deciding  whether  a  case
    can be investigated as a possible marriage of convenience,  caseworkers
    must proceed by a process of elimination, using the criteria set out in
    section 3.7; and the section goes on to detail various  types  of  case
    which  should  be  discarded  from  consideration   as   marriages   of
    convenience, including where there is a child of the relationship.

15. It was not part of the claimant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the Secretary of State had failed  to  follow  her  own  published
    guidance  in  deciding   that   the   appellant's   marriage   required
    investigation.

The errors of law

16. The judge has not given adequate reasons for finding at paragraph  [10]
    that the Secretary of  State  did  not  have  a  basis  for  reasonable
    suspicion of abuse before the marriage interview took place, and should
    therefore not have invited the parties to interview.

17. The implication of paragraph 20  of  the  refusal  letter  is  twofold.
    Firstly, the implication is that the claimant does not have any  extant
    leave to remain, and has been an overstayer since the refusal of  leave
    to remain.   Secondly,  and  more  importantly,  as  is  spelt  out  in
    paragraph 20, the ground of refusal of leave to remain was that he  had
    employed deception in order to obtain leave to  remain,  and  therefore
    this engendered reasonable grounds to suspect  that  he  was  employing
    deception now, by putting himself forward as being in a genuine marital
    relationship with an EEA national when in fact the marriage was entered
    into for the predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

18. There is no merit in the argument that the judge was entitled to ignore
    paragraph 20 of the refusal letter because the Secretary of  State  had
    not provided proof of the allegation that the claimant had  provided  a
    false document.

19. On the evidence available to the judge, the claimant did not take issue
    with the account of  his  adverse  immigration  history.   His  witness
    statement before the First-tier Tribunal only addressed  the  basis  on
    which he had first entered the country.  The  claimant  was  completely
    silent on the topic raised in paragraph  20  of  the  letter.   In  any
    event, unless  the  claimant  had  successfully  appealed  the  refusal
    decision referred to in paragraph 20, the mere fact that  he  had  been
    refused on deception grounds was enough to justify the claimant and his
    spouse being asked to attend a marriage interview.

20. The judge also did not have a proper evidential basis  for  finding  in
    paragraph [11] that the  interview  amounted  to  a  systematic  check,
    prohibited by Community law.  There was no evidence before her that the
    decision to interview the couple had been taken on a discriminatory  or
    automatic basis.  In order to make out a case that the  interview  came
    about as a result of a systematic check, rather than being triggered by
    the claimant's particular circumstances, it would have  been  necessary
    to show that the Secretary of State had not followed her  own  guidance
    in the IDIs which  is  expressly  designed  to  prevent  couples  being
    systematically invited to marriage interviews;  or  that  the  domestic
    guidance is so flawed that it achieves the  opposite  purpose  to  that
    which is intended: that is, instead of preventing systematic  checking,
    it encourages it.

21. Although not raised in the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    there is also a Robinson obvious point  of  procedural  unfairness  and
    irregularity.  The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal made no
    mention of an argument that the couple should not have been invited  to
    an interview in the first place.  The battleground sketched out in  the
    grounds of appeal was whether the outcome of  the  marriage  interviews
    reasonably  sustained  the  charge  that  the  marriage  was   one   of
    convenience.  The Secretary  of  State  did  not  have  notice  of  the
    distinct line of argument upon which the judge decided the case against
    the Secretary of State.  This was procedurally unfair, as the Secretary
    of State was thereby deprived of the opportunity to be  heard  on  this
    issue.

22. Mrs Price submits that there is no material error of law as  the  judge
    would have reached a decision in favour of the claimant in  any  event,
    having regard to the contents of the  marriage  interviews  and  taking
    into account the credible oral evidence which she had received from the
    claimant and his wife as to the genuineness of their marriage. I cannot
    infer this as the judge has made no findings about the evidence of  the
    witnesses, or about the import of the marriage interviews.  On the face
    of it, her finding in favour of the claimant was solely  based  on  the
    proposition that the couple should not have  been  interviewed  in  the
    first place, and thus  the  content  of  the  marriage  interviews  was
    irrelevant - as was the oral evidence which she had received  from  the
    couple.   They  were  irrelevant  because,  on  the  judge's   (flawed)
    reasoning, the interviews were unlawful, and thus the case based on the
    contents of the interview did not need to be addressed.

23. The judge ought to have engaged  with  the  contents  of  the  marriage
    interviews and the oral evidence of the  witnesses  before  reaching  a
    decision on whether the marriage was one of convenience or not, and she
    erred in law in failing to do so.

24. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated  by  a
    material error of law, such that it should be set aside and remade.

The resumed Hearing to remake the decision

25. I directed that none of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal
    should be preserved. For the purposes of the remaking of the  decision,
    both parties served further evidence.

26. The claimant's solicitors filed with the Upper Tribunal  an  additional
    bundle containing an additional witness statement from the claimant  in
    which he addressed the  allegation  that  he  had  relied  on  a  false
    document, and the decision pertaining to his appeal made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The decision was made by Designated Judge Campbell  and
    Judge Bird. The panel dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 28 September 2012 to refuse to
    vary the appellant's leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant on the ground that he had submitted a letter dated 2 March 2012
    from Kensington College of Business (KCB) showing he had been granted a
    qualification from the University of Wales, and  KCB  had  subsequently
    informed the Home Office that the document submitted  by  the  claimant
    was not genuine.  The decision of the panel records that  the  claimant
    appealed against the decision, arguing that the documents he  submitted
    were genuine and he should have been granted the relevant  points.   He
    provided a witness statement made on 3 May 2013, but he did not  attend
    to give oral evidence.  The claimant's case was heard with a number  of
    other similar cases in the autumn of 2013, with a final hearing  taking
    place on 15 January  2014.   The  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's
    individual appeal was promulgated on 23 October 2014.

27. Mr Jarvis produced Section E of the Home Office bundle  that  had  been
    compiled for the purposes of the claimant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to vary his leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  In an email  sent  on  26  September
    2012, Irwin Stagg, administrator of KCB, informed  an  UKBA  caseworker
    that the letter dated 2 March 2012 was not a genuine document  and  was
    not issued by the college.  The claimant was not known to the  college.
    The ID number given on the letter did not exist in their records.   The
    visa letter contained notable differences in  formatting  content  from
    genuine documentation issued by the college.

28. The email was sent in response to an earlier email from the  caseworker
    stating that the claimant  had  provided  evidence  he  was  awarded  a
    Masters in Business administration on 24 February 2012. She  asked  for
    confirmation from KCB that this was correct.

29. Mrs Price informed me that having taken instructions from  her  client,
    who was present in the courtroom with his sponsor, she had decided  not
    to call either of them to give evidence.  She was also not proposing to
    put in evidence the claimant's  additional  witness  statement  in  the
    supplementary bundle. I pointed out that the Secretary of  State  would
    have been expecting to cross-examine the claimant and  his  sponsor  on
    the witness statements which they had provided for the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Jarvis said he did not object to these witness
    statements being taken into account for the purposes of the remaking of
    the  decision,  although  (as  he  later  developed  in   his   closing
    submissions), he invited me to attach little weight to them,  precisely
    because the claimant and the sponsor had not been tendered  for  cross-
    examination.

30. I invited Mr Jarvis to  draw  my  attention  to  the  passages  in  the
    interview transcripts upon which he relied as showing that the  parties
    were not in a  genuine  marital  relationship.   In  reply,  Mrs  Price
    submitted that on a  fair  reading  of  the  interviews,  there  was  a
    significant degree of consistency.  The alleged inconsistencies  either
    did not stand up to scrutiny, or they were simply  reflective  of  poor
    memory.  She criticised the interviews as being  essentially  a  memory
    test.  The credibility of the marital relationship was shown inter alia
    by the photographs of the wedding, at which other people apart from the
    claimant and the sponsor were present.  It was  also  significant,  she
    submitted, that both of them had given evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and they were prepared to give evidence today.   It  was  her
    decision not to call them as she was not au fait  with  the  claimant's
    previous appeal.  The issue for  me  was  not  whether  the  claimant's
    previous appeal had been rightly dismissed, but  whether  the  marriage
    was  one  of  convenience.   She  submitted  that  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities it was not a marriage of convenience.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

31. The legal burden rests with the Secretary of State to  prove  that  the
    marriage is one of convenience, and the standard of  proof  is  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

32.  As  asserted  in  the  refusal  letter,  there  are   "a   litany   of
    discrepancies" between the answers which the claimant and  the  sponsor
    gave to a range of questions, including questions on the topic of their
    engagement, their wedding, a return trip to Lithuania, their respective
    immigration and employment histories, and the claimant's observance  of
    his Muslim faith.

33. The interviews took place on 12 June 2014. The marriage had taken place
    on 6 December 2013, following an engagement  which  was  said  to  have
    taken place on 17 July 2013, the sponsor's  birthday.   So  neither  of
    them was being asked to recollect crucial details about the development
    of their relationship which lay in the distant past.

34. On the topic of their engagement, the claimant  told  the  interviewing
    officer that he proposed to the sponsor on her birthday while  shopping
    and that they went to a restaurant thereafter.  She said  that  he  had
    proposed to her in Nando's in Stratford when they were having lunch  on
    her birthday.  Asked further questions about  the  proposal,  she  said
    that they were both sitting at the table eating and he had taken out  a
    ring box and had asked her to marry her, and he had then given  her  an
    engagement ring.  But when the claimant was asked about this,  he  said
    he had not proposed over lunch and he had not given her a  ring.   They
    were doing some shopping when he proposed, and after she said yes  they
    went to a restaurant. The interviewing officer informed  him  that  his
    sponsor had shown them a ring. He insisted he had not  given  her  this
    ring and that it must have been given to her by  her  family.  She  had
    been wearing the same ring "before we met" (Q&A 220).

35. The interviewing officer  noted  that  neither  the  claimant  nor  his
    sponsor was wearing a wedding ring to  the  marriage  interview.   When
    asked about this, the sponsor stated that they wanted to  choose  rings
    to exchange, but they could not decide which one(s) (Q  &  A  181-182).
    But the claimant gave a different explanation which  was  that  it  was
    contrary to family tradition to exchange  rings  when  getting  married
    because it was a bad omen or brought bad luck, and so they had no plans
    to exchange rings (Q& A 231-232).

36. With regard to the wedding, the claimant was asked  why  his  sponsor's
    parents were not present at the wedding.  He said it  was  because  the
    sponsor's grandmother was ill at the time.  But his sponsor said it was
    because her parents were working.  Her father was working  in  Germany,
    and her mother did not like travelling.

37. The claimant was asked about a deposit of �500 made by W  Shahzad  into
    his sponsor's bank account on 13 December 2013.  The claimant said this
    was a payment made by his brother for rent and  other  things  for  the
    wedding.  But the sponsor said that the payment was for her holiday  in
    Lithuania.  She said she had gone back to Lithuania  in  February  2014
    for a few days to visit her family and for  her  grandmother's  funeral
    (Q&A 92-105).  When questioned about whether his sponsor  had  recently
    gone back to Lithuania, the claimant initially stated that she had gone
    back in March (2014), before retracting this and asserting that she had
    gone  back  to  Lithuania  for  a  week  before  the  wedding  for  her
    grandmother's funeral. He did not know  which  airport  she  had  flown
    from. At the time she was living in Barking.

38. The sponsor was asked why the claimant's brother had paid him money  in
    December if she was not going to Lithuania until  February  2014.   She
    said she was not working, her  grandmother  had  passed  away  and  she
    wanted to see her family. When asked which airport she flew  from,  and
    she said she had flown from Glasgow Prestwick.  She was asked  why  she
    had flown from Scotland to Lithuania, when she lived  in  London.   She
    said it was because she had lived in Scotland before.  She took a train
    up to Glasgow, and a train back from Glasgow.  When she flew back  into
    Glasgow from Lithuania, she stayed with her friend there.  Her  husband
    did not accompany her, as he was working at KFC.

39. Earlier in her interview she was asked whether she had spent any nights
    apart from the claimant since their marriage, and she said no. They had
    gone to Scotland together (Q&A 33-34).  They  had  stayed  a  hotel  in
    Glasgow for four days between 21 and 25 January 2014 (Q&A 234-240).

40. As submitted by Mr Jarvis,  the  sponsor's  explanation  for  taking  a
    tortuous route via Scotland in order to return to Lithuania for a visit
    lacks credibility, and is much more consistent with her  continuing  to
    habitually reside in Scotland after the marriage, as she  had  done  in
    the past.  But the main blow to the couple's credibility  lies  in  the
    fact that when the claimant was asked to confirm she had gone  back  to
    Lithuania in the spring of 2014, he said no, she had gone  back  before
    their marriage.  As her alleged visit to Lithuania in February 2014 was
    only a few months earlier, it is not credible that the  claimant  could
    have forgotten as if he was in a genuine relationship with her.

41. The claimant also initially lied to the interviewer about  the  outcome
    of his application for a post-study work visa.  In answer  to  question
    173, he told the interviewer that he did not  get  any  answer  to  the
    application.  As Mrs Price points out, the claimant then corrected  his
    answer saying that his application had been rejected and he was waiting
    for a result on his appeal.  As the decision was not promulgated  until
    October 2014, this was true.  But it does not change the fact that  the
    claimant gave answer which he knew to be untrue.  As for  the  sponsor,
    when questioned about the claimant's immigration history, she displayed
    complete ignorance about the claimant's current situation.   In  answer
    to question 135 she said that he had got a good qualification from  his
    final course of study.  If she was in a genuine relationship  with  the
    claimant, she would have known that the qualification relied on by  the
    claimant was asserted by the college and the Home Office to  be  false,
    and that claimant had been pursuing an appeal against the  decision  to
    refuse him leave to remain.

42. On the topic of the claimant's religious observance, the  sponsor  said
    that the claimant and his brother shared a prayer mat which he kept  in
    the bedroom. It was green, and also red "sometimes". He kept a copy  of
    the Koran by the bed in a bedside drawer (Q&  A256-268).  The  claimant
    said he had a red prayer mat which  was  kept  in  a  cupboard  in  the
    sitting room. He did not have a copy of the Koran (Q&A 288-294).

43. Her husband's birthday was in November. She just got him a card as  she
    was not working at the time (Q&A 340-342). The claimant said  his  wife
    gave him a sweater as a present,  although  he  could  not  recall  the
    colour (Q&A 362-363).

44. She would like to have children by him and they had talked about having
    children (Q& A364-365). The claimant said they  had  not  talked  about
    having children (Q&A 381).

45. She said she had finished her  previous  employment  at  Tesco  in  the
    summer of 2013 (Q&A 52) and had begun her current employment at KFC  in
    January 2014 (Q&A 39). He said she had worked at Tesco  until  November
    2013, and had begun working at KFC in February 2014 (Q&A 57-63).

46. The sponsor said that about fifteen people joined them to celebrate the
    wedding, but the photographs only show two people  being  present  with
    the couple at the registry office,  one  of  whom  was,  I  infer,  the
    claimant's  brother.  There  are  no  photographs  showing  a   wedding
    celebration attended by a larger group of people.

47. They agreed that they had first met on  New  Year's  Eve,  31  December
    2012, and that she had moved into the house he shared with his  brother
    after their wedding. They agreed that they  had  gone  to  Scotland  in
    January 2014 for a honeymoon (although there is no documentary evidence
    of them staying together in a hotel in Glasgow for four nights  between
    21 and 25  January  2015).  There  was  also  a  reasonable  degree  of
    consistency in the information  which  they  gave  about  each  other's
    current daily routines.

48. The respects in which the claimant and the sponsor were in agreement in
    their accounts are merely consistent with them being friends  and  with
    them living from time to time under the same roof. I consider that  the
    discrepancies which I have highlighted above are strongly indicative of
    them not being in a genuine and subsisting  marital  relationship,  and
    that the marriage is one of convenience.

49. In his witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  claimant
    asserted that  some  of  his  answers  were  incorrectly  recorded.  He
    insisted, for example, that he kept a copy of the Koran and his  prayer
    mat in a drawer beside his bed, and had not said anything different  in
    his interview. However, the interview was recorded, so  it  was  always
    open to the claimant to apply  for  a  copy  of  the  recording  if  he
    challenged the accuracy  of  the  transcript.   In  any  event,  it  is
    inherently unlikely that the stark discrepancies in the  answers  given
    are accounted for by errors in transcription.

50. In conclusion, having assessed the evidence in its totality,  including
    the documentary evidence of cohabitation and the rebuttal  evidence  of
    the claimant and the sponsor in their respective witness statements,  I
    find that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden  of  proving
    that the marriage between the couple is  one  of  convenience.  On  the
    balance of probabilities the claimant paid the sponsor to marry him  as
    he knew that he had used a false document and so he was likely to  lose
    his appeal against the decision to refuse to vary his leave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

