
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th February 2015                         |On 31st March 2015             |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                            norma pearl mcgibbon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe of Counsel instructed by French and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency and to avoid confusion,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 24th November 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth  in  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds against the decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse leave to remain applying the provisions of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  on  Article  8  grounds
    generally.

 3. In granting permission Judge Parkes noted that the grounds argued  that
    Judge Hollingworth erred in relation to the needs  of  the  appellant's
    mother, said to be cared for by the appellant,  because  there  was  no
    evidence that alternative care packages had been explored including the
    actual needs of the appellant's mother and her entitlement  to  receive
    assistance.  This  had  to  be  balanced  against  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom illegally and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's mother did not wish to live in a care home did not make the
    respondent's decision unreasonable.

 4. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from both  representatives
    about the alleged error and then reserved my decision.   A  summary  of
    the submissions and my conclusions are set out below.

Submissions

 5. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied upon the  grounds.   He
    emphasised the respondent's view that the appellant had been given  the
    advantage of overstaying.  Full consideration had  not  been  given  to
    possible caring arrangements which might be available through the state
    and otherwise if the appellant had to return to  Jamaica.   He  thought
    that the judge's conclusions in paragraph 30 of the decision were wrong
    because the nature of a social care package had not  been  investigated
    and this was relevant to the decision on proportionality.  He also drew
    my attention to paragraph 34 in which the judge had  decided  that  the
    appellant's removal would have a significantly  detrimental  effect  on
    the wellbeing of the appellant's mother.  He considered this conclusion
    to be wrong in all the circumstances of the case.

 6. Mr Pipe drew my attention to his skeleton argument which, amongst other
    things, quotes the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AT  (Guinea)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1889 which made the elementary point that the  duty  to
    give reasons does not entail a requirement that the fact-finding  judge
    should deal expressly  with  every  matter  raised.   Nevertheless,  he
    argued that the judge had dealt with the issue of care  satisfactorily.
    In considering  the  provisions  of  Sections  117A  and  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) the judge had
    given proper consideration and weight  to  not  only  the  relationship
    between the appellant and her mother but also her relationship with her
    partner.  Although  the  latter  relationship  could  not  entitle  the
    appellant to status under the Immigration Rules it was, nevertheless, a
    relevant factor.  He also reminded me that the  judge  had  taken  into
    consideration medical evidence about the extent of care provided by the
    appellant for her mother.

 7. Mr McVeety concluded his submissions by expressing the view that  there
    was nothing in front of  the  judge  about  the  availability  of  care
    arrangements which had only been speculated upon by the judge.

 8. In conclusion Mr Pipe conceded that state care might be provided to the
    appellant's mother but the Home Office had to  show  that  interference
    with the Article 8 rights  of  all  the  parties  was  justified.   The
    removal of the appellant would clearly be detrimental to  the  mother's
    state of health.

Conclusions

 9. The issue of  potential  care  arrangements  had  been  raised  by  the
    respondent when examining the existence  or  otherwise  of  exceptional
    circumstances in the application made by the appellant.  The point made
    is that the appellant's mother, a British citizen, could  seek  support
    from local Social Services as required and, if that were not available,
    from her family members not subject to immigration  control.   This  is
    the issue which the respondent claims was inadequately examined by  the
    judge.

10. The decision by the experienced judge  is  comprehensive  and  cogently
    reasoned. It is difficult to see  how  the  decision  can  be  seen  as
    deficient in its examination of all the issues relevant  to  the  human
    rights claim and particularly  the  matter  raised  by  the  respondent
    namely the availability of state assistance and/or care  through  other
    family members.  The judge was evidently aware of the assistance  given
    by the appellant's niece in addition to the appellant but was  entitled
    to conclude that the niece's assistance was  limited.  He  had  medical
    evidence before him in the form of a letter from Dr Bell which assisted
    him to conclude that the care given by the appellant to her mother  was
    of significant importance to make her the main carer.  He  was  further
    entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  mother  was  completely
    dependent upon her  daughter.   Thus  the  issue  of  alternative  care
    arrangements within the family were properly covered in the decision.

11. Whilst the judge acknowledges  that  a  state  care  package  might  be
    available he has looked, as he was entitled to do, at  the  reality  of
    the situation and the difficult circumstances of the  mother's  failing
    health.   In  considering  that  he  also  looked   at   the   personal
    circumstances for the appellant taking into consideration that she  had
    no immigration status in the country.  He noted that, nevertheless, the
    appellant was an English speaker who is financially independent and was
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her  partner,  a  British
    citizen.  All of these factors  entitled  the  judge  to  conclude  the
    proportionality balancing exercise  in  the  appellant's  favour.   His
    conclusions, particularly in relation  to  the  availability  of  care,
    cannot be seen as pure speculation when they have been reached  on  the
    basis of the reality of the medical situation for the  mother  and  the
    clear emotional dependency between the mother and the appellant.  I  do
    not see that an error arises in this respect.

12. The approach of the judge to consideration of Article 8 issues is  also
    without error.  Although the judge reached the conclusion that the  two
    stage approach recommended in Gulshan ought to be followed when  it  is
    now clear from subsequent decisions of the Court  of  Appeal  that  any
    intermediary test is unnecessary, this  does  not  affect  the  judge's
    plainly thorough consideration of Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. He correctly applied the  five  stage  approach  recommended  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and gave full attention  to  the  application  of
    Sections 117A and 117B of the  2002  Act  in  relation  to  the  public
    interest involved.

13. I  have,  therefore,  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
    criticisms of the decision amount to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's findings which have been properly and cogently reasoned  in
    respect of all relevant issues.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


