
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29906/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               Mrs Ribi Khanom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   I will refer to the parties throughout this decision  by  their  titles
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, entered the UK on 29 May 2006
    as a visitor.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fitzgibbon QC (the
    Immigration Judge) allowed her appeal against the respondent's decision
    to refuse her leave to remain in the UK on the basis that she had
    formed a family life with Mr Ahmed, a British citizen.

3.    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pirotta  gave   the   respondent
    permission to appeal that decision on 16 June 2015.  She was  satisfied
    that there were grounds for considering it wrong  for  the  Immigration
    Judge to conclude that there were any insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    appellant continuing her family life with Mr Ahmed, the sponsor, if she
    were required to return to Bangladesh.   There  were,  it  appeared  to
    Judge Pirotta, no exceptional circumstances so as to meet the  criteria
    of paragraph EX.1 in the Immigration Rules (in Phelan's Immigration Law
    Handbook 9th ed at p.1154).  The Immigration Judge was  criticised  for
    not applying the case law of VW (Uganda)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5.   Judge
    Pirotta considered that the Immigration Judge had not applied  the  law
    to the facts or made properly reasoned findings.

The Appeal Hearing

4.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both  representatives.  Mr  Avery
    on behalf of the respondent  (the  appellant  in  the  Upper  Tribunal)
    submitted that the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to  "insurmountable
    obstacles"  had  been  flawed.   In  particular,  I  was  referred   to
    paragraphs 11 - 14 of the decision, where the Immigration  Judge  dealt
    with EX.1(b) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  had  been  an
    illegal overstayer in  the  UK  for  over  eight  years  in  breach  of
    Immigration Rules and therefore could  not  comply  with  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.2.2 (b) unless EX.1 was  satisfied.  EX.1.(b)  applied  where  the
    appellant was able to show a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen where  the  appellant
    was able to show that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life with that partner continuing outside the UK.  This is  defined  in
    EX.2 of the Rules as being:

         'very  significant  difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by   the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK which would not be overcome and which  would  entail
         very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.'

4.   The Immigration Judge decided not to set the  bar  for  "insurmountable
    obstacles too high" but thought that the decision by Mr  Ahmed  not  to
    "abandon his way of life in the UK and move to a foreign country"  with
    which he had "negligible ties" should be given considerable weight.  He
    thought that the decision overall was  "reasonable".   Taking  all  the
    evidence into account  the  Immigration  Judge  was  satisfied  to  the
    required standard that the  consequences  of  the  appellant's  removal
    would entail an indefinite disruption to her marriage and that it would
    be "unduly harsh" in all the circumstances.  He was satisfied  that  it
    was not reasonable in the circumstances to expect Mr Ahmed to  relocate
    to  Bangladesh.   Therefore,  EX.1.  did   apply   (i.e.   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles in this case) and because  the  appellant  had
    established  family  life  in  the  UK  it  was  unnecessary  for   the
    Immigration Judge to  consider  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, which deals with private life.

5.   Mr Avery submitted that the  Immigration  Judge  had  not  applied  the
    test, as interpreted in the recent Court  of  Appeal  case  of  Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  In that case the court had  been  concerned  with
    two illegal overstayers  who  had  formed  relationships  with  British
    citizens.  Mrs Agyarko got married to her partner.  They  then  applied
    for leave to remain relying on the Human Rights Act 1998  and  claiming
    that their human rights under that Act would be  unlawfully  interfered
    with if they were removed from the UK.  They both  claimed  that  their
    circumstances were exceptional which warranted the grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the  Rules.   The  Court  of  Appeal  decided  that  the
    insurmountable obstacles test was to be a "stringent" one but it had to
    be "sensible and practical" rather than "literally"  interpreted.   The
    fact that Mrs Agyarko's partner had lived in the UK all  his  life  and
    had a job here and therefore might find it  difficult  to  relocate  to
    Ghana to  continue  their  family  life  there  "cannot  constitute  an
    insurmountable obstacle".  I was invited to overturn  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  substitute  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which would be to dismiss the appeal against the  respondent's
    decision.

6.   I then heard from Mr Miah on behalf of  the  appellant.   He  submitted
    that paragraph 3 of the appellant's witness statement made  clear  that
    this judge had decided the case on the information supplied before him.
     The sponsor would lose contact with the appellant if the  latter  were
    required to return to Bangladesh.  He had no  relatives  in  Bangladesh
    and no ties to speak of.  Furthermore, the case was distinguished  from
    either of the cases  considered  in  Agyarko.   In  particular,  I  was
    referred to paragraph 23 of Agyarko and to paragraph 25  where  it  was
    pointed out that very weak evidence had been presented for Mrs Agyarko,
    who had not provided a witness statement.  It is hardly  surprising  in
    the circumstances that the appellant was unable to show that there were
    insurmountable obstacles to her family life continuing.   The  language
    used in the Immigration Rules cannot be taken  literally.   A  sensible
    and practical approach was  required.   A  reasonable  stance  for  the
    sponsor to take was that he did not wish to go abroad.

7.   Mr Avery responded to say that the reasoning at  paragraph  14  of  the
    decision was flawed.  The Immigration Judge had not  applied  the  test
    correctly and had decided the case on very limited  information  as  in
    the Agyarko case.  There was no evidence that a protected  family  life
    existed with the extended family.

8.   Mr Miah further addressed me to say that if I was persuaded as  to  the
    respondent's argument  I  should  nevertheless  refuse  to  remake  the
    decision.  I should remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision because there were other grounds that  could  have  been
    argued if the appellant had not  succeeded  in  establishing  that  she
    qualified under paragraph EX.1. of the Immigration Rules.

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law and if there was what steps I  should  take
    to remedy that.



Discussion

10.  The appeal was determined  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellant had  to  show  that  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to her family life continuing if the appellant has to return
    to Bangladesh.  The Immigration Judge took account  of  the  fact  that
    they entered their relationship  knowing  that  the  appellant  was  an
    overstayer who was at risk of removal.

11.  The circumstances were not materially different from those  in  Agyarko
    in that Mr Ahmed had, apparently, lived in the UK all of his life,  was
    employed here and had no close family ties in Bangladesh.   However,  I
    do note that the appellant had two sisters in Bangladesh but allegedly,
    he had not maintained contact with them.  This is perhaps a point  that
    the Immigration Judge could have been more critical about, rather  than
    simply accepting Mr Ahmed's assertions.  It seems there was no  contact
    with Mr Ahmed's extended family.

12.  It was suggested by Mr Miah that because Mrs Agyarko had not  submitted
    a witness statement this,  whereas  the  appellant  had,  the  case  of
    Agyarko  was  distinguished.   However,  as  Mr  Avery  submitted,  the
    Immigration Judge does not seem to have gone  into  the  facts  in  any
    great detail.  He seems to have attached  considerable  weight  to  the
    difficulties Mr Ahmed would face in having to return to Bangladesh with
    his wife, the appellant.

13.  The Court of Appeal made it clear in Agyarko and in  other  cases  that
    "insurmountable obstacles" is intended to be a high bar which  must  be
    overcome  and  the  case  law  cited  in  that  case  illustrated   the
    application of that test in a number of difficult cases.  I accept that
    the test has to be applied in a sensible and practical way and  that  I
    am not required to apply it literally.  However, the fact that Mr Ahmed
    has lived in the UK all his life and has a job here hardly takes it out
    of the ordinary.

Conclusions

14.  The appellant chose to embark on family life with her  husband  in  the
    knowledge that she would have to return to Bangladesh.  They have  only
    been married since February 2014 and have no children.  She has been in
    the UK as an illegal overstayer for a number of  years  and  it  is,  I
    find, in accordance with the proper application  of  Immigration  Rules
    including the public interest considerations applicable to  all  cases,
    following the insertion of Part VA into the Nationality Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration Act 2014, to require her  to  return
    to her own  country.   I  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge  attached
    excessive weight to the difficulties he perceived would be faced by the
    sponsor in relocating from the UK to Bangladesh.  The  conclusion  that
    the effects  of  removal  would  "sever  marriage  ties"  was  not  one
    reasonably open to the Immigration Judge  on  the  facts.   Those  ties
    could continue from afar and it would, at some stage, be  open  to  the
    appellant to apply from Bangladesh to join her husband if he wishes  to
    return to the UK.  This of course would  require  her  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In  the  circumstances,  having
    carefully considered the decision, I find that this is not  a  decision
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules as interpreted by recent  case
    law.

15.  Mr Miah invited me to conclude in the event of finding an error of  law
    that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. I accept
    I would have the power to do so under section 12 (2)  (b)  (i)  of  the
    Tribunals  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  but  do  not  think  it
    appropriate to do so. Both parties were given the opportunity to  apply
    for any additional evidence to be admitted before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    but there was no application to do  so.  The  appellant  was  given  an
    opportunity to present all his evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and in substance the matter was  fully  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is not the Immigration Judge's fact  findings  that  have
    been criticised in this appeal but his application of the  legal  tests
    to the facts of the case as he found them to be. I find that  it  would
    be a recipe for unending litigation to remit the appeal  to  the  First
    Tier-tribunal when the Upper Tribunal is in possession of a  number  of
    fact-findings by that tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16.  I find that there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

17.  Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    is necessary to re-make that decision, which is that the appeal against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain is dismissed.

18.  There is no cross-appeal and no basis that  I  can  see  on  which  the
    appellant would be able to stay solely on the basis of Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



Fee award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
