
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29407/2014
                                                               IA/29411/2014
                                                               IA/29417/2014
                                                               IA/29426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd September 2015               |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS


                                   Between

                            AL (FIRST appellant)
                            LA (SECOND appellant)
                            AA (THIRD appellant)
                            ZA (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Brunnen dismissing  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8.

 2. The Appellants are a family, comprising a mother, father and two  sons,
    and are all citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant came to  the  UK
    as a  student  in  October  2006  and  the  other  Appellants  are  her
    dependants.  The two sons were both born in the UK, the  older  in  May
    2007 and the younger in October 2008.

 3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the  basis  that  all
    four Appellants would be removed together as a family unit.  There  was
    no finding of family life with anyone outside this  unit.   There  were
    members of the wider family in the UK but the evidence did not show the
    relationships  with  these  relatives  constituted  family  life  under
    Article 8.  The judge was concerned therefore  only  with  interference
    with the Appellants' private life.  The judge took account of the  best
    interests of the children and accepted that a move  to  Pakistan  would
    seem very strange to them to begin with.  They would be separated  from
    regular contact with members of the extended family in  the  UK.   They
    did, however, have two grandmothers and uncles and aunts in Pakistan so
    would not be without contact with their wider family.   The  older  son
    has a medical condition but medication would be available in  Pakistan.
    He  might  require  surgery  at  some  stage  in  the  future  but  the
    possibility of this did not give rise to disproportionate  interference
    with private or family life under Article 8.

 4. The judge observed that  under  section  117B(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended, little  weight  should  be
    given to private life established by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration status was precarious.  The judge found  that  the
    status of the parents was precarious when they had established  private
    life in the UK and that they had no legitimate expectation  that  their
    admission for temporary purposes would lead to any right to  remain  in
    the long term.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  sole
    ground  that  the  judge  arguably  erred  in  finding  that  when  the
    Appellants had leave as a student and as the dependants  of  a  student
    their immigration status was precarious in terms of section 117B(5)  of
    the 2002 Act.  According to the grant of permission to appeal this  had
    the potential effect of undermining further  findings  in  relation  to
    private life they had established in the UK and the proportionality  of
    any decision to remove them.

Submissions

 6. In his submission for the Appellants, Mr Malik drew my attention to the
    decision of the Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal in  Deelah  and
    Others (Section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 515.  He informed me that  an
    application for permission to appeal against this decision was pending.
     He acknowledged that he  would  not  expect  me  to  depart  from  the
    reported decision of the Upper Tribunal but he wished  to  reserve  his
    position as to whether the decision in  Deelah  was  correct.   If  the
    family's residence in the UK was not regarded as precarious,  then  the
    appeal would be decided on a different basis and this might  give  rise
    to a different decision.

 7. In his submission  Mr  Bramble  pointed  out  that  there  was  another
    potential issue under section 117B(6) in respect of  the  older  child,
    who was a "qualifying child" under this  provision.   This  point  was,
    however, not being pursued.   The  issue  of  precariousness  had  been
    decided in Deelah and before that in  AM  (s117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
    0260.  In the present appeal the judge  had  written  a  very  thorough
    decision, which was mainly concerned with the position of the children,
    especially the older son.  The judge had considered the best  interests
    of the children and had made quite clear findings regarding the  family
    unit.  The judge had considered that the key period for residence by  a
    child was seven years from the age of 4.  The judge had  taken  account
    of  medical  findings  and  issues.   The  judge  had  considered   the
    suitability of the children living in Pakistan and the issues raised by
    the parents  in  relation  to  this.   The  judge  had  considered  the
    children's understanding of written Urdu.  The  judge  found  that  the
    children were young enough to catch up with their language skills.  All
    the factors were addressed and the  judge  made  appropriate  findings.
    The children could return to Pakistan with their parents.  It  was  not
    necessary for the judge to refer specifically  to  section  117B(6)  as
    long as  it  could  be  seen  from  the  findings  that  there  was  no
    uncertainty over the outcome in respect of this.

 8. In response Mr Malik said that he could see the point that  Mr  Bramble
    was making but the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  depended  on  a
    finding  that  the  family's  residence  was  precarious.    Mr   Malik
    reiterated that he reserved his position on Deelah and would not expect
    me to depart from this decision in these proceedings.

Discussion

 9. The sole ground on which permission to appeal was granted  was  on  the
    question  of  whether  the  judge  erred  in  treating   the   family's
    immigration status as precarious for the purpose  of  section  117B(5).
    On this issue, Mr Malik  recognised  that  in  terms  of  the  reported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Deelah  the  judge  did  not  err  in
    making this finding.  This is sufficient to deal  with  the  ground  on
    which permission was granted.

10. There is another issue arising from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on which Mr Bramble addressed me.  This was whether the judge
    had applied the proper test in respect of section 117B(6)  in  relation
    to the elder son, who is a qualifying child under this provision.  As a
    qualifying child the question for the judge ought to have been  whether
    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

11. Instead the judge approached the issue, for example at paragraph 60  of
    the decision, by asking whether the child's  removal  would  be  unduly
    harsh.   On  the  face  of  it  the  judge  applied  the  wrong   test,
    notwithstanding that the judge clearly had regard to section  117B  and
    referred to sub-sections (1) and (5), though not specifically  to  sub-
    section (6).

12. The submission made by Mr  Bramble  was  that  this  made  no  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal as the  judge  had  taken  into
    account all the relevant factors, including the child's health and  any
    linguistic difficulties.  Indeed, at paragraph 41 the judge referred to
    the case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197.  The judge drew  from  this
    case the principle that it is in the best interests of children  to  be
    with both their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the
    UK then the starting  point  suggests  that  so  should  any  dependent
    children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons  to
    the contrary.  The judge went on to note that lengthy residence in  the
    host country can lead  to  the  development  of  social,  cultural  and
    educational ties that it would  be  inappropriate  to  disrupt  in  the
    absence of compelling reasons to the contrary.  The judge accepted that
    by the date of the hearing the older son was  71/2  years  of  age  but
    observed that in the case of Azimi-Moayed it was said  that  the  seven
    years of a child's residence from the age of 4 will likely to  be  more
    significant than the first seven years of life as very  young  children
    are focused on their parents.

13. The judge then went on to consider the decision of the Supreme Court in
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, as well as the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The judge came  to  the  view
    that the best interests of the children were to be with their  parents,
    including the best interests of the  older  child.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Bramble's submission that although the judge did not refer directly  to
    the test of reasonableness, the judge took account of all the  relevant
    factors and there was no apparent flaw in the judge's findings.  As was
    pointed out in AM (s117B) Malawi the statutory  duty  to  consider  the
    matters set out in section 117B is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision
    shows that it has regard to such parts of it as are relevant.   It  was
    previously stated in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 that  it  is
    not necessarily an error of law to fail to  refer  to  a  provision  in
    section 117B and that what matters is substance rather than form.

14. My conclusion is that the judge did not err in law in relation  to  the
    finding that the family's immigration status in the UK  was  precarious
    and that any  error  he  made  in  relation  to  consideration  of  the
    reasonableness of expecting the older son  to  leave  the  UK  was  not
    material.  The decision will therefore stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made  an  order  for  anonymity.   I  continue  that
order.


Signed   Date
