
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29535/2014
                                                               IA/29579/2014
                                                               IA/29588/2014
                                                               IA/29595/2014
                                                               IA/29598/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th October 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    MMAA
                                     SA
                                     UAA
                                    AMAA
                                     AAA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us as a consequence of a previous Error of Law
    Decision and Reasons finding that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Braybrook contained a material error of law and that her findings
    should be set aside.

 2. The Appellants request that their appeals be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal. The Secretary of State does  not  oppose  that  request.  The
    Practice Statement dated 25  September  2012  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states as follows
    at paragraph 7.2:

         '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
         to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.'

 3. Pursuant to the Practice Statement, we are satisfied  that  the  nature
    and extent of judicial fact-finding in the re-making of this appeal  is
    such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appeals are hereby remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard
    by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Braybrook.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

