
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29657/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 February 2017                            |On 06 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        MR Olufemi Abimbola Fagbolade
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Olufemi Abimbola Fagbolade, was born on 9 December  1980
    and is a male citizen of Nigeria.  He applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  the  length  of  his
    residence.  His application was  made  on  10  December  2014  and  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on  7  August  2015.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge James) which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 20 April 2016 allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge erred in law such that the decision falls to  be  set  aside.
    The judge should not have  allowed  the  appeal  outright.   The  judge
    should have found that, the Secretary of State having accepted that the
    appellant had been living in the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for  a
    period of more than ten years, remitted the matter to the Secretary  of
    State to exercise her discretion which remains vested only in her.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  20  April
2016 is set aside.  The finding that the appellant had been continuously  in
lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than  ten  years  is
preserved.  The  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent dated 7 August 2015 is allowed to the extent that the  matter  is
returned to the Secretary of State so that she may exercise  her  discretion
as to whether to grant the appellant leave to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

