


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA292892014
     IA292912014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 14 June 2016                      |On : 15 June 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                             ripley roy campbell
                       greta pamella edwards campbell
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are husband and wife and are citizens of Jamaica,  born
      on 4 February 1938 and 17 July 1947 respectively. They have been given
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Walters, dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision to
      refuse their applications for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis
      of family and private life.

   2. The appellants entered the United  Kingdom  as  visitors  in  February
      2013, the second appellant in particular having made regular  previous
      visits to the UK as a visitor. They were granted an extension of their
      leave until 25 June 2014. On 16 May  2014  they  applied  for  further
      leave to remain on family and private life grounds. Their applications
      were refused on 14 July 2014 on the basis that they could not meet the
      criteria in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation to  family
      and private life. The respondent considered further that there were no
      exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      immigration rules.

   3. The appellants appealed against  that  decision.  Their  appeals  were
      heard on 11 September 2015 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walters  and
      were dismissed in a determination promulgated on 16 October 2015.


   4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  29  April
      2016, on the basis of inadequate reasoning in the judge's decision.

   5. It  is,  at  this  point,  necessary  to  provide  a  summary  of  the
      appellants' circumstances leading to their application  for  leave  to
      remain. The appellants had a daughter, Joan, who married  her  British
      citizen husband, Malcolm Drameh, in December  1992,  in  Jamaica,  and
      returned with him to live in the UK,  eventually  becoming  a  British
      citizen herself. Joan and Malcolm had two children, Aminitta, born  in
      Jamaica on 8 May 1993, and Mahdi, born in London on 18 September 1998.
      The second appellant visited her daughter and her family regularly and
      the first appellant visited occasionally.  In  August  2008  Joan  was
      diagnosed with breast cancer and underwent  surgery  and  it  was  the
      second appellant who helped out  with  the  children  whilst  she  was
      convalescing. She returned to the  UK  frequently  to  help  with  the
      children, spending a few months here each  time  before  returning  to
      Jamaica. In 2011 Joan was diagnosed again with cancer, but  this  time
      it had spread. The second appellant  returned  again  to  the  UK  and
      stayed as long as she was able to, in 2011 and 2012. Joan's cancer was
      diagnosed as terminal. Both appellants came to the UK  on  2  February
      2013, to care for Joan and to help with Mahdi. They applied to  extend
      their visas to care for Joan and were granted extensions until 25 June
      2014. Joan, in the meantime, passed away on 13 June 2013. Her  husband
      and the children went away, to stay with family in Gambia for a break,
      returning to the UK on 3 January 2014.  The  appellants,  having  also
      left the UK, returned on 22 March 2014. They did not feel that it  was
      possible to leave and abandon Mahdi and therefore applied  on  16  May
      2014 for further leave to remain on the basis of  their  family  life.
      They remain living with their son-in-law and  grandson  Mahdi,  whilst
      their granddaughter Aminitta is at university in Birmingham.

   6. At the hearing before me Mr  Hodson  expanded  upon  the  grounds.  He
      submitted that the judge had erred in considering that the  appellants
      had only had a six month visitor visa, and in putting  limited  weight
      upon their private life for that reason, when in fact  they  had  been
      granted further leave to  remain  for  a  year  as  a  result  of  the
      exceptional circumstances. The judge's findings were very limited  and
      his  consideration  of  section  117B  was  based  solely   upon   the
      appellants' apparent lack of  financial  independence.  There  was  no
      consideration of the family  ties  with  Mahdi,  or  of  Mahdi's  best
      interests and none of the case law in the grounds  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal had been considered.

   7. Mr Wilding submitted that, whilst the judge's decision was  brief,  it
      was apparent why he had made the decision  that  he  did  and  he  had
      reached a lawful outcome on the evidence.


   8. Mr Hodson, in response, reiterated the points previously made.


   9. Both parties agreed that, in the event that I found that the judge had
      erred in law, the decision could be re-made on  the  evidence  already
      available  without  a  further  hearing.  However,  having   carefully
      considered the evidence and the judge's decision,  I  find  myself  in
      agreement with Mr Wilding that the judge did enough  in  his  decision
      such that it was a lawful one and ought not to be set aside.


Consideration and findings


  10. It is correct to say that the  judge's  reasoning  is  brief  and  his
      specific findings on proportionality are limited to those at  [35]  to
      [39].  It is also clear, as Mr Hodson submitted, that  the  judge  was
      mistaken at [38] in his consideration of the  appellants'  immigration
      history and status, since he failed to acknowledge  that  their  leave
      was extended for a further year following the initial visit visas  and
      their current applications for leave to remain  were  made  when  they
      still had extant leave. However I do not agree  that  that  in  itself
      renders the judge's decision unlawful, when it is otherwise clear,  as
      Mr Wilding submitted, how and why he reached the conclusions  that  he
      did and that the conclusions reached were properly open to him on  the
      evidence before him.

  11. Whilst the judge did not make a specific finding,  with  reference  to
      Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ
      31, that family life existed between the appellants and their grandson
      Mahdi, it is clear from his findings at [31]  that  he  accepted  that
      family and private life had  been  established  for  the  purposes  of
      Article 8. Having found that that was the case  he  then  went  on  to
      consider proportionality under Article 8, properly identifying at [33]
      the necessity to  consider  the  public  interest  with  reference  to
      section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  Mr
      Hodson criticised the judge  for  going  straight  on  to  considering
      section 117B(iii) and for putting the weight that  he  did  upon  that
      part of section 117B, without giving full consideration to  the  other
      factors. However the judge was  entitled  to  take  that  factor  into
      account and to consider that the appellants were financially dependent
      upon their family in the UK, in addition to  public  services.  Whilst
      his reasons at [38] for according little  weight  to  the  appellants'
      private life were based  upon  an  incorrect  understanding  of  their
      immigration history, it was nevertheless the case that he was entitled
      to place the weight that he did upon their private life under  section
      117B(5), as consistent with the approach in AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]
      UKUT 0260.

  12. Furthermore, although the judge did not revisit  each  aspect  of  the
      appellants' circumstances in his findings from  [33]  onwards,  it  is
      clear that he took account of those circumstances as set out  at  [10]
      to [30]. I do not agree with Mr Hodson that [10] to [30] is  simply  a
      record of the evidence but consider that a  careful  consideration  of
      those paragraphs shows  that  the  judge  was  focussing  on  positive
      factors relevant to the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  appellants'
      interests.


  13. Accordingly, I find that the judge's consideration of matters  outside
      the immigration rules was adequate, that his  approach  to  Article  8
      outside the rules was a lawful one and one which followed the  correct
      test and correctly applied  the  relevant  principles,  and  that  the
      outcome was a lawful one.


  14. However, even if more detailed findings ought to have  been  made,  it
      seems to me that the same outcome would be  inevitable.  It  is  clear
      that the appellants could  not,  and  cannot  demonstrate  that  their
      circumstances are sufficiently compelling to justify a grant of  leave
      outside the immigration rules.  The  circumstances  leading  to  their
      application are undeniably unfortunate and sad,  but  the  exceptional
      circumstances existing at the time when their daughter was  terminally
      ill were recognised by a grant of further leave and it  is  now  three
      years since her death. Their granddaughter left  home  for  university
      some time ago and  their  grandson,  upon  whom  this  application  is
      essentially based, was almost 17 at the time of the hearing before the
      First-tier Tribunal and is  now  almost  an  adult.  Whilst  his  best
      interests may well be best served by his grandparents remaining in the
      UK, it cannot be said that such interests are sufficient  to  outweigh
      the strong public interest  factors,  particularly  when  he  has  his
      father here and other close relatives to provide him with support. The
      appellants would be able to continue visiting their family as they did
      previously   and   could   thereby   maintain   their   close   family
      relationships. Although all parties  clearly  desire  the  appellants'
      extended or permanent residence here, there is no evidence to  suggest
      that their departure would result in a  disproportionate  interference
      with their family and private life, or with Mahdi's family and private
      life, in breach of Article 8.

  15. Accordingly, and for the reasons given,  I  find  that  there  are  no
      errors of law in the judge's decision requiring that it be set  aside.
      The judge came to a lawful conclusion on the evidence before  him  and
      provided adequate reasoning for making the findings that he did.

DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be set  aside.  I
      do not set aside the decision. The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
      stands.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  15th June
2016
