








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/29454/2014
                                                               IA/29475/2014
                                                               IA/29471/2014
                                                               IA/29459/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 21 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Samuel Julius Alfazema
                           Mrs Christina Alfazema
                          Mr Khama Kelvin Alfazema
                              Ms Glory Alfazema
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Hoshi, counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of  state  and  to  the
    respondents as "the claimants."

 2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Callendar-Smith promulgated on 23 March 2015,
    allowing the claimants' appeals against the refusal by the secretary of
    state to vary their leave to remain, and in consequence her decision to
    remove the claimants to Malawi.

 3. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal. The first ground  was  that
    the  Judge  allowed  the  appeals  of  all  four  claimants  under  the
    immigration rules but only made findings in respect of one of the child
    claimants pursuant to paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the rules.

 4. Mr Hoshi accepted that the Judge should not have allowed the appeal  of
    all the claimants under the rules. That however  he  submitted  was  an
    inadvertent  and  immaterial  error  which  could   be   rectified   by
    substituting a decision reflecting what the Judge evidently intended to
    do, having allowed the appeal in respect of Glory under the  rules.  In
    the event, the appeals in respect of the other three  claimants  should
    have been allowed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,  with
    reference to s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 5. The second ground related to the Judge's conclusion that it  would  not
    be reasonable for Glory to leave the UK as she is at a  critical  stage
    in her education, has lived in the UK for ten years and  has  developed
    social ties within the UK  by  virtue  of  her  friendships  and  extra
    curricular activities, which includes a Malawian singing group.

 6. It is contended that the Judge's approach in this respect has conflated
    the best interests of the child with what is reasonable,  as  evidenced
    by the conclusion at the hearing that "the heart of the matter"  before
    the Tribunal was Glory's best interests [41].

 7. It is contended that whilst relevant  to  the  assessment  of  what  is
    reasonable, the best  interests  of  the  child  cannot  be  a  primary
    consideration. During the course of the hearing,  Mr  Kandola  accepted
    that that was an incorrect statement of the law. The best interests  of
    the  child  do,  on  the  highest  authority,  constitute   a   primary
    consideration. It  is  contended  however  that  the  Judge's  approach
    "denoted" Glory's best interests as the only consideration, with little
    regard for the public interest in maintaining an effective  immigration
    control "... which must form part of the holistic fact based assessment
    incumbent on the Tribunal to undertake."

 8. That meant that the best interests are for Glory to be brought up in  a
    loving and supportive family. If she wishes to study in the  UK  it  is
    open to her to pursue such studies at  a  boarding  school  should  her
    family wish to do so, or to  continue  her  education  in  Malawi.  The
    disparity in such provision does not make it unreasonable to expect the
    family, as Malawian nationals, to avail themselves of it.

 9. It is further asserted that the Judge's  failure  to  engage  with  the
    public interest in this case renders the conclusion to allow the appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) unsound.

10. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge  JM  Holmes
    held that it is arguable that the Judge's whole approach to this family
    was flawed and that he either  misunderstood  or  misapplied  paragraph
    276ADE, sections 117A-D and the guidance from the court of appeal in EV
    (Philippines).  Arguably,  the  decision  disclosed  a  free   wheeling
    approach to Article 8.

11. Mr Kandola in developing the secretary of  state's  grounds,  submitted
    that it was difficult to see how all the appellants could succeed under
    the rules. It is only children who benefit  from  paragraph  276ADE  in
    this case.

12. Mr Kandola referred to the decision at [47] where the Judge  posed  the
    question as to whether it was reasonable to expect Glory and  the  rest
    of the family to leave the UK. The Judge found that  the  secretary  of
    state's analysis did not give sufficient attention or  respect  to  the
    realities of Glory's position. He  could  not  find  any  very  weighty
    reasons or strong countervailing factors presented by the secretary  of
    state that would justify her  removal.  It  would  have  a  deleterious
    impact on her.

13. The Judge then proceeded at [52] to find  that  because  returning  the
    family unit to Malawi would breach the provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules - 276ADE - in respect of Glory's  private  life,  "these  appeals
    must succeed."

14. He submitted that there was no further analysis. Accordingly, the basis
    upon which that unreasoned leap was made had not been identified.

15. Mr Kandola submitted that the Judge was  required  to  make  a  rounded
    assessment as to why the whole family was  entitled  to  succeed.  They
    cannot all succeed under the rules. The reliance on Article 8 contained
    other considerations which had to be met,  including  a  proper  public
    interest inquiry.

16. Accordingly, the error was material and it  did  not  follow  that  the
    appeal would necessarily be allowed under Article 8. That applied  even
    if the Judge's finding did not amount  to  a  conflation  of  the  best
    interests of the child with what was reasonable. However, s.117B is not
    a stand alone provision.

17. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Hoshi referred to the Rule 24  response.
    He accepted that the Judge did not indicate which rule he was  applying
    when stating that he was allowing the appeal of all the claimants under
    the rules.

18. He referred to the fact that the secretary of state  did  not  seek  to
    challenge the findings and decision relating to Glory that she had  met
    paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the  rules.  Mr  Kandola  did  not   contend
    otherwise.

19. That error he submitted was not material as the  Judge  having  allowed
    the appeal of Glory under the Rules had intended  to  allow  the  other
    claim appeals under article 8 with reference to s.117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act. The Judge correctly observed at [46] that parents of children  who
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE (iv),  namely,  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK, are themselves  entitled  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of s.117B(6).

20. He therefore submitted that once Glory succeeded under that  paragraph,
    it was inevitable that the parents had to succeed under s.117B(6) given
    that the test of reasonableness in that paragraph is the same  as  that
    set out in s.117B. In that respect, he relied on the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in AM  (s.117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC).  The
    question posed by s.117B(6) is  the  same  as  the  question  posed  in
    relation to children by paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv). It must be  posed  in
    the proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to
    follow its parents to their country of origin: EV (Philippines). It  is
    not however a question that needs to be posed and answered in  relation
    to each child more than once.

21. Moreover, the fourth claimant, the youngest child, born in the UK on 17
    August 2015, had to be granted leave in line with her parents.

22. He submitted that  the  secretary  of  state's  approach  to  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) was not clear but it appeared that it  was  being  contended
    that what is or is  not  "reasonable"  for  the  purpose  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) involves carrying out a 'balancing exercise'  in  which  the
    child's interests are to be weighed against the public interest.

23. That he submitted was incorrect for reasons set out at paragraph  8  of
    the grounds seeking permission. In particular, the secretary of state's
    position has been that the rules themselves strike the right balance in
    most cases. It has not been contended that the  balance  is  struck  by
    reading in elements of Article 8 into the wording of the rules. What is
    established is that the decision maker must look at the rules in  their
    own right. It is not directly relevant that they may refer to  concepts
    familiar to Article 8. The assessment of Article 8 is then  a  separate
    one and depends on the wording of the rule in question, whether that is
    done within or outside the rules.

24. He  submitted  that  the  secretary  of  state's  "novel  approach"  to
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) is thus incorrect.  No  balancing  of  the  public
    interest against the personal interests of those concerns needs  to  be
    carried out within the rules. It is simply a matter of considering what
    is "reasonable" taking into account all the circumstances.

25. It is thus contended that the secretary of state's  arguments  disclose
    no error of law but merely express  dissatisfaction  with  the  Judge's
    findings. The secretary's grounds at paragraph 2 contain no  more  than
    an argument on the facts and displays exactly the reductionist approach
    for which the secretary of state wrongly criticises the Judge.

26. Mr Hoshi submitted that it would be disproportionate in  any  event  to
    remove the family, having regard to authorities  such  as  Azimi-Moayed
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197, where
    the Tribunal noted that seven years from age 4 is  likely  to  be  more
    significant to a child than the first seven years of life. That  was  a
    matter which the Judge expressly considered with regard to the position
    of Glory.

    Assessment

27. I accept that the Judge has not identified  or  articulated  the  basis
    upon which the appeals of the first, second and fourth  claimants  were
    allowed under the Immigration Rules. It is evident that the Judge found
    that returning the family unit to Malawi would breach  the  Immigration
    Rules (paragraph 276ADE) in respect of  Glory's  private  life  and  it
    followed that "these appeals must succeed" [52].  It  is  not  disputed
    that the parents' appeals  should  not  have  been  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

28. However, it is evident, as submitted, that having allowed the appeal of
    Glory under the rules,  the  Judge  intended  to  allow  the  remaining
    claimants' appeals pursuant to Article 8 read  with  s.117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.

29. At [46] the Judge considered the fact that parents of children entitled
    to remain on the basis of 276ADE (iv) are themselves entitled to remain
    under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. That is  because  it  is  not  in  the
    public interest  to  remove  parents  of  long  residence  children.  A
    qualifying child for the purpose of this section includes a child under
    the age of 18 who has lived in the UK for a continuous period of  seven
    years or more, which is the position of Glory.

30. I do not accept the apparent contention of the secretary  of  state  in
    the grounds that what  is  reasonable  for  the  purpose  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) involves some kind of balancing exercise where  the  child's
    interests are to be weighed against the public interest.

31. There is nothing in the wording itself indicating that such an exercise
    is required. The question is simply whether the appellant can show that
    she meets the relevant requirements of the particular rule.

32. In any event, as submitted in the Rule 24 response, the public interest
    is  already  built  into  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  in  the  form  of  the
    suitability criteria in s276ADE (i) and the minimum residence threshold
    of seven years' continuous residence. In  Ogindimu  [2013]  UKUT  00060
    [130] the Tribunal held that the weight that the executive attaches  to
    the public interest side of  the  balancing  exercise  can  largely  be
    gleaned from the new rules.

33. Moreover,  as  submitted  in  the  response,  if  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    requires  a  balancing  act  adopted  from  a  conventional  Article  8
    approach, the justification for the existence of paragraph 276ADE(i) is
    hard to justify.

34. The Judge has directed himself in accordance with EV (Philippines)  and
    Azimi-Moayed. He found that the factual matrix of EV differs from  this
    case, as in EV, the appellant with her husband and three  children  had
    only been in the UK for less than four years when  the  original  claim
    was made. Here, the first claimant had been in the UK for  much  longer
    and Glory had been here for ten years since arriving as a six year old.



35. The Judge at [47] posed the question whether it would be reasonable  to
    expect Glory and the rest of the family to leave the UK. She had  spent
    almost ten years of her 16 years living in the UK, more than  seven  of
    which were with leave to remain, and most of the rest of the period has
    been within the  process  of  the  pursuit  of  valid  and  meritorious
    applications for further leave.

36. Moreover, the Judge had regard to the fact  that  her  engagement  with
    Malawian culture has only been in the context of a UK experience, being
    part of a Malawian singing group; her short visit  to  Malawi  did  not
    engender any love for living in  that  country  that  could  act  as  a
    counterweight for the life she had grown up with in the UK [48].

37. He found that her social, cultural and educational ties had been formed
    and developed in the UK, and he took the view  that  it  would  clearly
    disrupt, in an inappropriate fashion, "... the arc of  her  educational
    and social progress and expectations here" [49].  Nor  were  there  any
    weighty reasons or  strong  countervailing  factors  presented  by  the
    secretary of state justifying Glory's removal - [51].

38. Even though the Judge may have failed to set out clearly the basis upon
    which the remaining claimants were entitled to succeed under the rules,
    it is evident that once he  found  that  Glory  fell  within  paragraph
    276ADE (iv) - which  finding  has  not  been  challenged  -  the  other
    claimants' appeals was bound were bound to be allowed, having regard to
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. With regard to the  fourth  claimant,  Khama
    Kelvin Alfazema, born in the UK on 17 August 2015, he  is  entitled  to
    remain in the UK in line with his parents, pursuant to paragraphs  304-
    306 of the immigration rules on the  basis  that  they  have  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  with  reference  to
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

    Notice of Decision

    The secretary of state's appeal in respect  of  the  first  and  second
    claimants is dismissed. However, I substitute for the decision  of  the
    First-tier tribunal allowing their appeals under the Immigration Rules,
    a decision allowing their appeals under Article 8.

    The secretary of state's appeal  in  respect  of  the  third  claimant,
    Glory, is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Judge allowing  her
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE  (iv)  of  the  rules  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    The secretary of state's appeal in respect of the  fourth  claimant  is
    dismissed. The decision of the First-tier  Judge  allowing  his  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules shall, on the basis  set  out  above,  also
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 20 October 2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
