
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29718/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 20 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR FAWAD KHALID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Moksud, Legal Representative, International
                    Immigration Advisory Services

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason, no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the
    First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State  is  technically
    the Appellant in this particular appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He initially came to  the  UK
    in 2009 as a Tier 4 student with leave to remain until 31  March  2011.
    His leave continued  in  that  category  (with  some  minor  breaks  in
    continuity) until 22 August 2014.  On 21 August 2014,  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen. His  spouse  has  a
    child from a previous relationship.

 3. The Respondent refused the application by decision dated 18 August 2015
    and directed the Appellant's removal to Pakistan.  She did  so  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had exercised deception in a previous  student
    application as he had produced an English  language  certificate  which
    had been obtained by use of a proxy test taker.    The  test  provider,
    Educational Testing Service ("ETS"), had, as  a  result  cancelled  the
    Appellant's results.  This then is a so-called ETS case.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
    in a decision promulgated  on  15  June  2016  ("the  Decision").   The
    Respondent appeals the Decision on two grounds. The first and principal
    ground challenges the Judge's finding that the Respondent was unable to
    demonstrate that the Appellant had exercised deception.

 5. The second concerns the Judge's finding in relation to the  Appellant's
    private life.  It is accepted in the grounds that the  Judge's  finding
    in relation to the Appellant's private (and family) life  is  dependent
    on the finding in relation to deception.  Mr Harrison accepted  in  the
    course of his submissions that  the  Respondent  has  herself  accepted
    that, but for the suitability requirements,  the  Appellant  meets  the
    Rules in relation to his  family  life  as  it  is  accepted  that  the
    relevant eligibility requirements are met and  the  Respondent  accepts
    that EX.1 is satisfied because the Appellant's spouse has a child  from
    a previous relationship.  I am concerned  therefore  only  with  ground
    one.

 6. Permission was granted on both grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro on 10 October 2016.   The matter comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether the Decision did involve the making of an error of law  and  if
    so either to re-make it or remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-making.

Discussion

 7. As I indicate  at  [3]  above,  the  Respondent's  decision  turned  on
    information received from ETS.  ETS cancelled the  Appellant's  results
    on the basis that he had not himself sat the tests.  There have been  a
    substantial number of similar decisions made by the Respondent  relying
    on information from ETS which in turn have led to a significant  amount
    of litigation including a number of "lead cases" in this Tribunal.   In
    those cases, the Tribunal  has  considered  the  generic  evidence  put
    forward by the Respondent as well as  the  evidence  relating  to  each
    individual Appellant.

 8. In this case, the Respondent relied on the generic evidence produced in
    all such cases namely witness  statements  given  by  two  Home  Office
    witnesses,  Mr  Peter  Millington  and  Miss  Rebecca  Collings.    The
    Respondent relied also on a report of Professor French, an  expert  who
    was instructed to respond to a report of an expert,  Dr  Harrison,  who
    had made a number of criticisms of the methodology  employed  in  these
    cases (and whose evidence has been considered by the Tribunal in SM and
    Qadir - see below).  The final piece of evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent in this appeal is a witness statement  of  Lesley  Singh,  a
    senior caseworker employed by the Respondent, to  whose  statement  are
    annexed the extracts from the Respondent's spreadsheet showing that the
    Appellant's results for his test taken at Manchester Trinity College on
    6 February 2013 were questionable and that  those  taken  at  the  same
    institution on 27 February 2013 were invalid.

 9. The Respondent's grounds (on which  Mr  Harrison  relied  in  his  oral
    submissions) criticise  the  Judge  for  failing  to  engage  with  the
    evidence  of  Professor  French,  misdirecting  herself   as   to   the
    appropriate burden of proof in accordance with SM and Qadir v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (ETS-Evidence-Burden of Proof)  [2016]
    UKUT 0229 (IAC) ("SM and Qadir") and placing undue weight on  the  fact
    that the Appellant speaks English.

10. Mr Moksud pointed out  that  none  of  the  witnesses  nor  the  expert
    attended the appeal hearing to give evidence.  The Judge  was  entitled
    to attach whatever weight she saw fit to the evidence, particularly  in
    light of the fact that the evidence could not be tested.   He  accepted
    though that there was no substantive reference to or  consideration  of
    the report  of  Professor  French  nor  indeed  the  statements  of  Mr
    Millington or Miss Collings.  He submitted though that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to describe that evidence as "generic"; it  is  not  concerned
    with the Appellant's individual case.  When I asked Mr Moksud  how  the
    Judge had dealt with that evidence put forward  by  the  Respondent  in
    relation to the Appellant's individual  case  namely  the  confirmation
    that  the  results  were  either  questionable  or  invalid,   he   was
    constrained to accept that there was no mention of that  other  than  a
    reference at [18] of the Decision  to  the  production  of  Ms  Singh's
    statement.   There  is  no  consideration  of  the  substance  of  that
    statement or the annex.  Mr Moksud repeated his submission  however  in
    relation to the weight to be given to the evidence, particularly  where
    the witnesses did not give oral evidence.

11. In relation to  the  Judge's  reliance  on  SM  and  Qadir,  Mr  Moksud
    submitted that the Judge's approach is in accordance with what is  said
    in that case.  The Respondent's challenge relates to what  is  said  in
    the headnote at (i) which reads as follows:-

         "The Secretary of  State's  generic  evidence,  combined  with  her
         evidence particular to these two appellants, sufficed to  discharge
         the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
         been procured by dishonesty." [my emphasis]

12. The Judge at [19] of the Decision deals with the Respondent's  evidence
    in light of SM and Qadir as follows:-

         "I have given the documents  in  RB2  due  consideration.   I  have
         regard to SM and Qadir. I am concerned that the evidence in RB2  is
         of a generic nature. In my view, the evidence  in  RB2  even  taken
         cumulatively is insufficient to discharge the evidential burden  on
         the respondent to substantiate the allegation  that  the  appellant
         has fraudulently obtained the TOEIC certificate issued  by  ETS  by
         means of using a proxy to undertake the test."

13. Mr Moksud submitted that the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Respondent's
    evidence did not meet the evidential  burden  is  consistent  with  the
    headnote in SM and Qadir as it depended upon there being some  evidence
    at least as to the individual Appellant.   However,  that  ignores  the
    Judge's failure to give consideration to the evidence of Ms  Singh  and
    (linked to that) the Judge's  finding  that  all  of  the  Respondent's
    evidence is generic in nature.  In fact,  if  one  has  regard  to  the
    evidence before the Tribunal in SM and Qadir, the evidence in  relation
    to the individual Appellants was similarly  confined  to  the  evidence
    that  the  results  were  either  questionable  or   invalid   and   an
    accompanying witness statement.  I note also, having regard to [64] and
    [65] of SM and Qadir, that the Tribunal did not have the benefit of the
    report of Professor French addressing some of the deficiencies  in  the
    Respondent's "generic" evidence to which the  Tribunal  there  alludes.
    If the Judge was relying only on SM and Qadir, therefore,  in  reaching
    her finding, it was incumbent on her to at least consider  whether  the
    report of Professor French made any difference.

14. I observe that, although the Court of Appeal's decision in Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    615 was not handed down until after the Decision and my  attention  was
    not drawn to this case in the hearing before me, the Court of  Appeal's
    judgment in those cases lends support to  the  Respondent's  case  here
    that the Judge has erred in  law.   In  relation  to  the  case  of  Mr
    Chowdhury, the Court, having referred to the evidence produced  by  the
    Respondent  in  his  case  (consisting   of   the   Millington/Collings
    statements and the results of the "look up tool"), found that the Judge
    erred in finding that the Respondent had failed to meet the  evidential
    burden.  It did so for the following reasons:-

         "[26]    With regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  I
         accept Ms Giovannetti's submission  that  it  is  not  possible  to
         derive from the FtT's  determination  that,  as  the  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal judge  found,  the  FtT  judge  was  "well  aware  of  the
         straightforward ETS Lookup Tool document" that she stated showed Mr
         Chowdhury's test to be invalidated.  This statement also shows that
         the Deputy Upper Tribunal judge misunderstood  the  nature  of  the
         evidence.  Had she understood it properly, she would  have  had  to
         deal with the failure of the FtT judge to  treat  the  "ETS  Lookup
         Tool" as evidence that Mr Chowdhury's test  had  been  invalidated.
         The reason for the misunderstandings by the tribunals may  be  that
         the language used  by  Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings  in  their
         statements to explain a technical process is not altogether  clear.
         But, whatever the reason, in these circumstances,  in  my  judgment
         the in limine rejection of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  as
         even sufficient to shift the evidential  burden  was  an  error  of
         law."

         [my emphasis]

    I gratefully adopt that analysis which applies equally in this case.

15. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the  Decision  discloses  an
    error of law both in relation to the  treatment  of  the  evidence,  in
    particular that of Professor French and Ms Singh, and  that  the  Judge
    has made a finding which is at odds with what is said in SM  and  Qadir
    or has, at the very least, failed to provide reasons for departing from
    the finding there made.

16. I asked Mr Harrison whether it could be said  that  the  error  is  not
    material in light of the positive credibility findings at [21] to  [26]
    of the Decision.  The Tribunal in SM and  Qadir  accepted  that  if  an
    Appellant is able to discharge the evidential burden which switches  to
    him, once the Respondent's evidence is accepted as meeting that  burden
    on her, the Respondent's evidence does not meet the legal  burden.   Mr
    Harrison pointed out that the difficulty with the Decision, once it  is
    accepted that the Judge has erred in her treatment of the  Respondent's
    evidence, is that the Judge has started from the wrong  position.   She
    has discounted completely the evidence  of  the  Respondent.   That  is
    therefore not taken into account in reaching  her  findings  about  the
    Appellant's credibility.  I accept that submission.

17. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material
    error of law.  I therefore set aside the Decision.

18. Both parties agreed that if I found a material error of law, the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as credibility is at  the
    heart of this appeal.  No findings are  preserved  since  the  positive
    credibility  findings  are  (wrongly)  premised  on  the   Respondent's
    evidence not establishing the necessary evidential burden.

DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of  law  for
    the reasons given above. The decision of Judge Ransley  promulgated  on
    15 June 2016 is set  aside.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Ransley.  I  do
    not preserve any findings.

Signed        [pic]Date         19 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

