

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/29039/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      | Decisions and Reason Promulgated |
|On 9 June 2017                           | On 16 June 2017                  |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              MR Md ABU SUFIAN
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Manning     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler hereinafter "the Judge") whereupon he
dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  10 August 2015
refusing to grant him  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier 4  (General)  Student
Migrant.

2.     By  way  of  brief  background,  the  appellant  is  a  national   of
Bangladesh.  Having previously had the benefit of a grant of  leave  he  had
sought further  leave  in  order  to  pursue  some  studies.   However,  the
application had been refused because he had  not  been  able  to  provide  a
valid Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  and  because  it  was
thought that he had used deception in his  application  by  relying  upon  a
false document. In that context, it was said that an English  Language  Test
Certificate he had relied upon had been fraudulently  obtained  because  the
test had been taken by a proxy.

3.    The appellant's appeal was heard on 13 October 2016.  He attended and
gave evidence.  He was represented.  There was no attendance  on  behalf  of
the Secretary of State.

4.    It does not appear to have been argued before the Judge that  he  had
provided a valid CAS.  Accordingly, the Judge  concluded  that  the  appeal
fell to be dismissed under the Immigration Rules  on  that  account  alone.
That part of the Judge's decision has not been the subject of  any  further
challenge.  The Judge,  though,  also  resolved  the  deception  allegation
against the appellant.  In doing so he said this:

      "     16.  I did however  consider  it  appropriate  to  consider  the
      evidence and to hear submissions in  relation  to  the  allegation  of
      dishonesty and the refusal under paragraph 322(1A).  I did so because
      of the importance to the appellant of a finding  of  dishonesty  which
      could  have  consequences  for  any  future  application  for   leave.
      Paragraph 322 provides, so far as relevant:

                 '322. In addition to the grounds for refusal  of  extension
           of stay set out in Parts 2-8  of  these  Rules,  the  following
           provisions apply in relation to the refusal  of  an  application
           for leave to remain, variation of leave to enter or  remain  or,
           where appropriate, the curtailment of leave:

                 Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused.

                 ...

                 (1A)  where false representations have been made  or  false
           documents or information have been  submitted  (whether  or  not
           material  to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to   the
           applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  have   not   been
           disclosed, in relation to the application or in order to  obtain
           documents from the Secretary of State or a third party  required
           in support of the application.'

            17.  Mr Samad relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
           SM and Qadir (ETS -  Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
           00229 (IAC) for the principle that the  evidence  on  which  the
           respondent relied was so flawed that dishonesty was not  proved.
           The Upper Tribunal had summarised is decision in the  following
           terms:

                       '(i)  The  Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence,
                 combined  with  her  evidence  particular  to   these   two
                 appellants, sufficed to discharge the evidential burden  of
                 proving that their TOEIC certificates had been procured  by
                 dishonesty.

                       (ii)  However,  given  the  multiple  frailties  from
                 which this generic evidence was considered to  suffer  and,
                 in the light of the evidence adduced by the appellants, the
                 Secretary of  State failed to discharge the legal burden of
                 proving dishonesty on their part.'

            18.  In general in an immigration appeal the burden of proof  is
      on the appellant and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  normal  civil
      standard.   However,  it  is  by  now  well  settled  that  where  the
      respondent alleges dishonesty on the part of an appellant, the  burden
      of proof is on her.  Moreover, the Upper Tribunal had  spoken  of  an
      evidential burden which lies initially on the respondent but  may,  if
      discharged,  result  in  there  being  an  evidential  burden  on  the
      appellant to  raise  an  innocent  explanation.   The  Upper Tribunal
      elaborated on this as follows:

                 '67.  We begin by asking ourselves  whether  the  Secretary
           of State has discharged the evidential burden  of  proving  that
           the Appellants were, or either of them was, guilty of dishonesty
           in the respects alleged.  Bearing in mind that, as noted  above,
           all of the Secretary of  State's  evidence  was  adduced  first,
           reflecting the burden of proof, it is appropriate to record that
           at the stage when the Secretary of State's case closed there was
           no  submission  on  behalf  of   either   Appellant   that   the
           aforementioned evidential burden had not  been  discharged.   We
           draw attention, en pasant to a procedural issue  which  may  be
           worthy of fuller consideration in an appropriate future  appeal,
           namely the question  of whether in a case where the Secretary of
           State bears the evidential  burden  of  establishing  sufficient
           evidence of deception and, at the hearing,  goes  first  in  the
           order of batting, the Tribunal should  invite  submissions  from
           the parties' representatives at the stage when the Secretary  of
           State's evidence is completed.

                 68.   As our analysis and conclusions  in  the  immediately
           preceding section make clear, we have  substantial  reservations
           about the strength and  quality  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
           evidence.  Its shortcomings are manifest.  On  the  other  hand,
           while bearing in  mind  that  the  context  is  one  of  alleged
           deception, we  must  be  mindful  of  the  comparatively  modest
           threshold which an evidential burden entails.  The calls for  an
           evaluative assessment on  the  part  of  the  tribunal.   By  an
           admittedly narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary  of
           State has discharged this burden.  The effect of  this  is  that
           there is a burden, again an evidential one, on the Appellants of
           raising an innocent explanation.'

            19.  In SSHD v Shehzad and  Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ 615  the
           Court of Appeal was concerned with a different ETS case in which
           the respondent had alleged deception.  Beatson LJ, who gave the
           only reasoned judgment, referred to the issue before  the  court
           as follows:

                       19.   I summarised the FtT's approach to the  generic
                 evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings regarding ETS's
                 analysis of the spoken English component of the TOEIC  test
                 at [6] and [7] above.  These  appeals  are  only  concerned
                 with whether their evidence, together  with  evidence  that
                 the test of the individual  under  consideration  has  been
                 assessed as 'invalid' rather than as 'questionable' because
                 of problems at the test centre,  suffices  to  satisfy  the
                 evidential burden of showing dishonesty that  lies  on  the
                 Secretary of State and to impose an  evidential  burden  on
                 the individual  to  raise  an  innocent  explanation.   The
                 question before us is thus not the ultimate reliability  of
                 the evidence or the ultimate disposition  of  the  appeals.
                 Those matters were considered  by  the  Upper Tribunal  in
                 Qadir, which, after a full hearing, rejected the  evidence.
                 An appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision in
                 Qadir is pending in this court.  There may be  other  cases
                 in the pipeline.

                       ...

                       22.    As  I  have  stated,  the  question  in  these
                 appeals only concerns the initial stage and  whether,  with
                 the  evidence  of  Mr Millington  and  Ms Collings,  the
                 evidential burden on the Secretary of State  is  satisfied.
                 If it is, it is then  incumbent  on  the  individual  whose
                 leave has been curtailed to provide  evidence  in  response
                 raising an innocent explanation.

                       23.   At the hearing,  Ms Giovennetti  informed  the
                 court that the other cases pending in the  tribunal  or  in
                 this court involve a range of different evidence adduced by
                 the individual.  These included an  independent  comparison
                 of that person's  voice  with  the  voice  tested  by  ETS,
                 evidence of attainment in English language, for example  by
                 educational  qualifications  in  English  (some   in   this
                 country), and evidence of spoken English ability.  I do not
                 address the question of what evidence will be sufficient to
                 enable a tribunal  to  conclude  that  there  has  been  no
                 deception.  That is likely to be an intensely fact-specific
                 matter.  These appeals and my judgment are  only  concerned
                 with the initial stage and the evidential  burden  at  that
                 stage.

            20.  The evidence before me comprises  material  which  is  very
           similar to that which was before the Upper Tribunal in  SM  and
           Qadir.  In that case the Upper Tribunal was satisfied that  the
           initial evidential burden had been  discharged.   The  Court  of
           Appeal reached a similar conclusion in Shehzad.  I am  satisfied
           that the evidence adduced by the  respondent  does  satisfy  the
           initial evidential burden on her  and  that  it  is  appropriate
           therefore to look at  whether  the  appellant  has  provided  an
           innocent explanation.

            21.  In his statement the appellant said that he did not  use  a
           proxy tester but undertook his English language test  in  person
           at Aston College in 2011.  He said  that  between  fifteen  and
           twenty students were present and that  the  testing  took  place
           over two days.  He described the questions put  to  him  in  the
           speaking test.

            22.  I have to assess whether, on the evidence as a  whole,  the
           respondent has discharged the burden of proof which  rests  upon
           her.  This appeal is not one in which the appellant has  adduced
           any  evidence,  expert  or  otherwise,  which   challenges   the
           statements on which  the  respondent  relies  in  terms  of  the
           methodology employed by ETS.  There is no evidence  with  regard
           to the appellant's educational  qualifications,  either  at  the
           time when he undertook the ETS test in 2011 or at  the  time  of
           the hearing.  There is no evidence beyond the  ETS  certificate,
           now challenged, of the appellant's ability in English.

            23.  I consider that the appellant's evidence amounts to  little
           more than a bare assertion that he did attend  the  test  centre
           and did take the test  personally.   He  has  adduced  no  other
           evidence to the effect that he was present and took the test and
           that he had the ability to pass at that  time.   The  respondent
           has  adduced  evidence  with  regard  to  the  checking  process
           undertaken by ETS and individual data to show  that  the  result
           was considered by  ETS  to  be  invalid.   That  conclusion  was
           reached only where there was evidence of proxy  test  taking  or
           impersonation:  see the statement of Rebecca Collings at [28]."

5.    As to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR),
the Judge was aware that the appellant was seeking to rely  upon  the  fact
that he had married a British citizen and that the couple were  expecting  a
child.  However,  he  decided  that  he  was  not  able  to  consider  those
Article 8 arguments because of the content of section 85(5) and (6) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  because  he  thought  it
appropriate to characterise the family life arguments as a "new matter".

6.    Permission to appeal was sought on the  appellant's  behalf.   It  was
contended  that  the Judge  had  erred  in  overlooking  or  misconstruing
transitional provisions and by then wrongly thinking he  was  not  permitted
to consider the Article 8 arguments raised.  It was also argued that he had
given inadequate reasons for his conclusions regarding the deception issue.

7.    Permission to appeal was granted but only in relation to the first  of
the  two  above  grounds.   The  appeal   was   then   listed   before   the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided  whether  the Judge
had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from that.  Representation  at
that  hearing  was  as  indicated  above  and  I   am   grateful   to   each
representative.

8.    In fact, there was a degree of agreement between the  representatives.
 Both accepted that the Judge had, indeed, erred  in  failing  to  consider
transitional provisions which meant  that  the  provisions  relied  upon  by
the Judge for his conclusion that he was unable to consider the  Article 8
arguments did not operate to preclude him from so doing.  So, it was  agreed
he had erred insofar as he had failed to consider the  Article 8  arguments
and to decide them as an integral part of the appeal.  There was no  attempt
to resurrect the second ground before me. Whilst Ms Manning urged me to set
aside the decision given the accepted error of law, Ms Aboni invited me  to
conclude that the error was not material because  the  appellant  could  not
possibly have succeeded under article 8.

9.    Ms Aboni, in support of her argument, pointed out the adverse finding
regarding deception which, she suggested, would have considerable  relevance
with respect to the Article 8  issues.   She  also  pointed  out  that  the
relationship relied upon by the appellant was a relatively  recent  one  and
had only commenced at a time when he was, in fact, awaiting a decision  upon
his application under the Immigration Rules  as  a  Tier 4 Migrant.   She
asserted that there were no compelling circumstances capable  of  persuading
a judge that the appellant could possibly succeed under  Article 8  outside
the rules.

10.   I accept the Judge did err in  law  in  failing  to  appreciate  that
transitional provisions operated to compel him to  address  and  decide  the
Article  8 issues notwithstanding the content of  the  amended  section 85.
The reasons for that are most fully  explained  in  the  actual  grounds  of
appeal and it is not necessary, given the  agreement  between  the  parties,
for  me  to  say  any  more  about  that.   Despite  Ms Aboni's  determined
arguments, I cannot say that the Judge, had he  not  erred  in  the  agreed
manner, would inevitably have dismissed the appeal.  Of course,  in  general
terms, it might be thought that it is now more difficult  to  succeed  under
Article 8 than had once been the case.  There  are  now  Immigration Rules
governing (though not exclusively)  decision making  under  Article 8  and
there are statutory provisions, perhaps most notably  section 117B  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which bear upon the nature of
Article 8 decision making.  Nevertheless, the appellant was relying upon a
relationship with a British citizen who was, at the  time  he  first  raised
the arguments, expecting his child.  I conclude that, whatever might be  the
ultimate outcome, he was advancing  arguments  which  had,  at  least,  some
prospect of success and which merited a proper and full consideration.   So,
I am unable to accept Ms Aboni's submission that the agreed error was not a
material one.  Accordingly, I do set aside the Judge's decision.

11.   Having explained that I was going to  set  the  decision  aside,  both
representatives urged me  to  remit  rather  than  to  seek  to  remake  the
decision myself.  Given that the error did result in what I consider  to  be
the major issue raised by the appeal not being considered, such  that  there
will be a need for fresh evidence and  fresh  fact-finding,  and  given  the
agreement between the parties as to what I should  do,  I  have  decided  to
remit.  Ms Manning  appeared  content  for  me  to  preserve  the  findings
concerning deception and Ms Aboni  urged  me  to  do  that.   Normally,  in
setting aside and remitting, I would not wish to tie the hands of the  first
tier at all.   However,  the  deception  aspect  is  a  discreet  issue  and
Ms Manning did not seek to persuade me that, permission having been refused
on that ground, I should not preserve the findings relevant  to  that.   So,
that is what I have decided to do.  I  have  issued  some  brief  directions
which will, hopefully, be of some  assistance  to  the  First-tier Tribunal
although I have not  been  prescriptive  because  I  appreciate  the  First-
tier Tribunal may well wish to  issue  its  own  directions  regarding  the
future conduct of the appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal involved an error  of
law.  Accordingly, (subject to preserved findings  referred  to  above)  its
decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee order is made.


Signed:                           Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway


