
IAC-FH-AR-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29551/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2015                               |On 13 May 2015                |
|Prepared 9 March 2015                         |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  Mr N K I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Quality
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national  of  Nigeria,  date  of  birth  6  May  1968,
    appealed against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  J  N  B
    Morris (the judge), dated 27 November, 2014 whereby she  dismissed  the
    appeals under Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Landes on 21 January 2015.

3.   The basis  of  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision,  upon  which
    permission was granted, covered a range  of  grounds.   In  particular,
    argued before me, was the issue of  whether  the  judge  had  correctly
    addressed the evidence relating to contact between  the  Appellant  and
    his three children, Stephanie Iwuanyanwu (dob 24 April  2002),  Stephen
    Iwuanyanwu (dob 5 December 2006) and  Ekene  Iwuanyanwu  (dob  23  June
    2008).

4.   In particular criticism  was  made  of  the  fact  that  the  judge  in
    addressing the Article 8 considerations expressed herself as  doing  so
    at the date of the Respondent's  decision,  which  was  25  June  2013,
    rather than, bearing in mind it was an in country appeal, the  date  of
    the hearing before the judge. In reply it is said, by  the  Respondent,
    in the round that read as a whole it is plain that the judge did not in
    fact constrain the evidence to that date in coming to the decision that
    she did.

5.   It is undeniable as a matter of fact that the judge did refer to  after
    arising issues of fact after 23 June 2013.  How it came  to  pass  that
    she did not express  herself  with  reference  to  the  later  date  is
    difficult to see. It may be that  it  is  an  error  which  arose  from
    confusion at the hearing rather than an error from  the  misapplication
    of the law.  I do not have to resolve that matter.

6.   It is enough to say that the judge in circumstances  that  are  perhaps
    surprising took into account after the date  of  hearing  documentation
    provided which touched directly upon the extent of contact between  the
    Appellant and his three children.  On one hand the judge, as recited at
    paragraph 6 of the determination was in receipt of a  letter  from  the
    children's mother in which she stated that the children had refused  to
    have contact with the Appellant.  The impression certainly was given to
    the judge that that was indeed what was happening.  Yet  on  the  other
    hand the judge took into account and considered information relating to
    contact by the appellant with the  children  provided  by  the  Contact
    Centre to the Appellant's legal representatives.  The differing factual
    positions are not resolved:  I find the judge's failure  to  do  so  is
    potentially significant in terms of the outcome of the appeal.  It does
    not seem to me at this stage, when I am  not  considering  the  overall
    merits, to be determinative.

7.   A  further  criticism  made,  which  really  may  be  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings, is  the  extent  to  which  the  judge  has
    analysed the best interests of the children as a relevant consideration
    bearing in mind, implicit in the view she came to, the extent to  which
    the Appellant has some relevance in the lives of the children: For  she
    opined that using Skype or other electronic means would  be  sufficient
    to maintain the intended  relationship;  recognising  as  she  did  the
    future absence of direct contact being at odds with that  which  would,
    in most cases, be regarded as desirable.

8.   I find without going through the extensive grounds of appeal  that  the
    decision of the judge represents a material error of law in failing  to
    properly and adequately address the issue of contact.  It is  extremely
    unfortunate that I am driven  to  that  conclusion  by  the  identified
    errors because in many respects the decision was extremely thorough and
    provided a great deal of information underlying the judge's decision.

9.   The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  It is  appropriate  for
    the decision to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

    (1)  Remade in the First-tier Tribunal not before  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge R J N B Morris

    (2)  Time estimate: 2 hours

    (3)  No interpreter needed

    (4)  Any further documents or statements relied upon to be  served  not
         later than 14 working days before  the  date  of  the  hearing  for
         remaking the decision.

    (5)  Any additional bundles of documents to be served  14  days  before
         the further hearing.6.  No findings of fact to stand unless  agreed
         between the parties and provided to the Tribunal in writing.

An anonymity order is both appropriate and necessary  in  the  circumstances
    of the case.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

