
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th April 2016                           |On 30th August 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR. SOLOMON OFORI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C Avery: Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. N Garrod:  instructed by Just & Brown Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  appealed  against  a
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Tipping  promulgated  on  25th
       March 2015 following a hearing on 10th March 2015.


    2. For the reasons set out in my earlier decision, I found an  error  of
       law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tipping.   I  set
       aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings
       preserved.  The hearing was adjourned for a continuation  hearing  to
       take place so that further evidence could be heard.  Full details  of
       the application for permission to appeal, the grant of permission  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes, and my reasons for finding an error
       of law are contained in my previous decision.


    3. For ease of reference, in the course of this  determination  I  shall
       adopt the parties' status as it previously was before the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  I shall in this determination, refer to Mr  Solomon  Ofori
       as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    4. Borrowing from my earlier  decision,  I  summarise  and  augment  the
       background.  The appellant is a national of Ghana born on  20th  June
       1992.  He claims to have entered the UK in July 2003, aged 11, with 6
       months leave to enter.  Whilst the date upon which he arrived in  the
       UK is in issue, it is uncontroversial that he has remained in the  UK
       unlawfully save during the 6-month period when he had the benefit  of
       leave to enter.


    5. I found that taking the appellant's date of arrival in the UK as  1st
       September  2003,  as  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tipping  had,  the
       appellant would have been just over 11 years and 2 months  old,  when
       he arrived in the UK.  Under cover of a letter dated  28th  September
       2012, the appellant's representatives submitted  an  application  for
       leave to remain in the UK under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)  and  (vi)  of
       the  immigration  rules.   Between  1st  September   2003   and   the
       application on 28th September 2012, the appellant had been in the  UK
       just over 9 years.  I noted  that  paragraph  276ADE(l)(v)  expressly
       provides that the requirements are to be met by an applicant "at  the
       date of application", and the Judge therefore erred in  finding  that
       the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) were met. As at  the  date
       of the application, the appellant had been in the UK  for  just  over
       nine years. He was between the age of 18 and 25, but had not spent at
       least half his life living in the UK.


    6. I found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  considered  the
       proper  approach  to  be  adopted  in  Article  8  claims  where  the
       requirements of the rules are not met, and neither had the Judge  had
       regard to the public interest considerations that a Tribunal is bound
       to take account of, under ss117A-D of the 2002 Act.  I set aside  the
       decision and directed that the appeal be listed for  further  hearing
       before me to remake the decision.


Re-making the Decision


    7. I had directed that any further evidence relied on by either party is
       to be filed and served no later than 14 days before the next date  of
       hearing.   Under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  8th  April  2016,  the
       appellant's representatives provided an updated index  for  a  bundle
       spanning some  526  pages,  much  of  which  was  material  that  had
       previously been before the First-tier Tribunal, but which included  a
       statement made by the appellant, dated 4th March 2015 and 11th  April
       2016.  The bundle also included a selection of photographs that it is
       said, were taken at  a  church  on  19th  April  2003  and  show  the
       appellant and other children.  The photographs are  digitally  marked
       with the date "2003 4 19".  Other photographs of the appellant  taken
       in 2015 were also included  in  the  bundle  together  with  internet
       articles relating the appellant's activities as a footballer.


    8. Notwithstanding the failure to file and serve  the  documents  relied
       upon in accordance with my directions, I permitted the  appellant  to
       rely upon all of the documents set out  in  the  updated  index.   It
       serves no purpose to refer to all of the documents relied upon by the
       appellant in this decision.  In reaching this decision,  I  have  had
       careful regard to the documents contained in the appellant's  bundle,
       whether or not a particular document is expressly referred to.


    9. At the resumed hearing I heard evidence from the  appellant  and  his
       aunt,  Ms.  Theresa  Asamoah.   I   heard   submissions   from   both
       representatives and in addition I have taken into account the matters
       set out in the updated skeleton argument produced by Mr. Garrod.


The evidence


   10. I first heard evidence from the appellant.  The  appellant's  witness
       statement is lengthy and much of it repeats what has been said in the
       correspondence  that  passed  between  his  representatives  and  the
       respondent.  The appellant confirms that he was  born  on  20th  June
       1992 and that he now lives with his aunt, Ms. Theresa  Asamoah,  whom
       he takes to be his mother.  He states that  he  has  resided  in  the
       United Kingdom since his arrival in early 2003 and that  he  has  not
       departed the United Kingdom at all since he arrived.  He states  that
       he has no family, social or cultural ties with Ghana  and  there  are
       significant insurmountable obstacles to his return and integration to
       Ghana.


   11. The appellant states that his mother who had been ill and  unable  to
       take care of him, died on 22nd August 2006.   A  copy  of  her  death
       certificate is to be found in the  appellant's  bundle  and  confirms
       that she died in Ghana on 22nd August 2006.  The cause of  her  death
       is said to be malaria.  The appellant states that his father, who was
       always absent, died on 18th May 2000. A copy of his death certificate
       is also to be found in the appellant's bundle and  confirms  that  he
       died in Ghana on 8th May 2006.  The cause of his death is said to  be
       a heart attack.


   12. The appellant states that he does not have any family in  Ghana.   He
       claims that the only family  members  that  he  has,  are  his  aunts
       Theresa and Augustina who  are  both  British  citizens  present  and
       settled in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  regards  his  aunt
       Theresa, as his mother.


   13. He states that the significant obstacles to his return to  Ghana  are
       that he does not have a home there to live in, and  no  other  family
       members in Ghana to assist him in integrating in  Ghana.  He  has  no
       social, cultural or family ties to Ghana. He states that he was  aged
       10 years old when he left Ghana and he does not  have  the  means  to
       earn an income in Ghana.  The appellant states that  the  thought  of
       being  removed  to  Ghana  or  being  required  to  return  to  Ghana
       distresses him and he is filled with utter dread, fear and nightmares
       as to what will happen to him in Ghana.  He  is  close  to  his  aunt
       Theresa, who looks after him but she is not in a  financial  position
       to provide accommodation and to assist him with other living costs in
       Ghana. The appellant regards the United Kingdom as his  home,  having
       lived here since 2003.


   14. The appellant refers to the evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  to
       show that he is fully integrated into the United  Kingdom,  including
       the numerous school and  college  letters  and  certificates,  church
       letters and certificates, and the photographs taken of  him  and  his
       family and friends in the United Kingdom. The appellant has submitted
       extensive evidence of his life as a footballer and he states that had
       he been granted limited leave to remain, Burnley Football Club  would
       have signed him up.


   15. In his evidence before me, the appellant adopted the content  of  his
       witness statement. In cross examination, he confirmed that he has  no
       family that he could turn to in Ghana, and that since his arrival  in
       the United Kingdom he has been living with his aunt and  his  cousin.
       The family support themselves through the work that  the  appellant's
       aunt and cousin undertake. The appellant himself is  unable  to  work
       although he does  play  semi-professional  football  on  a  part-time
       basis. When asked why he could not  return  to  Ghana  the  appellant
       claimed that he was young when he left, that he had  no  friends  and
       that he had spent his time in Ghana  previously,  looking  after  his
       mother who was ill. He stated that he has no-one to go back  to,  and
       that there are no jobs.   His  uncle,  who  had  abandoned  him,  has
       children but they were attended boarding school and he does not  know
       what happened to them.  The appellant confirmed that he was  arrested
       in December 2015 when he was stopped by the police whilst  travelling
       in a car with a friend. He had been questioned, but no  charges  were
       brought against him. When asked why he had not  taken  any  steps  to
       sort out his immigration status  previously,  the  appellant  claimed
       that  the  opportunity  had  not  previously  arisen,  until  he  was
       considering applications to universities. At that point, he  realised
       that he could not apply because of his immigration status.  He stated
       that he had not previously spoken to his aunt about why she  had  not
       taken steps previously to regularise his immigration status.


   16. I then heard evidence from Theresa Asamoah.  She adopted her  witness
       statement dated 4th March 2015 that is to be found in the appellant's
       bundle.  Theresa  Asamoah  is  the  half-sister  of  the  appellant's
       mother.  They share the same mother but have different fathers.   She
       provided letters in support  of  the  appellant's  application.   She
       considers him like a son and she states that the appellant  does  not
       have close family, cultural, or  social  ties  with  his  country  of
       origin, Ghana.


   17. Ms. Asamoah states that the appellant lived  in  Ghana  with  another
       relation, his uncle, before coming to the UK.  The appellant's  uncle
       had provided finances for the appellant's sick mother  following  her
       illness, and his uncle took him to live in a small town not far  from
       his village, after  the  appellant's  father  died.  His  uncle  then
       decided he could not look after the appellant because  he  could  not
       pay for his school fees, as he had two children of his  own  to  look
       after.  The appellant's uncle had reluctantly assumed  responsibility
       for the appellant but had since made  it  quite  clear  that  he  was
       unable to look after, and have the  appellant  live  with  him  on  a
       permanent basis, as he has his own two children to look after and  he
       was  finding  it  very  difficult  to  look  after  his  own   family
       financially.  The appellant's presence was an additional burden.


   18. Ms. Asamoah states  that  the  appellant  first  arrived  the  United
       Kingdom in 2003 having been granted a six-month visitor visa  by  the
       British High Commission in Accra, Ghana.  Upon arrival, the appellant
       immediately went to live with her at an  address  in  Palmers  Green,
       London.   During  that  visit,  Ms.  Asamoah  became  aware  of   the
       appellant's life after his father had passed away.  She  states  that
       she and  her  cousin  Augustina  Lewis,  made  a  decision  that  the
       appellant should return to Ghana but  the  appellant  was  scared  to
       return back to live in the village where he  and  his  mother  lived,
       because his mother was in a really bad state as she was very ill, and
       could not do anything to  provide  for  her  son  and  herself.   The
       appellant confided in Ms. Asamoah that he and his mother could go for
       2 to 3 days without food. He could not go to school in Ghana  as  his
       school fees were not paid, and so he had to go on the streets to sell
       small products like sweets, groundnuts, fruit and  water  in  plastic
       bags, to passing motorists and pedestrians.    Ms.  Asamoah  and  her
       cousin decided that for the time being, the appellant  should  remain
       with them, and they sent money to the appellant's mother in the  hope
       that she would recover and  the  appellant  could  return  to  Ghana.
       Following the death of the appellant's mother, the  question  of  who
       the appellant would live with, if returned to Ghana,  arose.   Return
       to his uncle was not an option because the appellant's uncle had made
       it clear that he would only look after the appellant on a short  term
       basis.  Ms. Asamoah felt obliged to  assume  responsibility  for  the
       appellant's upbringing and upkeep.  She states  that  she  could  not
       live with herself if the appellant returned to  Ghana  and  ended  up
       living with a  distant  relative.   Therefore,  she  and  her  cousin
       Augustina, decided that from their wages they would  both  contribute
       towards the appellant's food and other living costs.  She  refers  to
       the extensive evidence contained in the appellant's bundle about  his
       schooling in the UK and refers to the photographs taken at church  in
       2003 that show the appellant in the UK.   She also refers to  entries
       contained in the records maintained by the respondent  that  indicate
       that on 31st March 2014, the respondent was  of  the  view  that  the
       appellant should be granted leave to remain in the UK because he  met
       the requirements of the immigration rules.


   19. In cross examination, Ms. Asamoah stated that she had  not  tried  to
       sort out the appellant's immigration status before 2010, because  she
       did not know whether he qualified.  She conceded that she was worried
       that he would not qualify, and she considered that  it  was  not  the
       right time to make an application. By 2012,  she  realised  that  the
       appellant had spent half of his life in the United Kingdom  and  that
       without regularising his immigration status, he would not be able  to
       go to University. When asked why she  did  not  arrange  for  him  to
       return to Ghana previously, Ms. Asamoah stated that it  was  not  her
       intention to keep the appellant  here  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
       originally he was sent to the UK so that he  could  be  looked  after
       whilst his mother was sick.   Asked about the appellant's uncle - her
       half-brother,  Ms.  Asamoah  stated  that  she  does  not  know   his
       whereabouts and does not even know whether he is alive. She does  not
       know anything about his children and has had no  contact  with  them.
       She stated that she had tried to get in touch  with  the  appellant's
       uncle when her sister passed away, but she was unable to contact him.
        Ms. Asamoah stated that she last went to Ghana in 2011 for a holiday
       and to see where her sister is buried.  She had been shown where  her
       sister is buried by friends.   She was asked whether she had made any
       enquiries about the appellant returning to Ghana, but  she  explained
       that there was no one in Ghana that she could make any enquiry  with.
       The friends that she had visited will not  be  ready  to  assist  the
       appellant because Ms. Asamoah has been away from  Ghana  for  a  long
       time and she is not particularly close to them.  Ms.  Asamoah  stated
       that the appellant does not work but attends  football  practice  and
       does what he can to help local children.


   20.  I asked Ms. Asamoah where she had stayed during her holiday to Ghana
       in 2011. She stated that she had stayed with people that she had been
       introduced to by friends, for a few days at a time. She did not  stay
       in a hotel.    She was able to be accommodated in  this  way  because
       she had previously lived in Ghana and continues to have some  friends
       in Ghana.


The parties submissions


   21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr. Avery submits that the issue in this
       appeal is whether there are very serious obstacles to the appellant's
       reintegration in Ghana. He accepts that the appellant's situation  is
       difficult because it is not one of his own making.  He  was  a  child
       when he arrived in United Kingdom and the arrangements for  his  care
       were entrusted to the adults. That said, Mr. Avery submits that Ghana
       is an English speaking country and the appellant is now a  young  man
       aged 24. He submits that the appellant could find work and a  job  in
       Ghana and that the family maintain at least some contact with friends
       and distant relatives in Ghana,  who  could  help  the  appellant  to
       reintegrate.  Mr.  Avery  submits  that  the  requirements   of   the
       immigration rules are not met and that it is plain from the  evidence
       that the family have attempted to get around the  immigration  rules.
       He submits that the appellant was refused leave to remain in 2010 and
       arrangements should then have been made for the  appellant  to  leave
       the UK.  Mr. Avery  submits  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
       appellant has no one to turn to in Ghana for  some  assistance  on  a
       short term basis whilst he settles back to life in Ghana, and that in
       any event, he is an adult aged 24 who is capable of forming  his  own
       independent life. Mr. Avery submits that if the appellant  would  now
       qualify under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the immigration rules, it  is
       open to him to make an application.


   22. On behalf of the appellant, Mr. Garrod adopts the  matters  that  are
       set out in his skeleton argument. He submits that  the  appellant  is
       aged 18 years or above, and has lived continuously in the UK for less
       than 20 years.  The issue therefore under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
       the Immigration rules is whether there  would  be  "very  significant
       obstacles" to the  appellant's  integration  into  Ghana,  if  he  is
       required to leave the UK.  Mr. Garrod reminds me that  the  appellant
       arrived in the UK when he was 10 years  old.   He  submits  that  the
       "very significant obstacles" are that  the  appellant's  father  died
       when the appellant was of a very  young  age,  and  his  mother  died
       whilst the appellant has been in the UK.  The appellant has now  been
       in the United Kingdom for  13  years  having  received  very  limited
       education in  Ghana.    He  submits  that  even  if  there  was  some
       hypothetical person that the appellant could  turn  to  for  help  in
       Ghana, there  would  still  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       appellant's integration into Ghana because of the very young  age  at
       which the appellant left Ghana. He submits that it cannot be  claimed
       that the appellant had developed any independent life in Ghana and he
       would be returning to a culture that is alien  to  him.   Mr.  Garrod
       submits that the appellant has used his time in  the  United  Kingdom
       usefully, and that there is extensive evidence before me, of the  way
       in which the appellant has  positively  integrated  into  the  United
       Kingdom.


   23. Mr. Garrod submits  that  not  only  would  the  appellant  face  the
       difficulties of integration in Ghana, but he would be expected to  do
       so, having left a close-knit family in the UK  that  he  lives  with.
       They have successfully helped steer him through  adolescence  in  the
       UK.  He would not only need to  integrate  in  Ghana,  but  would  be
       expected to do so, having been effectively wrenched from  his  family
       in the UK.  He submits there is no legitimate purpose served  by  the
       removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom.


   24. Before turning to my findings and conclusions, it is as well at  this
       stage to set out the relevant legal framework.  Paragraph  276ADE  of
       the Immigration Rules sets out the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
       applicant for leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  private  life.
       Insofar as is relevant to this appeal, the rules provide:


           Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life


           276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of application, the applicant:


                ...


                (v)    is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has
                    spent at least half of his life living  continuously  in
                    the UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


                (vi)   subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                    above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20
                    years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there
                    would be very significant obstacles to  the  applicant's
                    integration into the country to which he would  have  to
                    go if required to leave the UK.


   25.  The  relevant  provisions  of  ss.117A-117B  of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") are as follows:


           117A: Application of this Part


           (1)    This part applies where a court or Tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Act-


                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and


                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.


           (2)    In considering the public interest question the court  or
           Tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                117B, and


                ...


           (3)    In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question"  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).


           117B: Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
           all cases


           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
           the public interest.


           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-


                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (4)    Little weight should be given to-


                (a)    a private life, or


                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.


           ...





Findings and Conclusions


   26. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to show, on the balance  of
       probabilities, that he has established a family and/or  private  life
       in the UK and that his removal  from  the  UK  as  a  result  of  the
       respondent's decision would interfere with those rights. It  is  then
       for  the  respondent  to  justify  any   interference   caused.   The
       respondent's decision must be in accordance with the law and must  be
       a proportionate response in all the circumstances.


   27. It is uncontroversial that the issue in this appeal  is  confined  to
       paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules and Article 8 ECHR.


   28. I have  carefully  considered  the  evidence  before  me  as  to  the
       appellant's arrival in the UK and I find that the appellant has  been
       in the UK since at least 12th April 2003.  There is no formal  record
       of the appellant's arrival in the UK.  The appellant and Ms.  Asamoah
       both confirm in their evidence that the appellant arrived in  the  UK
       in 2003.  In the application made on form FLR(O) dated 26th September
       2012, the appellant declared that he has lived in the UK for 9  years
       and that he has not visited Ghana since his arrival in 2003.  I  have
       been provided with photographs of the appellant  that  the  appellant
       and Ms. Asamoah claim, were taken on 19th April 2003 at St.  Monica's
       Church in London.  The photographs themselves have the date digitally
       recorded as "2003 4 19" and  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  I  am
       satisfied that the photographs establish that the  appellant  was  in
       the UK on 19th April 2003.  There is no evidence before me as to  how
       long the appellant had  been  in  the  UK  at  the  time  that  those
       photographs were  taken,  but  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the
       appellant will have arrived in the UK, at least  a  week  before  his
       first attendance at Church.   I  therefore  find,  on  a  balance  of
       probabilities that the appellant has been in the UK  since  at  least
       12th April 2003.


   29. Based upon my finding that the appellant has been in the UK since  at
       least 12th April 2003, I find that the appellant was 10 years  and  9
       months old when he arrived in the UK. Under cover of a  letter  dated
       28th September 2012, the  appellant's  representatives  submitted  an
       application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the   UK   under   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(v) and (vi) of the immigration rules.  Between  12th  April
       2003 and the application on 28th September 2012,  the  appellant  had
       been in the UK for 9 years and 5 months.


   30. It follows that at the date of application (28th September 2012), the
       appellant had not spent at least half of his life living continuously
       in the  UK  and  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration Rules.


   31. I turn then to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.   It
       is uncontroversial that the appellant is aged 18 years or above,  and
       has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20  years.   As  Mr.
       Garrod submits, the issue therefore is whether there would  be  "very
       significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Ghana,  if
       he is required to leave the UK.


   32. Although there is a voluminous bundle of documents relied upon by the
       appellant, most of that material is evidence of the private life that
       the appellant has established in the UK.  I accept that the extensive
       evidence that is relied upon by the appellant establishes that he has
       achieved well in his education, that he is an active  member  of  the
       church and community and that the appellant has gone as far as he can
       to establish what is likely to be a promising career in football at a
       high level.


   33. The appellant states in his evidence that he has no family, social or
       cultural ties with Ghana and that the significant  obstacles  to  his
       return to Ghana are that he was aged 10, when  he  left  Ghana.   His
       parents have passed away.  He  does not have a home in Ghana to  live
       in, and no other family members in Ghana to assist him in integrating
       in Ghana. He claims that he has no social, cultural or family ties to
       Ghana and he does not have the means to earn an income in Ghana.


   34. I find that the appellant's father died on 18th May 2000  whilst  the
       appellant was in Ghana and that his mother died on 22nd August  2006,
       whilst the appellant was  in  the  UK.   A  copy  of  the  two  death
       certificates are included in the appellant's bundle  and  I  have  no
       reason to doubt the provenance of those documents.


   35. I accept the evidence of Ms. Asamoah that following the death of  the
       appellant's father, the appellant went  to  live  with  his  maternal
       uncle, who not only  cared  for  the  appellant,  but  also  provided
       finances for the appellant's sick mother following her illness.


   36. In my judgement, the central issue in this appeal  is  whether  there
       would be "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's  integration
       into Ghana, given the very young  age  at  which  he  left,  and  his
       absence from Ghana for what is now over 13 years.  The requirement of
       "very significant obstacles" sets a demanding standard. It sets out a
       high threshold to be met.  I have carefully considered  the  evidence
       before me concerning the circumstances  surrounding  the  appellant's
       arrival in the UK and the decision's made on his behalf by those that
       were caring for him.  In my judgement, the appellant's  own  lack  of
       continuing ties to Ghana, and the  fact  that  he  found  himself  an
       overstayer in the UK through no fault of his own, do  not  amount  to
       "very significant obstacles"  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
       Ghana.


   37. Ms. Asamoah states that following the appellant's arrival in the  UK,
       and following the death of his mother, it became  apparent  that  the
       appellant's return to his maternal uncle was not  an  option  because
       the appellant's uncle had made it clear that he would only look after
       the appellant on a short term basis.  Whilst it is unsurprising  that
       Ms. Asamoah felt obliged to assume responsibility for the appellant's
       upbringing, I do not accept that the appellant would be  without  any
       family support whatsoever, if he returns to Ghana.   The  appellant's
       maternal uncle had previously made it clear that he would  only  look
       after the appellant on a short term basis.  There  is  no  reason  to
       believe that the  appellant's  maternal  uncle  would  be  unable  or
       unwilling to provide short term assistance to the appellant now if he
       were to return to Ghana.  I  have  considered  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant and Ms. Asamoah that neither the appellant nor Ms.  Asamoah
       have had any contact with  the  appellant's  uncle.   There  is  very
       limited evidence before me of the  steps  taken  by  Ms.  Asamoah  to
       establish any contact with the appellant's uncle and I find that  the
       appellant could take steps to establish contact with  his  uncle  and
       seek some short term assistance, upon return to  Ghana.   After  all,
       his maternal uncle was willing to look after the appellant after  his
       father passed away and appears to have been prepared to assist in the
       care arrangements for the appellant, albeit on  a  short  term  basis
       only.  That would allow the appellant  an  opportunity  to  integrate
       into Ghana.  The appellant has obtained a  number  of  qualifications
       whilst he has been living in the UK and clearly speaks  English,  the
       official language in Ghana, very well.  The appellant would  not  now
       need the intense support and care from his maternal uncle that he did
       previously, when the appellant was much younger.


   38. The appellant claims that he would effectively be destitute on return
       as he  would have  no  home  and  no  means  of  getting  funds  from
       employment.  I  fully  accept  that  initially  the  appellant  would
       experience difficulties, but there  is  credible  evidence  that  Ms.
       Asamoah has maintained contact with friends in Ghana and has  herself
       been able to visit Ghana and seek the assistance of  her  friends  to
       locate and visit the grave of the appellant's mother.   There  is  no
       evidence to suggest that the appellant's uncle and his children, with
       whom the appellant has previously lived, have left  Nigeria.   Whilst
       relationships might have been strained in the  past  because  of  the
       additional burden  placed  upon  the  family  in  looking  after  the
       appellant's mother, I find that the appellant would be able  to  make
       contact with his uncle in Ghana and seek help for the initial  period
       of return until he is able to make more solid links to Ghana  of  his
       own. I do not accept that it would not be possible for the  appellant
       and Ms. Asamoah to seek  help  from  those  that  they  have  limited
       contact with, and who have helped them in the past. I do  not  accept
       that work is not available in  Ghana  to  the  appellant,  given  the
       skills and qualifications that he has gained during his time  in  the
       UK.


   39. The immigration rules are said to reflect the  respondent's  view  of
       where a fair balance should be struck between the  right  to  respect
       for private  and  family  life  and  public  interest  considerations
       relating to the maintenance of an  effective  system  of  immigration
       control (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM). The rules should be read  in
       a way that reflects a proper  interpretation  of  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention. However, there may some cases where the rules do
       not address relevant Article 8  issues.  In  such  cases  it  may  be
       necessary to consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  to
       justify granting leave to remain outside the immigration rules:  SSHD
       v SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.  This  should  be  assessed  by
       reference to the five stage test outlined by the House of Lords in  R
       v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.


   40. I have no doubt the appellant has made friends and connections to the
       UK in the last 13 years. I bear in mind that following the  decisions
       in AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] INLR 407 and VW (Uganda) v SSHD  [2009]
       EWCA Civ 5,  the  threshold  for  showing  an  interference  with  an
       appellant's rights under Article 8 is not particularly high.  I  find
       that it is likely that the appellant has  established  some  form  of
       private life in the UK and that in all the circumstances of this case
       removal would interfere with that life in a sufficiently grave way as
       to engage the operation of Article 8  (points  (i)  &  (ii)  of  Lord
       Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).


   41. Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family and
       private life. However, it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
       interfered with by the state in certain circumstances.  It  is  trite
       law that the state has a right to control immigration and that  rules
       governing the entry and residence of people into the country are  "in
       accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article  8.   Any
       interference with the right to private or family life must be  for  a
       legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.


   42. In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision would  be
       a proportionate response I am  required  to  take  into  account  the
       public interest  considerations  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002").  I  take
       into account that it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  maintain  an
       effective  system  of  immigration  control  (s.117B(1)).  While  the
       appellant speaks English and is therefore better  able  to  integrate
       this is a neutral factor that does not add to his  case  (s.117B(2)).
       It is merely a factor that does not lend  additional  weight  to  the
       public interest considerations: see AM (S.117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
       260.   The  appellant  relies  upon  financial  assistance  from  Ms.
       Asamoah.  There is no evidence to show that the appellant is  or  has
       financially independence (s.117B(3)). In any event, it would also  be
       a neutral factor.


   43. The appellant  has  remained  in  the  UK  as  an  overstayer  and  I
       acknowledge the fact that he found himself an overstayer  in  the  UK
       through no fault of his own.  However, his leave has been  precarious
       throughout his time in the UK. Section  117B(5)  states  that  little
       weight should be given to a private life that has been established in
       the UK at a time when a person's immigration status is precarious.


   44. The public interest considerations outlined in section 117B are  only
       one  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment  and  may  still   be
       outweighed if the appellant can  show  that  there  are  particularly
       compelling circumstances that might justify granting leave to  remain
       even though he doesn't  meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
       rules. Beyond the appellants age at arrival, and the length  of  time
       that he has now been in the UK, I find that there is nothing  in  the
       circumstances of this  case  that  could  properly  be  described  as
       raising  any  such  compelling  circumstances.   Unfortunately,   the
       appellant's understandable desire to remain in the UK does not equate
       to a right to do so under the law.


   45. For the reasons given above I find that removal in consequence of the
       decision would  amount  to  a  proportionate  interference  with  the
       appellant's right to private life under Article  8  of  the  European
       Convention (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five  stage  approach
       in Razgar).


   46. In reaching my decision, I have had regard  to  the  entries  in  the
       internal records maintained by the respondent and the view  initially
       recorded that the respondent's caseworker was of the view that by the
       time of the hearing of an appeal, the appellant would  qualify  under
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the immigration rules.  The appellant would
       not have been aware of that erroneous view until  the  disclosure  of
       the notes. I find that whenever the appellant  became  aware  of  the
       view set out in the internal records of the respondent, the view  set
       out was erroneous in law and in any  event,  does  not  amount  to  a
       legitimate expectation that he would be granted leave to remain.


   47. It follows that in my judgement the appellant does  not  qualify  for
       leave to remain under the Immigration Rules or on Article  8  grounds
       and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   48. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law and was set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh
       decision and dismiss the appeal under the immigration  rules  and  on
       Article 8 grounds.


   49. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.


Signed   Date 30th August 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismissed
the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 30th August 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

