
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29276/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 11 December 2015                          |     On 18 January 2016          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Maqsood of Counsel instructed by Pride Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie promulgated on 25 June 2015 in which he allowed the appeal of
    Ms KM under the Immigration Rules with reference to Appendix FM and  in
    particular paragraph EX.1.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Ms KM is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency
    with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to
    Ms KM as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  17  December  2013  with
    entry clearance as a visitor.  During the time  that  she  was  in  the
    United Kingdom she met and married 'H' ('the sponsor').

4.   The sponsor was granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    the Legacy Scheme and is a person who is currently under  the  care  of
    the West London Mental Health National Health Service Trust,  suffering
    from paranoid schizophrenia.  There is extensive  medical  evidence  on
    file in respect of  the  history  and  treatment  of  that  unfortunate
    condition.  It is said that the sponsor was  a  victim  of  torture  in
    Libya and that this circumstance is thought to be in some  considerable
    part responsible for his current mental health condition.  As suggested
    from the foregoing, he is a national of  Libya.   The  Appellant  is  a
    national of Tunisia.  The Appellant married the sponsor on  1  February
    2014 and an application for leave to remain as a partner was then  made
    during the currency of her visitor visa.

5.   Mr Maqsood today helpfully and realistically acknowledges that  because
    the Appellant was present in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  at  the
    time that the application for variation of leave to  remain  was  made,
    she cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules by virtue of paragraph E-
    LTRP.2.1.   Mr  Maqsood  therefore  acknowledges  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  in  error  in  allowing  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules.

6.   For completeness I observe that it would appear that at  paragraph  12,
    in  considering  the  framework  of  the  case,  the  Judge  must  have
    overlooked the effect of paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 because he says this: "In
    order to come within the Rules then the Appellant must prove  that  the
    Exception EX.1 applies to exempt her as it would from  the  immigration
    status  requirements  and  the  English  language   requirement."    As
    discussed, clearly the effect of paragraph EX.1  does  not  exempt  the
    Appellant from the immigration status requirements of  the  eligibility
    requirement in E-LTRP.2.1.

7.   In those circumstances - the First-tier Tribunal Judge  having  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules on the basis of his findings  in
    respect of paragraph EX.1 - it follows that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside and requires to be remade.

8.   In the context of remaking the decision in the appeal,  necessarily  it
    is  now  acknowledged  that  the  appeal  cannot  succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules, and so the Appellant relies solely on Article 8. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider Article 8.

9.   I have been invited today by Mr Maqsood in cogent, clear  -  and  to  a
    certain extent yet not quite sufficiently - persuasive  submissions  to
    accept that the findings of the Judge at paragraph 14 of  the  decision
    when considering paragraph EX.1 are sufficient to  found  a  favourable
    conclusion under Article 8, and thereby to allow the appeal on  Article
    8 grounds without more.


10.  Paragraph 14 of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
    following terms:

         "The fact of the genuine and subsisting nature of the marriage has,
         as I noted, been conceded.  All that is in issue is  whether  there
         can  be  said  to  be  insurmountable  obstacles   preventing   the
         continuance of the relationship outside the  United  Kingdom.   The
         respondent has based its decision on the proposition  that  it  has
         seen no evidence to suggest that there are insurmountable obstacles
         preventing the continuation  of  the  marriage  in  Tunisia.   This
         finding leaves out a number of considerations.  First, the  sponsor
         is not Tunisian.  He has no connection with Tunisia.  There  is  no
         basis for assumption that he is entitled  to  entry  into  Tunisia.
         Second, the sponsor is a person with  protection  issues,  although
         these have not been expressly recognised by the respondent with the
         grant of asylum, they have  been  implicitly  acknowledged  in  the
         exceptional leave that was granted.  He cannot return with his wife
         to his own country.  Third, the  appellant  is  a  person  who  was
         displaced in the United Kingdom as an asylum seeker for some  seven
         years while awaiting decision by the respondent on his status.  His
         settled  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  such  as  ought  not
         reasonably to be interfered with  now.   Fourth,  the  sponsor  is,
         moreover, a survivor of torture and abuse which  has  rendered  him
         mentally disabled.  He suffers paranoid schizophrenia which has for
         the entirety of his stay in the United  Kingdom  required  constant
         and very close support and medication that it is most unlikely that
         he will achieve or be able to  access  in  Tunisia.   It  would  be
         grossly  unreasonable  to  deprive  him  of  this   support.    The
         cumulative effect of these considerations, not adverted to  at  all
         in the refusal letter, impels me to the conclusion that there exist
         insurmountable obstacles to the continuation  of  married  life  in
         Tunisia or outside the United Kingdom."


11.  I am not persuaded  that  the  contents  of  paragraph  14  provide  an
    adequate assessment of all of the  relevant  circumstances  such  that,
    without more, they are conclusive of a favourable Article 8 decision.

12.  Given that that is my overall conclusion it is not for me to essay  any
    very close analysis of all of the evidence because that will require to
    be done on another occasion with proper fact-finding - and it would  be
    inappropriate for me  to  seek,  as  it  were,  to  set  an  agenda  by
    indicating any particular view on the facts.  It is, however, necessary
    for me to give something by  way  of  explanation  of  why  I  consider
    paragraph 14 not to amount to a sufficiently  complete  and  conclusive
    consideration of all of the Article 8 issues that may  be  in  play  in
    this case.  (In doing so,  necessarily  I  do  not  seek  to  make  any
    particular criticism  of  Judge  Gillespie,  who  was  not  considering
    Article 8 in that paragraph.)

13.  The following matters appear to me to be germane.

     (i) There was no consideration of the possibility of the Appellant  and
    the sponsor  being  separated  only  for  a  short  period  whilst  the
    Appellant returned to  Tunisia  to  pursue  an  application  for  entry
    clearance in the way that the Immigration Rules would have expected her
    to do having arrived here as a visitor and the Rules not  permitting  a
    switch to a partner or spouse from that category of migrant.

     (ii) Furthermore, insofar as the couple might be able  to  relocate  to
    Tunisia  no  particular  consideration  was  given  to  the   sponsor's
    circumstances in that country.  There is no evidence whatsoever  as  to
    her life in Tunisia and therefore no evidential basis upon  which  this
    Tribunal could make any finding without further evidence,  either  oral
    or documentary, as to the circumstances in which the sponsor  might  be
    able to be accommodated by his wife in her country of origin.

     (iii) Further to the foregoing,  in  considering  the  ability  of  the
    sponsor to enter Tunisia as the partner of the Appellant there  was  no
    evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  Insofar  as  it  is
    suggested that there was no  basis  to  assume  that  the  sponsor  was
    entitled to enter Tunisia, on the face of it this would appear to be  a
    reversal of the  usual  burden  of  proof.   In  short,  it  is  to  be
    maintained that the Appellant could not be joined in her country by her
    husband, it would be for the Appellant  to  produce  evidence  of  that
    circumstance.

     (iv) The  Judge's  observations  in  respect  of  the  availability  of
    medical treatment for the sponsor's condition are also in  my  judgment
    not sufficiently adequate to found a proper basis  for  the  Article  8
    consideration.  It is to be  noted  that  in  the  Respondent's  appeal
    bundle  at  Annex  H  documentary  evidence  about  the  provision   of
    psychiatric facilities in Tunisia was produced and was before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge. The Appellant's documents do not produce any  such
    evidence  as  to  the  availability  of  treatment  or  other   support
    mechanisms in Tunisia.  On that basis it is unclear  on  what  evidence
    the Judge reached the conclusion that it was  most  unlikely  that  the
    sponsor would be able to access adequate support and medication  if  he
    were to accompany his wife to Tunisia, whether for a  short  period  to
    support her application for entry clearance or by way of resettlement.

    (v) Moreover, no consideration has been given  to  any  of  the  public
    interest considerations pursuant to section 117A-D of the 2002 Act  (as
    amended).

14.  I express, as I indicate, no final views in respect  of  any  of  these
    matters, but it seems to me that they are all matters that require some
    careful  further  consideration.   For  that  reason  I   decline   the
    invitation to simply remake the appeal on the basis of the findings  at
    paragraph 14 by allowing it under Article 8 and instead I set aside the
    decision and remit it  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  new
    decision to be made in respect of Article 8. It is  possible,  however,
    particularly in light of the concession made on behalf of the Appellant
    to remake the decision in the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    dismissing it.

15.  It may be that the Secretary of State will wish to file and  serve  the
    Appellant's  entry  clearance  documents  because  they  should  reveal
    something of her circumstances in Tunisia.  Equally the  Appellant  may
    now wish to file and serve  documentary  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    possibility or otherwise of the sponsor being able to enter Tunisia  as
    a partner, and also in respect of  the  availability  or  otherwise  of
    suitable medical support in Tunisia for the sponsor.   Ms  Everett  has
    acknowledged today that there is no suggestion that the sponsor and the
    Appellant should relocate to Libya at the present time.

16.  Exactly what evidence is to  be  filed  is  really  a  matter  for  the
    parties  and  in  such  circumstances  I  do  not  make  any   specific
    Directions.  It is for the Appellant to prove her case and  it  is  for
    the Respondent to put before the Tribunal anything that the  Respondent
    wishes to rely upon: that should be done within  the  normal  timescale
    and Standard Directions will suffice.


Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


18.  I remake the decision in the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


19.  The decision in the appeal under human rights grounds is to  be  remade
    before the First-tier Tribunal before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

