
IAC-DH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29159/2014
                                                               ia/31426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2015                   |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS LYDIA ADUSEI
                          MASTER KAY BAASAAH OPPONG
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Evans, instructed by Templeton Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department but nonetheless  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that  is
    Mrs Adusei and her child as the appellants and the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the respondent.

 2. The appellants are mother and son, the mother being born  on  4  August
    1974 and her son born on  23  May  2007.   They  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent  made  on  28  June  2014  to  refuse  their
    applications for leave to remain and to remove them from the UK by  way
    of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act.

 3. The first appellant came to the UK on  15  April  2000  with  leave  to
    remain until 20 November 2002 and the appellant's then partner came  to
    the UK in 2003.  An older child, a daughter, was born  on  29  December
    2003 in the UK and this child was not the subject of the appeal.   Both
    children were born in the UK and the facts were such that  the  partner
    of the first appellant and father of both of the children had  departed
    the family unit prior to the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds on  7
    November 2007 with her partner  and  children  as  dependents  but  was
    refused on 20 August  2008  and  served  with  removal  directions.   A
    further application was made by the appellant for leave to remain on 21
    August 2012 and that application was refused and is the subject of this
    appeal.  The respondent considered that none  of  the  appellants  were
    British citizens or settled in the UK and it was reasonable for them to
    return to Ghana as a family unit.

 4.  Judge  Borsada  allowed  the  appeal  on  18  September  2014  and  an
    application for permission to appeal was made on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had approached the appeal from the wrong direction, and,  in  the
    absence of any consideration as required by EV (Philippines) and Others
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, that neither parent would have any claim to
    remain in the UK independent of the children.

 5. It followed from this that all findings made on the  reasonableness  of
    removing the children and their  integration  to  life  in  Ghana  were
    vitiated by a fundamental misdirection in law.  It was submitted to  be
    speculative and premature to allow the appeal on the partial basis that
    one family member might soon  become  a  British  citizen.   The  facts
    before the Tribunal were that the older  child  was  still  subject  to
    immigration control.

 6. Further, the judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  proper  test  for
    allowing an appeal outside the Rules approved at [42] of  Nagre  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) that there needed to be exceptional circumstances such
    that removal would result in unjustifiably harsh  outcomes.   This  was
    good law following Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and undisturbed by MM (Lebanon) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985.

 7. In addition, the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis that Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act operated to  nullify  the  public  interest  in
    removal and this was  a  misapplication  of  that  provision.   It  was
    submitted that "does not require" could not be read to mean  "defeats".
    This was at best a "neutral provision which must be read in conjunction
    with the other provisions of part 5A of the 2002 Act".

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coates
    who stated that all grounds were arguable.

 9. Mr Nath  at  the  hearing  referred  to  paragraph  58  and  60  of  EV
    (Philippines)  and  that  it  was  important  for  the  judge  to  have
    considered the position of the parents.  The judge  needed  to  address
    the issue of Gulshan and Nagre and  the  fact  that  the  family  would
    return as a unit.  The judge had concentrated on the best interests  of
    the child and merely gone straight into a consideration  of  Article  8
    without  considering  the  Immigration  Rules.    There   was   nothing
    exceptional in the circumstances of this family such  that  they  could
    not be returned.  The judge had not considered that the public interest
    and Gulshan was still good law.

10. Mr Evans submitted that the Secretary of State had twice considered the
    appeal on the basis of the wrong Immigration Rule.  In August 2012 when
    this application was filed with the Secretary of State,  a  requirement
    of reasonableness in relation to the  child  in  Rule  276ADE  was  not
    there.  If there was an error of law in the determination it  was  that
    the parent was not allowed under the  Immigration  Rules.   The  parent
    could succeed under the Immigration  Rules  because  she  had  a  valid
    application for leave to remain as the parent, had  not  been  rejected
    under the suitability requirements and  in  fact  met  the  eligibility
    requirements because of EX.1.  The parent had a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with a child who had been in the UK for seven years and it
    was not reasonable to expect that child to leave.

11. Secondly, the judge did not say that the public interest was  nullified
    by  Section  117D(6)  [[5]  of  the  determination].   The  judge   had
    considered all aspects of Article 8 and on the balanced assessment  had
    made it clear that it was in the interests of the child  to  remain  in
    the UK.  By way of additional information Mr Evans submitted  that  the
    first child was now a British citizen.

12. Mr Nath submitted that paragraph 12 of the judge's determination lacked
    clarity particularly in relation to his  reference  to  findings  in  a
    previous paragraph.  There  was  a  failure  to  analyse  and  set  out
    correctly the matters to be considered.

13. I note that the judge set out at length the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal and in particular identified  that  the  respondent  considered
    that in  relation  to  the  second  appellant,  the  son,  it  was  not
    considered unreasonable for him to go to Ghana with  both  his  parents
    who were both Ghanaian citizens as a family and his  parents  would  be
    able to help him adjust to change and provide him with maintenance  and
    accommodation  [Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)].   The  same  reasoning   was
    applied to the appellant's daughter's case.

14. I find the judge also set out why the  respondent  thought  that  there
    would be no unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  should
    they have to return.  The judge also clearly set out  the  response  to
    that by the appellants, not least that the  second  appellant  and  the
    sibling had spent their entire life in the UK and were  both  in  full-
    time education.   The  judge  recorded  that  the  older  daughter  had
    submitted  an  application  in  August  2012  and  had  fulfilled   the
    requirements for leave to remain under the version of paragraph  276ADE
    that was then in force which was simply that a  child  needed  to  show
    that they had lived continuously for a period of seven years in the  UK
    to qualify.  It was submitted that the children  had  spent  all  their
    lives and formative years in the UK.

15. Although Mr Evans submitted that the appeal should  have  been  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules because when the application was filed  the
    Rules had been less stringent the relevant date for  the  applicability
    of the rules is the date of decision. The decision was in fact made  on
    28th June 2014.  The judge made a finding that  the  Immigration  Rules
    were not satisfied. There was no cross challenge by the  appellants  in
    this case.

16. The judge set out that the first appellant's daughter was now  applying
    for UK citizenship, having spent the first ten years of her life in the
    UK.

17. On reading the determination as a whole I am  not  persuaded  that  the
    judge has failed to comply with Gulshan and Nagre as  set  out  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.  In MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA the Court of  Appeal  referred  to  Sales  J  who  found  that  in
    precarious cases "it is likely to  be  only  in  the  most  exceptional
    circumstances  that  the  removal  of  the  non-national  family   will
    constitute a violation of Article 8".  MF continued however:

         "In our view that is not to say that a test  of  exceptionality  is
         being applied.  Rather it is that in approaching  the  question  of
         whether  removal  is   a   proportionate   interference   with   an
         individual's Article 8 rights the scales are  heavily  weighted  in
         favour of deportation and something very compelling 'which will  be
         exceptionally' is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         removal."

18. MM Lebanon and Others R on the Application of the  Secretary  of  State
    for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EW  Civ  985)  confirmed  that  the
    Immigration Rules do not displace  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  and  also
    referred to the Secretary of State's guidance  as follows:

          1. In the same paragraph it explains "exceptional" in the
             following terms (which are not set out in the Section 3.1):

                  " 'Exceptional' does not mean 'unusual' or 'unique'.
                  Whilst all cases are to some extent unique, those unique
                  factors do not make them exceptional. For example, a case
                  is not exceptional just because the criteria set out in
                  EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed by a small margin.
                  Instead 'exceptional' means circumstances in which refusal
                  would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
                  individual such that refusal of the application would not
                  be proportionate. That is likely to be the case only very
                  rarely".

          1. The same paragraph then stipulates that the decision maker
             must consider all relevant factors and gives two examples: the
             circumstances around the applicant's entry to the UK and
             cumulative factors'

19. Thus the test exceptional means circumstances in which the consequences
    are such that the application would not be proportionate.

20. That said, the judge at paragraph  11  confirmed  that  the  appellants
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules but he did note that  the
    daughter's application for registration as a British  citizen  had  not
    been processed and he added "I cannot take account of this with  regard
    to the parent route under the Immigration Rules"

21. Thus, importantly, the judge did not proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
    daughter was a British citizen or indeed that her claim  to  remain  in
    the UK was speculative.  Indeed it is clear  that  the  judge  did  not
    allow the appeal on this basis alone.  He took into accounts the  facts
    as they were cumulatively.  He accepted at paragraph 12 that the family
    were likely to have developed a strong private life in the UK and  made
    findings at paragraph 9 with respect to the children that he  had  very
    good documentary evidence of the daughter's private  life  and  further
    that:

         "It is also the case they have spent all of  their  lives  in  this
         country and  have  no  direct  experience  of  another  culture  or
         society.  As at the date of applications, the appellant's  daughter
         has been in the UK for more than seven years and the son over  five
         years.  These periods of time are of enormous significance  in  the
         assessment of the strength and depth of  these  children's  private
         lives and have weighed heavily in my consideration of this case".

22. The judge took into account the fact that the mother  and  her  partner
    had an immigration status which was precarious.  He did however omit to
    identify and this is a factor which goes against the respondent's case,
    that the father had in fact left the family home. In  other  words  the
    family would not be returning as a family unit and the mother would  be
    returning alone with two children.  The judge  took  into  account  the
    fact that their status was precarious but  he  also  noted  that  blame
    should be attached to the respondent for the  delays  in  the  decision
    making  after  2012  which  contributed  to  the  accumulation  of  the
    children's rights and further entrenchment of those rights.

23. It is clear that the judge noted that the appellants'  appeal  did  not
    succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  but  gave  reasons  for  finding
    compelling circumstances.

24. The judge also applied, in effect correctly, Beoku-Betts v SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 39 and found that the sister would "experience profound difficulty
    in adjusting to life in a different country even with the assistance of
    their parents.  The judge found that the circumstances  of  the  sister
    and the appellant would be unduly harsh should they be returned  as  he
    noted that the children had known no other  life  outside  the  UK  and
    "given  their  ages  would  have  therefore  fully   assimilated   both
    culturally and socially in UK society".

25. Although the judge did not address EV (Philippines),  the  children  in
    that case entered the UK in 2011 and had been born abroad and  came  to
    the UK at the ages of 9, 7 and 5 respectively.  That is not the case in
    this appeal and although it is right to say that the assessment of  the
    best interests of the children must be made on the facts as they are in
    the real world as per EV Philippines, and as  cited  at  [58]  'if  one
    parent has no right to remain but the other does that is the background
    against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither parent  has  the
    right to  remain,  then  that  is  the  background  against  which  the
    assessment is conducted'.  The judge did look  at  the  background  the
    fact is that one of the children in this case did have leave to  remain
    and that was a fact that was extant and before the judge and  which  he
    was entitled and did take into account.

26. EV (Philippines) is clear  that  the  interests  of  the  other  family
    members need to be considered and that together with the best interests
    of the children and "in particular the seriousness of the  difficulties
    which any children of the applicant are  likely  to  encounter  in  the
    country to which  the  applicant  is  to  be  expelled"  �ner  and  the
    Netherlands [2007] 45 EHRR 14 [55 of EV (Philippines)].

27. EV (Philippines) does not depart from the  concept  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the children  to  depart  with  the  person  being
    removed [52]. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  clarified  that
    all the relevant article 8 criteria should be taken  into  account  and
    the court confirmed that  the  test  of  exceptionality  had  not  been
    revived

         'At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement in the case law  that,
         in "precarious" cases, "it  is  likely  to  be  only  in  the  most
         exceptional circumstances that  the  removal  of  the  non-national
         family member will constitute a violation of art 8". This has  been
         repeated and adopted by the ECtHR in near identical terms  in  many
         cases. At paras 41 and 42, he said that in  a  "precarious"  family
         life case, it is only in "exceptional"  or  "the  most  exceptional
         circumstances" that removal of the non-national family member  will
         constitute a violation of article 8. In our view, that  is  not  to
         say that a test of exceptionality is being applied'.[42]

28. That said in Nagre at paragraph 14 Sales J  identified that

         'The definition of "exceptional circumstances" which  is  given  in
         this guidance [Home Office  guidance]  equates  such  circumstances
         with there being unjustifiable hardship involved  in  removal  such
         that it would be disproportionate - i.e. would involve a breach  of
         Article 8. The practical guidance and illustrations  given  in  the
         passage quoted above support that interpretation. No  challenge  is
         brought to the lawfulness of this guidance. In my  view,  it  gives
         clear and appropriate guidance to relevant officials that  if  they
         come across a case falling outside the new rules, they  nonetheless
         have to consider whether it is a  case  where,  on  the  particular
         facts, there  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8  rights  if  the
         application for leave to remain were refused'.

29. Overall there was an assessment of proportionality in this case and the
    judge did not in my view  cite  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  'defeating'  the  public  interest.
    Throughout the determination it was clear that the judge was  aware  of
    the immigration history of the appellant but found overall  that  there
    was a disproportionate interference  with  the  private  lives  of  the
    children to leave the country even  allowing  "that  the  family  group
    would be returning together i.e. it would be unduly harsh"  [12].   The
    judge adopted for clarity sake the submissions of the appellant as they
    appeared at paragraph  55  and  this  merely  stated  that  the  public
    interest did not require the removal  of  the  appellant  or  her  son,
    particularly in circumstances in  which  a  parental  relationship  was
    shared with a child whom it would be unreasonable to  expect  to  leave
    the UK.

30. Clearly the judge found it was  unreasonable  for  the  child  and  the
    remaining family to leave the UK and as such took into account  Section
    117B(6) but made no mention that it defeated  the  respondent's  claim.
    That said, if the public interest does not 'require' removal I  am  not
    persuaded that the  fourth  test  in  Razgar  can  be  satisfied.   The
    question is this

         'is such interference necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the
         interests of national  security,  public  safety  or  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

31. If the removal is not required I am not persuaded that the interference
    is necessary.

Notice of Decision

32. I therefore find no error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

