
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29459/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2016                          |On 28 November 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    G S M
                         (anonymity direction  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was  born  on  26th  November
    1976.  His appeal against the refusal of  a  permanent  residence  card
    under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge J Macdonald in a decision  dated
    5th July 2016.


2.   The Appellant appealed on the grounds that the judge had erred  in  law
    in his application of Regulation 9 of the EEA  Regulations.  Regulation
    9(2)(c) and 9(3) did not apply in this case because the  Appellant  was
    excluded under the transitional arrangements in Schedule 3 paragraph  2
    of the Immigration (EEA) (Amendment)  (No.  2)  Regulations  2013.  The
    judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  transitional  provisions  and   the
    assessment  of  the  Appellant's  case   should   not   have   included
    consideration of the 'centre of life' test. The Appellant had  acquired
    a permanent right of residence in the UK under the Regulations prior to
    the amendments coming into force.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on 28th October 2016.  She states:

         "It is arguable that the judge had misdirected himself  by  failing
         to apply such cases as OB (EEA Regulations  2016,  Article  9(2)  -
         Surinder Singh spouse) Morocco [2010] UKUT 420 (IAC) to  the  facts
         of this appeal where arguably there is a  sufficient  link  between
         the exercise of the spouse's treaty rights and return  which  could
         impact on the 'centre of life' issue."

4.   The Appellant's immigration history is as follows.  The  Appellant  and
    Sponsor resided together in the Republic of Ireland from December  2000
    until August 2001 during  which  the  Sponsor  was  employed  from  6th
    November 2000 to  9th  March  2001.   The  Appellant  married  the  EEA
    national Sponsor in the Republic of Ireland on 15th March 2001. Towards
    the end of their residence the Sponsor made frequent trips to visit the
    UK to see her father who was unwell and who died on 26th July 2001. The
    Sponsor returned to the UK in August 2001 and took up  employment  with
    Boots Dental Care in November 2001. The Appellant returned to the UK in
    December 2001. He applied for a permanent residence card on 20th  March
    2015.


Submissions

5.   Mr Jarvis conceded that  the  transitional  provisions  in  Schedule  3
    paragraph 2 of the Immigration (EEA) (Amendment)  (No.  2)  Regulations
    2013 may well apply in the Appellant's case. If  that  were  the  case,
    then the 'centre of life' test in Regulation 9(2)  and  (3)  would  not
    apply and the judge had erred  in  law  in  applying  Regulation  9  as
    amended rather than applying  Regulation  9  prior  to  amendment.  The
    relevant date was 1st January 2014.

6.   Mr Jarvis accepted that this point was raised in the skeleton  argument
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Therefore, the judge had
    erred in law in failing to consider whether this was a  case  to  which
    the transitional provisions applied and whether  it  should  have  been
    decided under Regulation 9 prior to amendment.

7.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the Respondent had refused the application  on
    the basis that  the  parties  had  failed  to  show  they  were  living
    together. The judge found that the parties  were  living  together  and
    then went on to consider the remaining sub-sections  of  Regulation  9.
    What the judge should have considered was whether, when  the  Appellant
    re-entered the UK in 2001, there was a five-year period  in  which  the
    Sponsor was not only living with  the  Appellant,  but  was  exercising
    Treaty rights.

8.   Mr Burrett agreed with Mr Jarvis  and  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because this was an issue which had
    not been considered at first instance, the judge having failed to  look
    at whether there was sufficient evidence to show that the Appellant had
    acquired permanent residence in the five-year period immediately  after
    his return to the UK. Mr Burrett applied for an anonymity order.


Discussion and Conclusions

9.   Schedule 3 of the Immigration (EEA)  (Amendment)  (No.  2)  Regulations
    2013 states:


         "(1) The substitution of regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations by
             paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 has no effect in relation to the
             family member ("F") of a British citizen where the criteria in
             subparagraphs (2) or (3) are met.


           (2)    The criterion in this subparagraph is met where, upon the
             coming into force of these Regulations, F was a person with a
             permanent right to reside in the United Kingdom under the 2006
             Regulations."

10.  Regulation 9 prior to amendment on 1st January 2014 states:


         "(1) If the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
             Regulations apply to a person who is the family  member  of  a
             United Kingdom national as if the United Kingdom national were
             an EEA national.

         (2)  The conditions are that-

             (a)  the United Kingdom national is residing in an  EEA  State
                  as a worker or self-employed person  or  was  so  residing
                  before returning to the United Kingdom; and

             (b)  if the family member of the United  Kingdom  national  is
                  his spouse  or  civil  partner,  the  parties  are  living
                  together in the EEA State or had entered into the marriage
                  or civil partnership and  were  living  together  in  that
                  State before the United Kingdom national returned  to  the
                  United Kingdom.


         (3)  Where these Regulations apply to the family member of a United
             Kingdom national the United Kingdom national shall be  treated
             as holding a valid passport issued by an  EEA  State  for  the
             purpose of the application of regulation  13  to  that  family
             member."

11.  Given the concession by Mr Jarvis and the  transitional  provisions  in
    Schedule 3 set out above, I find that the judge erred in law in failing
    to consider whether  the  Appellant  benefited  from  the  transitional
    provisions. The judge failed to consider whether the 'centre  of  life'
    test in Regulation 9(2)(c) and 9(3) was applicable in  this  case.  The
    judge erred in law in failing to consider whether, when  the  Appellant
    re-entered the UK in 2001, there was a five-year period, prior  to  1st
    January 2014, in which  the  Sponsor  was  not  only  living  with  the
    Appellant, but was exercising Treaty rights.

12.  If the Appellant could  demonstrate  that  he  had  acquired  permanent
    residence in the five-year period immediately after his return  to  the
    UK, in that he was residing with the Sponsor and she  could  show  that
    she was employed during that time, the Appellant could benefit from the
    transitional provisions. Regulation 9 prior to amendment (see paragraph
    10 above) would be applicable. If that was the case the Appellant  need
    not satisfy the 'centre of life' test.

13.  I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25th September 2012 that the decision dated 5th July 2016
    should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  This decision is served on the Appellant.

(ii) The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge J MacDonald.

(iii)    I direct that  the  Appellant  serve  on  the  Respondent  and  the
    Tribunal not less than 14 days before the hearing a fully paginated and
    indexed bundle of documents on which they intend to rely.

(iv) No interpreter is required. Time estimate 2 hours.


              J Frances
Signed:                                 Date:  24th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 24th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


