
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29009/2014
                                                               IA/29012/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Promulgated on                       |
|19 November 2015                     |24 February 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                FUAD HOSSAIN
                                NAZIA KUMKUM
                                                                 Appellants.
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Ndubuisi of Drummond Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to this Tribunal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge Balloch dismissing  their  appeals  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing the first appellant further leave as a student  and
    the second appellant, his wife, further leave as his dependant.

 2. The facts are as follows.  The first appellant (whom we shall call "the
    appellant") had leave to remain as a  student,  due  to  expire  on  30
    January 2014.  On 29 January 2014 he made an  application  for  further
    leave.  It appears to  be  the  case  (and  is  not  contested  by  the
    appellant) that the documents  submitted  with  that  application  were
    insufficient to meet the requirements of the  rules.   On  21  February
    2014, as part of the process  of  dealing  with  the  application,  the
    Secretary of State required him to submit biometric information  within
    15  days  at  the  most.   The  appellant  did  not  comply  with  that
    requirement, and on 3 April 2014 the Secretary of  State  informed  him
    that for that reason his application was deemed to be invalid.   On  27
    March 2014, however, the appellant had sent to the Secretary of State a
    new application form for further leave to remain  as  a  student,  this
    time, it is said, accompanied by documents  which  were  sufficient  to
    meet the requirements of the rules.

 3. The Secretary of State's position is that the first application  having
    been invalid, the appellant's leave to remain expired  on  30  January,
    and so the second application was made after the expiry of  his  leave.
    The  refusal  of  it  therefore  carried  no  right  of  appeal.    The
    appellant's position is  that  the  making  of  the  first  application
    sufficed to extend his leave until it was declared invalid; before that
    had happened he had varied his application,  the  decision  upon  which
    accordingly carries a right of appeal.  The  appellant  further  argues
    that the application is to be treated for all other purposes as made on
    27 March 2014, the date of the second application form.

 4. As is well known, s 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 extends  the  period
    of leave where a person makes an application for further  leave  during
    the currency of existing leave.  For present purposes the only relevant
    period of extension is that in sub-s 3(a): the leave is extended  until
    the Secretary of State's  decision  on  the  application.   Clearly  an
    application which is invalid, (for example because it does not meet the
    formal requirements for the  application  being  made)  it  is  not  an
    "application" for the purposes of s 3C, and cannot have the  effect  of
    extending leave.  In the present case, however, the application was  on
    its face formally valid (even  if  certain  to  be  unsuccessful).   It
    became invalid only subsequently, when the appellant failed  to  comply
    with  the  Secretary  of  State's  requirements  to  provide  biometric
    information.  The judge decided that, under those circumstances,  leave
    was extended by the making of the application which  was  on  its  face
    valid.   She  then  concluded  that  it  became  invalid  only  on  the
    notification  of  the  consequences  of  the  failure  to  provide  the
    information.  That is to say, first, she decided  that  the  invalidity
    arose on the notification of the consequence, rather than on the expiry
    of the time limited for providing the information; and she decided that
    the invalidity  was  not  retrospective.   She  therefore  treated  the
    application as valid  during  the  period  up  to  3  April,  with  the
    consequence that on 27 March, when the second form was  submitted,  the
    appellant's leave was extended by s 3C.  It would clearly  be  possible
    to doubt the judge's conclusions, but we are not asked to do so in this
    appeal.  We proceed on the basis that, on 27 March, the  appellant  had
    leave as extended by s 3C.  Section 3C(4) and (5) are as follows:
         "3C  (4) A person may not make an application for variation of  his
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave  is
         extended by virtue of this section.
              (5) But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation  of  the
         application already made."

 5. In the light of those provisions, the appellant does not claim that  he
    made a new application when the second application form was  submitted;
    he characterises that event as a variation of the original application.
     Judge Balloch accepted that submission.  It therefore followed in  her
    judgement that, contrary to the Secretary of  State's  assertions,  the
    appellant had a  right  of  appeal  against  the  substantive  decision
    following the submission of the second form, which appeal she proceeded
    to determine on its merits.  In doing so she treated the application as
    having been made not on 27 March but on 29 January 2014, and found that
    the documentation was not sufficient to justify the granting  of  leave
    on the basis of an application made  at  that  date.   The  grounds  of
    appeal to this Tribunal, on the basis of which permission was  granted,
    are in essence that, having accepted that the claimant  had  made  a  s
    3C(5) variation  of  his  application,  she  should  have  treated  the
    application as made at the date of the variation: if she had  done  so,
    she would have found  that  the  documents  available  established  the
    claimant's entitlement under the rules, viewed from that date.

 6. In making his submissions, Mr Ndubuisi referred  us  in  particular  to
    paragraph 34E-34G of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC
    395 (as amended).  This part of the rules deals with  the  process  for
    making applications.  Paragraphs A34, 34 and 34A-34D make provisions as
    to the use of forms, the sending of forms, the documents which need  to
    accompany forms, and the consequences of failing to comply.  After  34D
    there is a heading, and two further paragraphs as follows:
         "Variation of applications or claims for leave to remain
         34E. If a person wishes to vary the purpose of  an  application  or
             claim for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  an
             application  form  is  specified  for  such  new  purpose   or
             paragraph A34 applies, the  variation  must  comply  with  the
             requirements of paragraph 34A or paragraph A34 (as they  apply
             at the date the variation is made) as if the variation were  a
             new application or claim, or the variation will be invalid and
             will not be considered.
         34F. Any valid variation of a leave to remain application  will  be
             decided in accordance with the immigration rules in  force  at
             the date such variation is made. "

    Paragraph 34G has provisions for the calculation  of  the  date  of  an
    application or variation.

 7. Paragraph 34E does not apply  to  this  claim,  because  there  was  no
    variation of the purpose of the application: the  event  identified  by
    Judge  Balloch  as  a  variation  was  simply  a  repetition   of   the
    application.  As she decided that that event was a  "valid  variation",
    however, paragraph 34F clearly does apply.  But that  does  not  entail
    the acceptance of Mr Ndubuisi's submission.  The grant of permission to
    appeal is in terms of which Mr Ndubuisi would no doubt approve:
         "Arguably, the judge having accepted that the appellant had made  a
         valid variation application on 27 March 2015 should have considered
         whether the appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules
         at that date, not at the date of the  original  application  on  29
         January 2014."

 8. That, however, is not what  paragraph  34F  says.   It  says  that  the
    variation will be decided in accordance with the immigration  rules  in
    force at the date of the variation.  In the present case  there  is  no
    suggestion  that  the  relevant  rules  changed  between  the  original
    application and the variation.  Further, it is clear from ss 3C(4)  and
    (5) that the  variation  is  not  a  new  application.   There  is  one
    application, which has been varied.  It  is  to  that  application,  as
    varied, that the relevant immigration rules have to be applied.

 9. The appellant needed to meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX of the
    rules, including that at sub-paragraph (d), but he must have 10  points
    under paragraphs 10 to 14 of Appendix C.   Those  points  can  only  be
    attained by the submission of specified documents, the specification of
    which is in paragraph 1B of Appendix C.  Those relevant to this  appeal
    are financial documents including bank  statements,  building  society,
    passbooks or financial letters.  In each case there  is  a  requirement
    that the document or most recent document "must  be  dated  no  earlier
    than 31 days before the date of the  application".    There  are  other
    references to the date of the application.  There is no suggestion that
    the date of any  variation  is  to  be  treated  as  the  date  of  the
    application for these purposes.

10. The amount of money to be evidenced varies  between  applications,  but
    all cases are covered by paragraph 1A of Appendix C, which requires  at
    1A(a) the funds to have been held at the date of the  application,  and
    at 1A(c) for the funds to have  been  held  for  a  consecutive  28-day
    period of time if the applicant is applying as a Tier 4 Migrant, as the
    appellant was.  Again, the references to the date of  the  application,
    not to some other date.

11. The only application in this case, the only application permitted by  s
    3C, was made on 29 January 2014.  If it was validly varied, it is to be
    determined by the immigration  rules  in  force  at  the  date  of  the
    variation, but they were the same as those in force at the date of  the
    application.  Those rules require the financial conditions to be met by
    reference to the date of the application.  Those requirements were  not
    made by reference to that date.  The fact (if it be a fact)  that  they
    would have been met by reference to the date of the variation does  not
    assist the appellant.

12. For these reasons it appears to us that, given Judge Balloch's decision
    that the application had  been  validly  varied,  she  was  correct  to
    dismiss the appeal for the reason she did.  She made no error of law in
    doing so.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 28 January 2016
