
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29609/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 15th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               HABIB UR-REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Legal Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings, Mr Habib Ur-Rehman, is  a  national
    of Pakistan who was born on the 23rd April 1982.  He had applied to the
    Secretary of State for a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national.  In the course of the refusal an issue was taken  as  to  the
    genuineness of the marriage.  In doing so the Secretary of State relied
    on differences given between what the Appellant  and  his  Sponsor  had
    said  about  what  were  said  to  be  significant   parts   of   their
    relationship, how they became engaged and details such as that.

 2.  The  appeal  was  not  heard  immediately.  There  were  a  number  of
    adjournments.   For  example  on  the  12th  January  the   Appellant's
    solicitors wrote to the IAC requesting the Tribunal in Newport in Wales
    to request a transfer to London.  There was  no  request  then  for  an
    adjournment or a suggestion that documentation relating to the  pending
    birth of child might be available.  When the case  was  finally  listed
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain at Richmond on the  5th  March
    2015 neither the Appellant nor the representatives attended.  There was
    no  request  for  an  adjournment  but  a  request  was  made   for   a
    determination of the appeal on the papers which is what took place.

 3. Submissions were invited from the Home Office which were duly  recorded
    and the Judge noted reliance made on  the  case  of  IS  (Marriages  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 where it was stated that the burden
    of proving that a marriage is not a marriage  of  convenience  for  the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations rests  on  the  Appellant  but  it  not
    required to discharge this in the absence of evidence unless supporting
    a suspicion that a marriage is one of convenience  i.e.  there  is  the
    evidential burden on the Respondent.

 4. Even though the  Home  Office  had  not  provided  transcripts  of  the
    interviews, the Judge found that there was sufficient evidence to raise
    the issue of a marriage of convenience.  In  paragraph  10  Mr  Hussain
    said this: "Having made that finding, it is for me  to  assess  whether
    the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof that has  now  shifted
    to him" and then went on to give reasons for finding that the Appellant
    had not taken the opportunity provided  and  had  not  discharged  that
    burden, and that he found also that the absence of a birth  certificate
    recording the appellant as his father was most troubling. He  concluded
    "For the reasons given I concluded the Appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proof that his marriage is not one  of  convenience  and  the
    appeal is dismissed."

 5. The grounds of application  to  the  First-tier  took  issue  with  the
    findings in paragraph 10 and beyond and also raised Article 8.  I  will
    deal with those in turn.

 6. The Judge was entitled to rely on the  case  that  had  been  cited  to
    consider the issue of a marriage of convenience and was entitled on the
    evidence that had been presented and was also  entitled  to  take  into
    account the evidence that had not been presented, that it had not  been
    shown not to be a marriage of convenience.

 7. Article 8 would therefore not arise because there would be  no  finding
    available to engage Article 8.  There would be  no  finding  of  family
    life.  In any event in the refusal letter the Secretary  of  State  had
    required a further paid application to be made  for  Article  8  to  be
    considered.  No such further application had been made and,  with  that
    in mind, and bearing in mind that by this point paragraph  400  of  the
    Immigration Rules  applied  given  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    prepared to make  such  a  demand,  Article  8  was  not  there  to  be
    considered for two reasons.  Firstly, there was  no  paid  application.
    Secondly, the findings already made by the Judge on  the  evidence  and
    open to the judge meant that Article 8 could not have been  engaged  in
    any event.

 8. I am now told that the birth certificate is available.  It  is  not  an
    error for a Judge to not consider evidence which has,  for  unexplained
    reasons, not been presented.  It  may  form  the  basis  of  a  renewed
    application which the Appellant is entitled to make to the Secretary of
    State in the usual way, but as my job is limited to  correcting  errors
    in the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and  Reasons,  and  I  find  that
    there are no errors in the Decision and Reasons on the information that
    was available to the Judge at the time, I find that there is no error.

 9. Accordingly the decision stands and the appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law  and
stands as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 13th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes
