
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29444/2014
                                                               IA/29445/2014
                                                               IA/29447/2014
                                                               IA/29448/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 21 April 2015                         |             On 23 April 2015       |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                          Mr R M (first appellant)
                        Mrs F D S (second appellant)
                      Miss S M R D S (third appellant)
                       Master S R M (fourth appellant)

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Victor-Mazeli (Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal a decision made by the  respondent  on  1st  July
    2014.  That decision was made following a decision on 29 November  2013
    refusing their application for leave to remain on the grounds of family
    and private life.  As there was no right of appeal against the  initial
    decision, the respondent (in response to a pre-action  Protocol  letter
    of 11 December 2013) agreed to review the case and consider  a  removal
    direction.  The appellants submitted further  grounds  to  clarify  the
    basis of their request for leave to remain.  In a letter dated  1  July
    2014 the respondent considered Article 8 ECHR  under  paragraph  276ADE
    and Appendix FM together with Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Removal directions were issued under Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on 7 July 2014.

2.   The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Kempton),  who
    dismissed the appeal against refusal of leave to remain in  the  UK  on
    the basis of  private  and  family  life  and  in  respect  of  removal
    directions under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.

3.   In grounds of application it was asserted by the  appellants  that  the
    Tribunal  failed to consider the specific circumstances  of  the  third
    appellant, whose date of birth was 14  October  2005,  under  paragraph
    276(iv) of the Immigration Rules, on the grounds that the  child  lived
    in the UK for over seven years and was under 18 years.  Further it  was
    contented that the  Tribunal  failed  to  properly  consider  the  best
    interests of the child following EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874.
    The third appellant's length of residence  in the UK was not taken into
    account in assessing her best interests or in consideration  of  return
    to India.  There was also a failure to consider Section 117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Permission to Appeal

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    7 January 2015.

Rule 24 Response

5.   The Secretary of State opposed the appeal in a Rule 24  response  dated
    20 January 2015.  Her position was that the Tribunal took into  account
    the fact that the eldest child had lived in the UK for over seven years
    [ 25] and [26].  The Tribunal had  also  considered  Section  117B  and
    public interest considerations under Article 8 at [28] -  [30]  of  the
    determination, together with the best interests of the children as  set
    out at [25] - [26].

Error of Law Hearing

6.   This matter came before me for consideration of whether  or  not  there
    was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

7.   I heard submissions from Ms Victor-Mazeli and Mr Avery, the details  of
    which are set out in the Record of Proceedings and which I  have  taken
    into account.  In essence Ms Victor-Mazeli expanded on the  grounds  of
    application  submitting that the Tribunal  failed to properly  consider
    the applicability of paragraph 276ADE, Section 117B(6) and  Section  55
    best interests of the children, specifically with regard to  the  third
    appellant, who had lived in the UK for in excess of seven years and was
    a "qualifying child".  She submitted that  the  third  appellant  would
    have been aged 8 years old at the time of  the  hearing  and  that  the
    Tribunal  should  have  specifically  considered   her   position   and
    circumstances.  There had been an overemphasis by the Tribunal  on  the
    circumstances of the parents including the fact that they had no  leave
    and had claimed benefits.  Her second argument was  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider all of the factors raised  in  guidance  as  to  the
    assessment of the best interest of children in EV (Philippines)  (cited
    above).

8.   Mr Avery's initial submission  was  that  the  Tribunal  had  not  been
    required to consider paragraph  276ADE  as  the  appeal  related  to  a
    removal decision.  He conceded, however, having referred  to  the  most
    recent refusal letter, that  the  respondent  had  in  fact  considered
    private and family life under  paragraph  276ADE  and  that  issue  was
    properly dealt with at [29] of the determination. Furthermore he argued
    that the Tribunal had considered the best interests of the children  by
    reference to most of the factors raised in EV (Philippines); it was not
    necessary for the Tribunal to  cover  all  issues.   The  determination
    amounted to a thorough and comprehensive assessment, in  particular  as
    regards  the  best  interests  of  the  children.   The  Tribunal   had
    specifically covered Section 117B(6) of the 2004 Act at [29].

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

Discussion and Decision

10.  I find no material error of law in the determination of the appeal.   I
    am satisfied that the Tribunal had  regard  to  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, who were born in the UK and whose respective dates of birth
    were 14 October 2005 and 22 November 2008.

11.  The Tribunal found that the family had lived in the UK  unlawfully  for
    thirteen years and took into account that the children were not British
    citizens.  The Tribunal found that the children understood the  dialect
    spoken in Kerala, although it accepted that they were  not  fluent  and
    that the language spoken at home was English.  The  Tribunal  found  no
    evidence of any real connection by the children in the  UK  other  than
    their attendance at school  and  at  church.   The  Tribunal  found  no
    evidence to show why it would  be  unreasonable  for  the  children  to
    return to India.  The Tribunal had regard to the fact that  there  were
    wider family members living in India.

12.  I find that the Tribunal did consider where the best interests  of  the
    children lie, having regard to the available  evidence.   Its  findings
    are set out at  [26]  and  the  Tribunal  specifically  considered  the
    interests of  young  children  with  reference  to  relevant  case  law
    including Azimi-Moayed, Zoumbas, Osawemwenze and EV (Philippines).   It
    considered that in general terms the interests of younger children were
    met  by  remaining  with  their  parents  in  the  family   unit.    It
    acknowledged that the eldest child was  at  school  but  she  had  only
    attended school at a very elementary level and there  would  be  little
    disruption to her education if she were to leave the UK.  The  Tribunal
    also placed weight on the fact that the period of seven years residence
    from the age of 4 years was of greater significance than earlier years.
     The Tribunal was aware that the third appellant was aged 8  years  and
    considered her needs in the context of her parents' circumstances.  The
    Tribunal found an absence of any evidence to establish  any  real  ties
    and connection on the part of the third appellant within the  UK  other
    than her family.

13.  I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  did  properly  consider  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) with regard to the length of residence of the child and more
    particularly  found   that  there  was  no  evidence  why  it  was  not
    reasonable for the child to leave the UK.  To  that  end  the  Tribunal
    further  considered  public  interest  factors  and  specifically  made
    reference to Section 117B(6) at  [9].   I  find  no  substance  in  the
    argument that the Tribunal focused in the main on the  public  interest
    factors applying to  the  parents.  Whilst  accepting  that  the  third
    appellant was a "qualifying child" in terms of length of residence, the
    section also provides that it must be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK.  The Tribunal's  assessment  reasonably  found  that  the
    child's interests lay in remaining with her parents/family and that her
    own private life could be established in India notwithstanding that she
    had never lived in that country. It took into account that neither  she
    nor her younger brother were British  citizens  and  therefore  had  no
    entitlement to education in the UK. There was no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal to support an argument that the interests of the  third  child
    could outweigh the public interest in removal of the family as a whole.

Notice of Decision

14.  I find no material error of law in the determination.

15.  The determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   Two  of
the appellants are children.

Signed                                  Date 22.4.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 22.4.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
