
[pic]
IAC-AH-RG-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 October 2014                               |On 27 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                             Faiyaz Hussain syed
                         (anonymity Order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali of Immigration Chambers, E1 2BT
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 2 September  1982.   On  16
    February 2010 he arrived with leave as  a  Tier  4  (Student)  migrant.
    Before expiry of that  leave  he  sought  further  leave  in  the  same
    capacity which on 31 March 2012 the Respondent  refused  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant did not have a valid Confirmation of Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS).  By a determination promulgated on 20 June 2012 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Rintoul dismissed  his  appeal  on  immigration
    grounds but allowed it on  human  rights  grounds.   Subsequently,  the
    Respondent granted the Appellant discretionary leave for the purpose of
    continuing his studies to expire on 4 May 2013.

 2. On 2 May 2013 the Appellant applied  for  further  leave  in  the  same
    category to continue his  course.   Mr  Syed  Ali  explained  that  the
    Appellant had not been able to continue  his  studies  following  Judge
    Rintoul's determination until he had received leave to  remain  because
    his studies  were  being  pursued  at  an  institution  which  was  not
    publically funded.  In consequence,  he  was  unable  to  complete  his
    studies within the term of his  discretionary  leave.   At  some  point
    which is not clear from the documents in the Tribunal file the  college
    at which he was studying lost its sponsorship licence.

 3. On 21 June 2013 the Respondent refused the application on the basis  of
    paragraphs 245ZX(c) and  (d)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the
    Appellant did not submit a valid CAS.  Additionally,  the  most  recent
    grant of leave had been on a discretionary basis and was not one of the
    types of leave specified in paragraph 245ZX(b) of the Immigration Rules
    which an applicant must have prior to seeking further leave as a Tier 4
    (General) Student migrant.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. The Appellant appealed under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended through his solicitors and requested  an
    oral hearing.  He did not attend the hearing in respect  of  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal was satisfied as  to  service  and  the  Respondent
    agreed that the matter  could  proceed  without  the  Respondent  being
    represented.

 5. By a determination promulgated on 5 June 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cooper dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 6. The Appellant in his own name sought permission to appeal  which  on  8
    August 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth granted
    on the basis that it was an arguable error that it was not clear to the
    Judge why the Appellant's last period of leave had been  granted  on  a
    discretionary basis.  It should be noted that the determination of 2012
    by Judge Rintoul was not before Judge Cooper and was only filed at  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The only other matter referred to in the  grounds  for  appeal  was  an
    assertion that Judge Cooper had  not  dealt  with  other  issues  which
    issues were not specified.





The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Appellant attended and Mr Syed-Ali said he had been instructed only
    that day.  He explained the previous grant  of  leave  had  been  on  a
    discretionary basis in consequence of the Appellant's 2012 appeal being
    allowed  on  human  rights  grounds.   He  produced  a  copy   of   the
    Respondent's letter granting that leave which in the early part of  the
    letter made it clear that it was to enable the Appellant to pursue  his
    studies and would be kept under review.  Mr Syed-Ali went on to explain
    why the Appellant had not been  able  to  commence  his  studies  until
    subsequent to the grant of leave on 1 November 2012  to  which  I  have
    already referred.

 9. He submitted that Judge Cooper had not taken into  account  the  reason
    why the Appellant had not been able to complete his course  of  studies
    which was because of the delay in the issue of  the  document  granting
    him discretionary leave.  This was an error of law.  He  confirmed  the
    sponsoring college's licence had been revoked.  I asked  if  the  Judge
    had had any evidence before him about the background to  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave when he determined the appeal without a hearing  on
    the papers in the Tribunal file.  He informed me the Judge did not have
    any such information.

10. I reminded Mr Syed-Ali that the first issue I had to decide was whether
    there was an error of law in the Judge's determination and it could not
    be said that there was an error if the Appellant had failed to put  the
    relevant information before the Judge.  I commented that it might  have
    been a mistake on the part of the Appellant not to attend  the  hearing
    and not to have supplied all the relevant documents  to  the  Tribunal.
    Mr Syed-Ali maintained that the facts found in the  2012  determination
    meant the Judge had made a  materially  incorrect  determination  which
    amounted to an error of law such that it should be set aside.

11. I enquired if the Appellant had any  other  documents  or  evidence  to
    submit having regard to the directions issued on 27  August  2014  that
    the parties should have prepared for the hearing on the basis  that  if
    there was an error  of  law  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  consider  any
    additional evidence and re-make the decision at the same  hearing.   He
    confirmed he had no such evidence to submit.

12. For the Respondent, Mr Kandola submitted there was no error of  law  in
    the Judge's determination.  The Appellant should have raised the  issue
    of the discretionary leave in his original grounds of appeal  since  he
    was aware from the terms of the Respondent's decision that  it  was  an
    issue or he could have sought an extension of his  discretionary  leave
    rather than leave to remain under the Points Based System.  To  support
    his case he  should  have  submitted  the  2012  determination  and  an
    explanation with evidence why he had not  been  able  to  complete  his
    original course.  The Appellant had applied  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    migrant and not for an extension of his discretionary leave outside the
    Immigration Rules.  The fact he  had  not  held  previous  leave  in  a
    category which the Immigration Rules required for  an  application  for
    further leave as a Tier 4 (General) migrant was a mandatory ground  for
    refusing the application.

13. Mr Kandola also made the point that even if Judge Cooper had had notice
    of the 2012 determination it would have made no difference because  the
    Appellant sought further leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  migrant
    and not further leave outside the Rules on a discretionary basis.

14. Any appeal relying on Article 8 of the European Convention outside  the
    Rules would now have to meet the requirements of Section 117A(b) of the
    2002 Act and additionally the  Appellant's  college  was  no  longer  a
    licensed Sponsor. He concluded the determination should stand.

15. In response, Mr Syed-Ali noted the  Appellant  had  originally  entered
    with leave under the Points Based System, his appeal in 2012  had  been
    allowed  under  the  principles  of  fairness  set  out  in  CDS  (PBS:
    "available" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC).  The  Judge  could
    have considered the appeal as a refusal of further discretionary leave.
     It was unfortunate he did not have all the relevant information before
    him.

Findings

16. I noted the Appellant's application leading to the  2012  decision  had
    been refused under the Immigration Rules  and  he  eventually  obtained
    further leave on human rights grounds.  His application for  permission
    to appeal leading to the hearing before me had been made  out  of  time
    and he had  failed  to  prepare  himself  so  as  to  comply  with  the
    provisions of standard directions issued by the Upper  Tribunal  on  27
    August 2014.

17. There was no evidence of any educational or other achievements or  what
    studies he would  pursue  and  where,  if  his  appeal  was  eventually
    successful.

18. The burden of proof is on the Appellant.  He had  failed  to  discharge
    this before Judge Cooper in the First-tier Tribunal and was  not  in  a
    position to discharge it in the Upper Tribunal in  the  event  that  an
    error of law was found.

19. E and R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49 considered  the  issue  of  the  late
    submission of evidence by way of reference to the principles enunciated
    in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489.  The Appellant has not given  any
    reason for the failure to submit the evidence of the 2012 determination
    and the November 2012 grant of discretionary leave  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He has not sought to argue before the Upper Tribunal that it
    should be considered by the Upper Tribunal.  Unlike E and R who  had  a
    full right of appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the  Appellant
    has a right limited, at least initially, to the ground that there is an
    error of law: see paragraph 92 of E and R.

20. In R (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 the Court  of  Appeal
    reviewed the judgment in E and R.  At paragraph 9 it gave a summary  of
    the points of law which will most frequently be encountered in practice
    in considering whether there is an error of law  and  at  paragraph  28
    addressed whether unfairness resulting from a  mistake  of  fact  could
    amount to an error of law which was the basis put forward by  Mr  Syed-
    Ali.  The mistake of fact claimed in this case is that  the  Judge  did
    not know of the 2012 determination.  The Court of  Appeal  referred  to
    paragraph 64 of the judgment in  E  and  R  noting  that  the  ordinary
    requirements for a finding of unfairness amounting to an error  of  law
    included that  the  Appellant  or  his  advisors  must  not  have  been
    responsible for the mistake.  They evidently were in this case.  It  is
    of note that the original grounds for appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    were submitted by representatives for the Appellant  who  continued  to
    represent him until four days before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

21. Mr Kandola made the point that even if the Judge  had  had  before  him
    details of the 2012 determination  the  appeal  would  inevitably  have
    failed under the Immigration Rules because the Appellant previously did
    not leave in a category which permitted the grant of further leave as a
    Tier 4 (General) migrant.  The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained a claim under Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    yet other than the mere assertions in the Appellant's witness statement
    there was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  or  which  could
    have been submitted to the Upper Tribunal in support of  his  claim  to
    show that his private life, as a student or otherwise,  engaged  rights
    protected under Article 8 the European Convention.

22. On the basis of the evidence before the Judge there was no error of law
    in his determination.  The Appellant has failed to persuade me that the
    evidence comprised in the 2012 determination  should  now  be  admitted
    because he has not shown that there are sufficiently strong reasons  to
    admit it.  The Appellant has not explained his  failure  to  prepare  a
    proper bundle in support of his  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Similarly, he has not explained why he has also  failed  adequately  to
    prepare himself for the Upper Tribunal hearing  and  I  have  in  mind,
    amongst other matters, the obligations imposed by  the  second  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's direction of 27 August 2014.

Anonymity

23. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    papers in the Tribunal file and heard  the  application  consider  that
    there is no need for such.

DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal's determination did not  contain  an  error  of
law and shall     stand.

Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  23.
x. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

