
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/29566/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 August 2017                         |On 11 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                Amjid Mahmood
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence sitting at Hatton Cross  on  18
    November 2016) dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain as
    the spouse of a  person  present  and  settled  here.   The  ground  of
    refusal, which was  upheld  by  the  Judge  on  appeal,  was  that  the
    appellant's marriage to his UK sponsor was not genuine and subsisting.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. In his decision, the Judge said at paragraph [17]:

       Insofar as Appendix FM and the relevant  Rules  are  concerned,  the
       first issue is whether the couple are in a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship.  If this key (sic) is not available, the  other  parts
       of Appendix FM and the Rules (relating to spousal relationship)  are
       not engaged.  On the evidence before me I do not that they are.   It
       is  a  marriage  of  convenience  entered  into  to  facilitate  the
       appellant's status in the UK.  Accordingly, I  find  that  there  is
       "family life" within the terms of Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
       Convention.

 3. The grounds of appeal were settled by the legal representatives who had
    appeared for the appellant at the hearing before  Judge  Lawrence.   As
    the Judge had found that there was "family life" at paragraph  [17]  of
    his decision, "therefore it is submitted that his removal would put the
    United Kingdom in breach of its duties under Article 8 of ECHR."  As he
    had made a family life finding in favour of the  appellant,  the  Judge
    had erred in law in not  asking  himself  whether  the  impact  of  his
    removal was sufficiently serious as to engage Article 8;  and,  if  so,
    whether the decision was proportionate.

 4. On 6 July 2017 Designated First-Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  He said that it might be obvious  that
    the Judge had omitted some key words in paragraph  [17].   However,  he
    could not make corrections because it was arguable that  the  omissions
    were more than typographical errors.

 5. Firstly, the Judge made no assessment as to whether the  appellant  had
    any sort of relationship with  the  sponsor's  step-children.   It  was
    possible, therefore, that the Judge had reason to find that  Article  8
    was engaged in terms of family life, despite the clear finding that the
    marital relationship was not genuine and subsisting.

 6. Secondly, the Judge used the term "marriage of convenience", which  led
    to some confusion as to what he was considering, since that term is not
    used in the Immigration Rules, being limited in use to EEA cases.

 7. It was not permissible for him to resolve  these  issues.   They  could
    materially affect the outcome because the findings of  the  Judge  were
    unclear.  It followed that permission must be granted.   He  continued:
    "I  mention,  however,  that  the  very  strong   findings   that   the
    relationship between the appellant and his wife is neither genuine  nor
    subsisting may lead to the same outcome because those findings are  not
    challenged."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, it became clear at the outset that there was no possibility of the
    decision being remade at the same hearing, in the event that  an  error
    of law was made out.  This was because  the  appellant's  wife  was  in
    Pakistan, from where she and the appellant originate.  Mr Rees informed
    me that she had been due to fly back for  the  hearing,  but  had  been
    declared unfit to travel.  He showed me her travel plan, and a doctor's
    note issued by a doctor in Pakistan on 7 August 2017.  The doctor  said
    in the note that the sponsor was not fit to travel for a period of  one
    week.

 9. Mr Rees submitted that an error of law was made  out  for  the  reasons
    given by Judge McCarthy, and also because the Judge had wrongly  failed
    to conduct a proportionality assessment in accordance  with  the  five-
    point Razgar test.

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Tufan adhered to  the  Rule  24
    response settled by a colleague. The adverse credibility findings  made
    by the Judge had not been challenged in the grounds of appeal.  It  was
    clear that there were typographical errors in  paragraph  [17]  of  the
    decision.  The Judge had intended to say the opposite of  what  he  had
    actually said.  His actual finding was that there was no family life.

Discussion

11. Rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 provides that the Tribunal
    may at any time correct any clerical mistake or any accidental slip  or
    omission in a decision, direction or any document produced by it, by  -
    (a) providing notification of the alleged decision or direction,  or  a
    copy of the amended  document  to  all  parties;  and  (b)  making  any
    necessary amendment to any information published  in  relation  to  the
    decision, direction or document.

12. Paragraph [17] is not the only paragraph in the  decision  where  words
    appear to be missing.  The Judge  rendered  himself  vulnerable  to  an
    error of law  challenge  by  not  proof-reading  his  decision.   I  am
    satisfied, to a very high degree of probability, that if  the  apparent
    anomalies in paragraph [17] had been drawn to his attention,  he  would
    have amended paragraph [17] so as to insert the word "issue" after  the
    word "key" in the second line; and the word "find" after the word "not"
    in the fourth line; and the word "no" in the penultimate line  so  that
    the final sentence would have read that he  found  that  there  was  no
    family life  within  the  terms  of  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, rather than him ostensibly making  a  positive  finding  of
    family life for the purposes of this Article.

13.  I  reach  this  firm  conclusion  for  three  reasons.   Firstly,   as
    acknowledged by Designated Judge McCarthy when granting permission, the
    Judge makes very strong findings that the parties to the  marriage  are
    not in a genuine and subsisting marital relationship.  Accordingly,  it
    would be wholly illogical for the Judge nonetheless to find  that  they
    enjoyed family life for the purposes of Article  8.  Given  the  choice
    between a reading of the  decision  which  imports  perversity  to  the
    Judge, and a reading which accords with  common  sense,  the  reviewing
    court should adopt the reading  which  is  in  accordance  with  common
    sense, unless it is clear that the alternative and perverse reading  is
    the right one.

14. Secondly, Judge McCarthy postulated the possibility that the Judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant enjoyed family life with the UK  sponsor's
    step-children, despite not having  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marital
    relationship with her.  Having reviewed  the  witness  statements  that
    were relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal, I am  fully  satisfied
    that this is not the case.  Both the sponsor's children were  over  the
    age of 18 at the date of the refusal decision  appealed  against.   The
    sponsor's daughter was at all material times living in  Pakistan.   The
    evidence of the appellant and the sponsor was that  the  appellant  had
    met the sponsor at the daughter's marriage in Pakistan.   Although  the
    sponsor's son continued to live in the UK, it was not suggested in  the
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had  a
    parental relationship with him.  Since the Judge  was  not  invited  to
    find that the appellant enjoyed family life with  the  sponsor's  step-
    children, it cannot reasonably be inferred that  he  intended  to  make
    such a finding in paragraph [17] of his decision.

15. Thirdly, the Judge's finding that the marriage  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor was one of convenience was a finding which  reinforces,
    rather than detracts from, the finding that the marital relationship is
    not genuine and subsisting; and it  reinforces,  rather  than  detracts
    from, the finding that there is inter alia a typographical error in the
    penultimate line of paragraph [17], and that what the Judge intended to
    say was that there was no family life within the terms of Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

16. An essential function of a judicial decision is to  inform  the  losing
    party why he or she has lost.  Despite  the  regrettable  typographical
    errors in paragraph [17] of the decision, it is clear from the decision
    as a whole why the appellant has lost his appeal.

17. The appellant entered the United Kingdom for the first time on 19 March
    2011.  The Judge found that there were not very  significant  obstacles
    to the appellant returning to Pakistan for the reasons which he gave in
    paragraphs [19]-[21] of his decision.  In  the  light  of  the  Judge's
    sustainable findings that the appellant did  not  qualify  for  further
    leave to remain either under Appendix FM or under  Rule  276ADE,  there
    was  no  realistic  prospect  of  the  appellant  succeeding   in   the
    alternative in an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  Moreover,  it  is
    not clearly  shown  that  the  appellant's  legal  representatives  put
    forward such a case.  It appears that the only reason  for  complaining
    in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the Judge  had  not
    applied the five-point Razgar test was because he had made  a  positive
    finding of family life in the penultimate line of paragraph [17].

18. Accordingly, as I have found that this positive finding was the product
    of a typographical error,  it  follows  that  the  Judge's  failure  to
    conduct an Article 8 proportionality assessment outside  the  Rules  is
    not material.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not vitiated by a material  error
of law, and accordingly the decision  stands.   This  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





