
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                            NOSHIN KHOSRAVINEJAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Malone who, in a decision promulgated  on  10  March  2015,
        dismissed her appeal against a refusal by the  respondent  to  grant
        the appellant a further period of leave  to  remain  and  against  a
        decision to remove her from the UK.

Background

     2. The appellant is a national of Iran, date of birth 27 June 1993. She
        entered the United Kingdom in August 2009 as the minor dependent  of
        her father who was also a citizen of Iran. Her father claimed asylum
        on entering the United Kingdom. This asylum claim was refused and  a
        subsequent appeal dismissed. On  15  July  2010  the  appellant  was
        however granted Discretionary Leave to Remain in line with  that  of
        her father who had a serious medical condition. On 10 May  2011  she
        was granted further Discretionary Leave to Remain on the same  basis
        until 9 May 2014. Her father died on 9 May 2011, a  day  before  she
        was informed of the decision  to  grant  her  further  Discretionary
        Leave to Remain.

     3. In May 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain.  This
        was on the basis of the private life  she  had  established  in  the
        United Kingdom. This was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  30
        June 2014 and a decision was made to remove her under Section 47  of
        the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The  appellant
        appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4. In his determination the judge stated:

            "The appellant claims that, were she to be removed to Iran, she
            would be persecuted  or  subjected  to  serious  harm  or  ill-
            treatment contrary to Article  3  of  the  1950  Convention.  I
            unable to deal with such allegations today. As I  informed  the
            appellant and Mr Mohamed, the appellant's proper course  is  to
            claim asylum at the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon. The  only
            matter I need address today is  the  appellant's  private  life
            claim under Article 8."

     5. The judge then went on to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life
        claim. The judge inaccurately believed that the appellant failed  to
        inform the Secretary of State immediately on the death of her father
        and of her change in circumstances. I am grateful to Ms  Holmes  for
        indicating, after review of the Home Office records,  that  in  fact
        the Secretary of State did receive the  death  certificate  and  the
        letter from the appellant's representatives indicating the change of
        circumstances. The judge found the appellant to  be  an  honest  and
        reliable  witness.  The  judge  considered  the  Immigration   Rules
        relating to private life and  concluded  that  the  requirements  of
        those rules were not met. The judge considered Section 117B  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the  2002  Act)  and
        concluded, having regard to the basis of the appellant's  claim  and
        the evidence before him, that the appellant had  not  established  a
        private  life  to  a  sufficient  degree  that  her  removal   would
        constitute a disproportionate interference with Article 8.

Whether the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law

     6. The grounds of appeal are twofold. The first ground maintains  that,
        as the appellant specifically indicated in her Grounds of Appeal  to
        the First-tier Tribunal that she feared persecution or Article 3 ill-
        treatment if removed  to  Iran,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  judge,
        pursuant to section 86 of the 2002 Act, to engage with this  ground.
        I note that the appellant's bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        contained a large number of human rights reports relating to Iran.

     7. I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  in  failing  to  engage  with  the
        appellant's Article 3/asylum claim the judge erred in law.  Reliance
        was placed by the appellant on the case  of  Haque  (Section  86(2),
        adjournment not required) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00481, an authority
        which indicated that, pursuant to Section 86(2) of the 2002 Act,  an
        Immigration Judge is obliged to determine any  matter  raised  as  a
        ground of appeal. The appellant specifically raised her fear of ill-
        treatment in Iran as a ground of appeal.  The  judge  was  therefore
        obliged to consider this  ground.  The  judge's  failure  to  do  so
        constituted a material error of law.

     8. The second ground relates to the judge's assessment under Article 8,
        specifically his taking into account the  inaccurate  factual  basis
        that the appellant had failed to inform the Secretary  of  State  of
        the death of her father.

     9. I am concerned that this may have made  a  material  impact  on  the
        judge's overall proportionality assessment. As  the  respondent  was
        informed at the first opportunity of the death  of  the  appellant's
        father she (the respondent) was entitled to curtail the  appellant's
        leave. The failure of the  respondent  to  curtail  the  appellant's
        leave arguably  enabled  the  appellant  to  further  establish  her
        private life in the United Kingdom, a factor  that  may  reduce  the
        public interest in the appellant's removal.

    10. I cannot safely say that the judge, properly  directing  himself  on
        the law and taking full account of all material facts, including the
        failure by the respondent to  curtail  the  appellant's  leave  when
        aware of the material change in the appellant's circumstances, would
        inevitably  have  reached  the  same  conclusion.  I  am   therefore
        satisfied that this also constituted a material error of law.

    11. In circumstances where no consideration at all has been given to the
        appellant's asylum claim I regard it as appropriate to remit it back
        to the First-tier Tribunal to a judge other  than  Judge  Malone  to
        enable  full  consideration  to  be   given   to   the   appellant's
        asylum/Article 3 claim, and for consideration to  be  given  to  the
        fact that the appellant did inform the Secretary  of  State  at  the
        earliest opportunity of the death of her father.

    12. It is appropriate to maintain the judge's findings  in  relation  to
        the appellant being an honest and reliable witness.  Those  findings
        were however made in the context of the appellant's Article 8  claim
        as the judge failed to engage  with  the  asylum  and/or  Article  3
        aspect of the claim.

Notice of Decision

A material error of law was made and the matter  is  remitted  back  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

Direction

The appeal is to be heard by a Judge other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Malone.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]    23 July 2015
Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

