
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/29064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 18 September 2015                   |                On 1 October 2015    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 KA (ghana)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:                Ms Ashika Vijiwala, Specialist Appeals
Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:      Mr John Waithe, Counsel, instructed by MA
Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid sitting at Taylor  House  on  4
    March 2015) allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to grant him and other members of his family
    leave to remain, and  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  concomitant
    decision to remove him under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 (his human rights claim having been refused).  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, but as the best interests
    of affected minor children are  a  central  issue  in  this  appeal,  I
    consider that the claimant and his family should be accorded  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Ghana, whose date of birth is  9  January
    1971.  He entered the United Kingdom on 11 January 2003  on  a  student
    visa.  His spouse, H, (date of  birth  24  December  1979)  is  also  a
    Ghanaian national, and she entered the United Kingdom  illegally  under
    an assumed name on 26 July 2004 to join her husband.  On 24 March  2005
    she gave birth to their daughter N.   In  the  meantime,  the  claimant
    successfully  extended  his  leave  to  remain  as  a   student   until
    30 September 2005.  On 26 September 2005 he applied to extend his leave
    to remain as a student, but the application was refused with a right of
    appeal on 26 May 2006.  His appeal was dismissed on 27 July 2006.   The
    claimant successfully applied for judicial review,  which  led  to  his
    appeal being reheard on 17 April 2007 and  dismissed  on  27  September
    2007.  On 23 November 2007 the  appellant  was  refused  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.  While these proceedings  were  ongoing,
    the claimant's spouse gave  birth  to  M,  their  second  daughter,  on
    31 August 2006.

 3. Although the claimant was unsuccessful in his appeal,  he  remained  in
    the UK and made another application for leave to remain as a student on
    8 April 2008, and this application was  granted.   He  was  granted  an
    extension of stay until the end of his course of study, with his  leave
    expiring on 31 May 2009.  On 30 May 2009 he applied for leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, and the application was  refused
    with a right of appeal on  9  November  2009.   The  claimant  did  not
    appeal.

 4. The determination of Judge Kaler  promulgated  on  27  September  2007,
    which is at section  G  of  the  Home  Office  bundle,  summarises  the
    claimant's case on appeal.  He had enrolled on an MBA  course  for  one
    year, but decided he could not afford the fees.  He had switched to  an
    ACCA course in January 2004, and had passed all  level  1  papers.   He
    passed one paper out of three, stage 2, in June 2004.   He  had  failed
    three papers in December 2004, and had failed all  papers  in  December
    2005.  He passed one of three  papers  in  June  2006.   He  had  since
    transferred to study for an MBA at a different college.  His father had
    died in February 2005 and his girlfriend had a child on 24 March  2005.
    He was unable to concentrate on his studies.  He was  a  serious  full-
    time student and his marks improved every time he sat his  exams.   His
    girlfriend was originally from Ghana.  She had worked as a  hairdresser
    but she had only worked from home  since  the  birth  of  their  second
    child.  He was  unaware  of  her  immigration  status.   He  wished  to
    complete his studies and then return to Ghana to work as an accountant.



 5. Judge Kaler accepted that the claimant was a serious  student  who  had
    tried his best, but he had not shown satisfactory  progress  under  the
    Rules.  The claimant also did not qualify for Article  8  relief.   His
    partner was of Ghanaian origin.  The two children were young enough  to
    adjust to life in the country of their parents.  The claimant was  able
    to continue with his studies in his home country, should he wish to  do
    so.

 6. Following the refusal of the Tier 4 application on 6 November 2009, the
    claimant became an overstayer as he did not appeal the refusal, and  he
    did not voluntarily return to Ghana with his spouse and  two  children.
    On 30 June 2010 he applied for leave to remain outside the  Rules,  and
    the application was refused with no right of appeal on 17 August  2010.
    On 25 November 2011 he requested a  reconsideration  of  the  decision.
    There was intermittent correspondence between his  representatives  and
    the Home Office in 2011, 2012 and 2013,  culminating  eventually  in  a
    reconsideration decision of 7 July 2014.

 7. In assessing the best interests of his children, the Secretary of State
    contended the best interests of the child  would  normally  be  met  by
    remaining with their parents and returning with them to the country  of
    origin.  His daughters were both citizens of Ghana, born to parents who
    were also nationals of Ghana without any lawful leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom; so they could not qualify for leave  under  the  Rules.
    The refusal letter continued:

    20.  [N] was 5 years  old  at  the  time  of  the  application  and  is
         currently 9 years of age and her sister, [M], was nearly 4 years of
         age at the time of application and will be 8  on  31  August  2014.
         Having spent their youth and formative  years  in  Ghana  prior  to
         their arrival in the United Kingdom, it is considered that both the
         girls' parents will continue to have cultural ties to their country
         of origin. At only 9 years of age and  almost  8,  the  nature  and
         degree of any relationships your  client's  daughters  have  formed
         will, for the most part, be of a primarily  intra-familial  nature;
         in the main, with the focus  on  home  and  family.  Your  client's
         children would be returning to Ghana with their parents where  they
         will continue to live as a family unit  with  their  support.  Your
         client's daughters have no known medical concerns,  welfare  issues
         or special educational needs. They will be able to  continue  their
         education on  return  to  Ghana.  The  sole  official  language  of
         instruction throughout the Ghanaian educational system is  English.
         Students may study in any of eleven local languages for much of the
         first three years, after which English becomes the medium. Students
         continue to  study  a  Ghanaian  language  as  well  as  French  as
         classroom subjects through at least the ninth grade. All  textbooks
         and materials are otherwise in English.  This information has  been
         sourced from http://ghana.usembassy.gov/local  links.html on 3 June
         2014. It is accepted that they may not receive the level of tuition
         available in the United Kingdom but is not accepted that the United
         Kingdom has assumed responsibility for the girls' education.

    21.  In view of the above, it is not considered that  your  client  and
         his family's  removal  to  Ghana  would  be  detrimental  to  their
         daughters' welfare as they, together with their parents,  would  be
         expected to return as a family  unit.  The  general  needs  of  the
         children have been considered but at  present,  no  welfare  issues
         have been raised.

    22.  It is accepted that the removal of your client and his family from
         the United Kingdom would result in a degree  of  interference  with
         the private life they have developed in this country. However,  the
         evidence that you have supplied in support is insufficient and does
         not demonstrate any breadth or depth to this aspect of their  lives
         in the United Kingdom.  The lead applicant arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a student and would have been fully aware that he  would
         be expected to return to Ghana when his student visa expired. These
         matters weigh against your client when a decision  is  made  as  to
         whether his removal would  be  a  disproportionate  breach  of  his
         limited private life. The need to maintain Immigration control is a
         weighty consideration. In your client's  particular  circumstances,
         it is considered that the balance is struck in favour  of  removal.
         Your client's removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  along  with  his
         spouse and two children,  is  therefore  fully  justified,  lawful,
         proportionate and necessary to protect United Kingdom interests. In
         addition, your client has enjoyed a significant time  in  education
         in  this  country  and  has   gained   skills   through   his   new
         qualifications.  These  are  assuredly   assets   which   will   be
         transferable into the employment arena in Ghana.  Your  client  and
         his family will be at liberty to maintain contact with any  friends
         they have made in the United Kingdom  through  the  many  means  of
         modern technology available to them throughout the world.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Majid,  both  parties  were   legally
    represented.  The claimant adopted as his evidence-in-chief  a  witness
    statement dated 4 March 2015 in which he said that he and his wife  had
    had two more children in the UK.  One of  them  had  been  born  on  25
    August 2011, and their youngest had been  born  on  24 December  2012.
    Although the Home Office considered his  two  eldest  children  in  the
    refusal, they had not mentioned his two  youngest  children,  and  that
    meant that their case was not considered.

 9. In cross-examination, the claimant said he was a law abiding person who
    had not committed any crime.  His life was in this  country  and  there
    would be grave consequences to his children if they were asked to leave
    here, as they had not been to any other country than the UK.

10. The judge's reasons for allowing the claimant's appeal are to be  found
    in paragraphs [10], [21] and 22, which I reproduce below:

    10.  In this Determination I am confining my reasons to the dispositive
         aspects  of  the  case.   I  have  carefully  perused  the  Witness
         Statement of the Appellant and my mind is affected by the following
         facts:-

         (a)  The eldest child will become "ten years old" on 24 March 2015.
              This means that she will be entitled  to  apply  for  British
             nationality.  I always wonder where a British person  will  be
             deported to if (s)he is unwanted in a foreign country.

         (b)  The second child of the Appellant was born on 31 August  2006.
             She will soon be reaching the 10 year mark.

         (c)  The Appellant has 4 children and all of them have been born in
             the UK and have not been  to  any  other  country.   Thus  the
             rights of the children are paramount in this appeal.

         (d)  The Home Office has not paid full attention to  the  interests
             of the children otherwise this Refusal would  not  have  taken
             place.  However the fact that the parents can benefit from the
             children's rights could  confuse  anyone.   The  Rule  of  Law
             demands that the children  should  not  be  punished  for  the
             wrongs of their parents.

    21.  I am fully conscious of the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  by
         Immigration Law.  It is incumbent upon me  to  advert  to  the  new
         Rules giving respect to the animus legis.  I certainly  have  taken
         into account the "best interests" of the Appellant's  children  and
         the Rule of Law should benefit  this  crime-free  family  which  is
         fully integrated in  the  UK  system.   As  the  statement  of  the
         Appellant says, this family so far has conducted  itself  properly.
         The Appellant has highlighted that he has been doing community work
         for the benefit of many people.  He was at pains to  highlight  the
         fact that the Home Office has not considered the interests  of  his
         children properly.  I cannot overlook the fact that the  Respondent
         was particularly asked to look at the interests of the children.

    22.   Accordingly,  in  view  of  my  deliberations  in  the  preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the  submissions  at  my  disposal,
         cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
         and the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  I  am
         persuaded that the Appellant comes within the law and  can  benefit
         from the relevant Immigration Rules as amended and the  protections
         of the ECHR.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 6 May  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

    1.   An arguable error of law has arisen as to  the  degree  of  weight
         attached by the Judge to individual factors in the case.

    2.   At paragraph 10 the Judge has stated that his mind is affected  by
         the following facts.  These are then set out at  (a)  to  (d).   An
         arguable error of law arises in relation to the Judge's  statement:
         "I always wonder where a British person  will  be  deported  to  if
         (s)he is unwanted in a foreign country.".  It is  unclear  to  what
         extent this factor has weighed in the analysis of the Judge.

    3.   An arguable error of law arises on the footing that it unclear  to
         what extent the wondering of the Judge plays a role in the  finding
         of facts and the application of the law to those facts.  The  Judge
         has stated that the Home Office has not paid full attention to  the
         interests of the children otherwise  the  refusal  would  not  have
         taken place.  The Judge  continues:  "However  the  fact  that  the
         parents can  benefit  from  the  children's  rights  could  confuse
         anyone".

    4.   An arguable error of law arises in relation to the extent  of  the
         Judge's analysis of the best interests of the children set  against
         these  statements  in  the  light  of  the   degree   of   analysis
         subsequently conducted by the Judge.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing before me, Ms Vijiwala developed the arguments raised in
    the grounds of appeal.  On behalf of the claimant, Mr Waithe  submitted
    that there were no material errors of law in  the  judge's  assessment.
    He referred me to Section 1(4) of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981
    which provides as follows:

         A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement who is not a
         British citizen ... shall be entitled, on an  application  for  his
         registration as a British citizen made at any  time  after  he  has
         attained the age of 10 years, to be registered as  such  a  citizen
         if, as regards each of the first ten years of that  person's  life,
         the number of days on which he was absent from the  United  Kingdom
         in that year does not exceed 90.

13.  Mr  Waithe  submitted  that   the   provision   was   mandatory,   not
    discretionary, and the ability of the oldest child to be registered  as
    a British citizen was a matter which the judge justifiably  treated  as
    being of considerable weight.

14. I have ruled an error of law was made out, and gave my reasons  for  so
    finding in short form.  I then  discussed  with  the  parties  how  the
    decision should be remade.  From my reading of the  claimant's  witness
    statement for the First-tier Tribunal  there  were  no  factual  issues
    which needed to be resolved, with the possible exception of the claimed
    difficulties which the claimant said he would  encounter  in  Ghana  on
    return.  The First-tier Tribunal had made no findings of fact  on  this
    aspect of the claimant's evidence.  Accordingly, I invited Mr Waithe to
    call the claimant as a witness to give evidence on this issue.

15. In evidence-in-chief, the claimant  said  that  the  obstacles  to  the
    children going back to Ghana were the fact that  they  had  never  been
    there, and they did not speak the  Ghanaian  languages.   His  children
    were all healthy, except that his second child had been involved  in  a
    car  accident  on  12  August  2015,  which  had  led  to   her   being
    hospitalised.  She was now out of hospital, but her leg was in plaster.
     She was currently at home, having bed rest.  He was due to take her to
    an appointment at the hospital on 23 September 2015 where she would  be
    reviewed and an updated prognosis given.

16. He had worked part-time on a student visa until 2011.  He had worked as
    a security guard.

17. He had no assets in Ghana.  He had lived with his parents before coming
    to the United Kingdom.  They lived in a room with other people.  If  he
    went back now, he would only be able to go and stay in a hotel.

18. In cross-examination, he said he had worked in the UK until  2014.   He
    had received a letter requiring him to stop work on  11  January  2014.
    Since then, he and his family had been supported here  by  friends  and
    family, and also the church helped them from time to time.

19. He had last gone back to Ghana in 2005 for his father's  funeral.   His
    mother was still alive but she was old.  He was  in  contact  with  her
    when he was able to be in contact with her.  She lived in a town in the
    middle part of Ghana.  Before he came here, he moved from his home town
    to Accra.  He was living with friends in Accra, trying to make  a  life
    for himself.  Initially he said he did not work in Accra, but  he  then
    said that he made money selling things in the street, and that  he  had
    paid for his initial studies in the UK,  including  his  college  fees,
    from the savings which he had accrued from his business in Accra.

20. His mother was living with his brother who was supporting her.  He  was
    a teacher at a primary school.  He had a big extended family in  Ghana,
    but he was not close to anyone in  Ghana  apart  from  his  mother  and
    brother, who was married with children.  His brother could not  support
    him financially.

21. He was asked about his qualifications.  He said he  had  got  a  higher
    national diploma at a polytechnic in Ghana in the year  2000.   He  had
    come to the United Kingdom in 2003 to study an ACCA course.  He had not
    completed an ACCA course, but he  had  obtained  an  MBA  in  financial
    management.  As from last  July  2014  he  was  a  qualified  financial
    advisor and mortgage broker.  He would not be able to get a job in this
    capacity in Ghana.  There were a lot of unemployed graduates in  Ghana.



22. In her closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Ms
    Vijiwala submitted that the appeal should be dismissed for the  reasons
    given in the decision letter.  She  relied  on  paragraph  [13]  of  AM
    Malawi for the  proposition  that  the  disruption  of  the  children's
    education in the UK was not a trump card.

23. In reply, Mr Waithe submitted that the claimant faced very  significant
    obstacles  in  reintegrating,  which  would  impact  adversely  on  the
    children.  He had no property or job to return to in Ghana.  The  other
    child had now made  an  application  to  be  registered  as  a  British
    national, and once she had been registered as a British  national,  she
    would be able to secure her parents' status here on Zambrano grounds.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

28.  EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:
       34. In determining whether or not, in a case such  as  the  present,
           the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests of
           the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength
           of the factors which make it in their best interests  to  remain
           here; and also to take account of any  factors  that  point  the
           other way.


       35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
           depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their  age;  (b)  the
           length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have
           been in education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;
           (d) to what extent they have become distanced from  the  country
           to which it is proposed that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable
           their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
           have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in  adapting  to
           life in that country; and (g) the extent  to  which  the  course
           proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
           (if they have any) as British citizens.


       36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer
           falls to be given to the question: is it in the  best  interests
           of the child to remain? The longer the child has been here,  the
           more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his  education,  the
           looser his ties with the  country  in  question,  and  the  more
           deleterious the consequences of  his  return,  the  greater  the
           weight that falls  into  one  side  of  the  scales.  If  it  is
           overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should  not
           return, the need to maintain immigration control  may  well  not
           tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the  child's  best
           interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with  some  factors
           pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.


       37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken  into
           account the strong weight to be given to the  need  to  maintain
           immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
           country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
           entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents
           may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
           deceitfully.
29.  Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

30.  The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

      On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way  from
      the facts of the case before them.  No one in the family was a British
      citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If the  mother
      was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.  With  the
      parents removed,  then  it  was  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children to go with them:

         Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.

      Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

24. As stated by  Clarke  LJ  in  paragraph  [34]  of  EV  Philippines,  in
    determining whether or not the need for immigration  control  outweighs
    the best interests of affected children, it is necessary  to  determine
    the relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in  their  best
    interests to remain here and also to take account of any  factors  that
    point the other way.

25. The approach taken by Judge Majid is  wholly  inadequate,  as  he  only
    addresses some of the factors listed by Clarke LJ in paragraph [35]  of
    EV Philippines.  He does not address at all the  factors  mentioned  in
    sub-paragraphs (d) to (g).  He also does not weigh in the  balance  the
    strong weight to be given to the need to maintain  immigration  control
    in pursuit of the economic wellbeing of the country and the fact  that,
    ex hypothesi, none of the members of  the  family  (with  the  arguable
    exception of the eldest  child)  have  an  independent  entitlement  to
    remain.

26. As I explored Mr Waithe in  oral  argument,  there  was  also  a  clear
    misdirection on the part of the judge in characterising the  children's
    best interests as being a paramount  consideration,  as  opposed  to  a
    primary consideration.

27. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it should be  set  aside
    and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

28. Mr Waithe accepts that neither the claimant nor his dependants  qualify
    for leave to remain under Appendix FM.  The two eldest children also do
    not have a viable claim under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) as neither of them had
    accrued seven  years'  residence  at  the  date  of  application.   The
    application which triggered the eventual decision in July 2014 was made
    in 2010.  The fact that there was an exchange of correspondence in  the
    intervening period, in the course of which further representations were
    made by the claimant's solicitors, does  not  mean  that  the  date  of
    application was reset to a later date.

29. The claimant has a potential claim  under  Rule  276ADE(1)(vi)  on  the
    ground  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
    integration into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
    to leave the UK.  But the  postulated  obstacles  are  purely  economic
    ones.  It is not suggested that  there  would  be  cultural,  familial,
    linguistic or societal obstacles to his reintegration.  I find there is
    not a real risk that the claimant would be homeless  and  destitute  on
    return to Ghana, thus imperilling  the  safety  and  wellbeing  of  his
    children.  Although the claimant was very dismissive about his  trading
    activity in Accra between the year 2000 and 2003,  it  must  have  been
    significant in order to persuade an Entry Clearance Officer that he had
    sufficient funds to maintain and  accommodate  himself  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to meet the costs of his proposed  course  of  study.   The
    claimant has enhanced his employability  on  return  to  Ghana  through
    acquiring an MBA qualification in the UK and gaining  experience  as  a
    treasurer (see below),  and  there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he would be unable to obtain gainful employment in order
    to set himself up in business on return to  Accra.   In  the  meantime,
    there is no reason to suppose that the financial support which  he  and
    his family are accessing from family and friends in  the  UK  will  not
    continue, while the claimant re-establishes himself.

30. Turning to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules, questions 1 and  2  of
    the Razgar test should be answered  in  favour  of  the  claimant  with
    regard to the establishment of private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test should be answered  in  favour  of
    the respondent.

31. On the crucial question  of  proportionality,  the  best  interests  of
    affected  minor  children  are  a  primary  consideration.   Under  the
    statute, the two eldest children are qualifying  children  as  each  of
    them has accrued more than seven years' residence as at the date of the
    hearing.  Although the best interests of the two youngest children must
    also be taken into account, the scales are firmly tipped in  favour  of
    them returning with their  parents  to  Ghana,  given  their  ages  and
    respective lengths of residence.  The outcome of this appeal pivots  on
    the best interests of the two eldest children, who have  much  stronger
    private life claims, in view of their ages and  respective  lengths  of
    residence.

32. The main considerations weighing in favour of the two  eldest  children
    remaining here are their length of residence and the fact that they are
    now both in full-time education.  But they have not reached a point  in
    their education where they are about to  take  public  exams  (such  as
    GCSEs) and neither of them has accrued seven years' residence from  the
    age of four.  Having grown up in a multicultural society, and  probably
    within a Ghanaian diaspora, their connection to the  country  of  their
    nationality should be relatively easy to renew.  While there is  likely
    to be a difficult period of adjustment to a  new  life  in  Ghana,  the
    children will have the support of their Ghanaian parents and they  will
    also be able to enjoy family reunion with, among others, their maternal
    grandmother and maternal uncle.  The Ghanaian Constitution  provides  a
    free compulsory and universal basic education  for  all  children  from
    kindergarten through junior high school, and so the children  would  be
    able to continue with their education in Ghana, albeit with a different
    set of teachers and fellow pupils.  English is the official language of
    Ghana, and so the children will not have any linguistic difficulties in
    adapting to life there.  The evidence also does not disclose any  long-
    term medical or other difficulties in readapting to life in Ghana.  The
    proposed removal of the entire family to Ghana will not interfere  with
    family life, as the integrity of the family unit will be preserved.

33. The more difficult question is whether  the  proposed  removal  of  the
    family is inimical to the eldest child's rights as a  British  citizen.
    Clearly this was not the case at the date of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, as the eldest child had not yet accrued ten years'
    residence so as to be eligible to apply for registration as  a  British
    national.  The position is less straightforward now as the eldest child
    has passed the ten year mark, and her parents have applied for  her  to
    be registered as a British national.  As Ms Vijiwala accepts, there  is
    no reason to suppose that the application will not  be  successful.  On
    the other hand, as of the date of the  hearing  before  me  the  eldest
    child has not yet  been  registered  as  a  British  national.   So  Ms
    Vijiwala submits that I should not treat the eldest child as having  an
    independent right to remain here as a British national.

34. I consider that the right approach is to recognise that N is not yet  a
    British national, but that her registration as  a  British  citizen  is
    imminent; and, this represents an additional factor which militates  in
    favour of her staying here.  For otherwise she will be deprived of  the
    benefits of British citizenship for  the  remainder  of  her  minority,
    including the right to receive a free education in the UK.

35. Accordingly, I accept that the scales are marginally tipped  in  favour
    of the eldest child remaining in the UK, notwithstanding  the  benefits
    of her returning with the rest of her family to Ghana, the  country  of
    which she is also a national.  On the other hand, as the second child M
    has not yet accrued ten years' residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    scales are tipped in favour of her returning to Ghana with the rest  of
    the family.

36. The outcome of the best interest assessment with respect to  M  is  not
    decisive, because the  outcome  of  the  best  interest  assessment  in
    respect of the eldest child N could by itself render the removal of the
    entire family to Ghana a disproportionate outcome.

37. But it is necessary to have regard to the parents' adverse  immigration
    histories in the wider proportionality assessment.  While the  children
    are blameless in  their  parents'  immigration  offending,  the  public
    interest in the removal of immigration  offenders  cannot  be  ignored.
    Not only is the claimant an overstayer, but on the  available  evidence
    his wife is an illegal entrant; and the  claimant  initially  concealed
    her illegal entry and presence. For in his FLR(S) application  received
    by the Home Office on 10 April 2008, the claimant mentioned N and M  as
    his dependants, but crossed out the section referring to a partner.  At
    all events, the claimant and his wife have built up family and  private
    life in the United Kingdom in the full knowledge that the claimant only
    came to the United Kingdom  for  a  temporary  purpose,  and  that  his
    declared intention was  to  return  to  Ghana  once  his  studies  were
    completed; and in the full knowledge that his girlfriend, and  latterly
    his wife, had no right to be here herself.

38. I acknowledge the character references for the claimant from his church
    and from Glyndon Community Group (for whom the claimant has  served  as
    treasurer and chairman of the finance  subcommittee  since  31  January
    2009). But little weight can be given to a private life which is  built
    up while the person's status  here  is  precarious,  and  the  positive
    contribution which the claimant has made to his  local  community  does
    not detract significantly from the public interest in his removal.  For
    his illegal presence here is damaging on a macro-economic level.

39. In conclusion, I find that the proposed interference  is  proportionate
    to the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,  namely  the
    maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed under the  Rules  and  under
Article 8, ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the SSHD and to the claimant.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson










