
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29583/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 January 2017              |On 25 January 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                KHIZAR USMAN
                         NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal dated 11 July 2016, in which it dismissed his  appeal  on
          human rights grounds.  The appeal  was  made  against  the  SSHD's
          decision  dated  13  August  2015  to   refuse   the   appellant's
          application for a residence card as confirmation of his  right  to
          reside in the UK as an  extended  family  member  ('EFM')  of  his
          brother, an EEA national under the Immigration (European  Economic
          Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ('the 2006 EEA Regulations').


       2. In her decision the SSHD was not satisfied that the appellant  was
          dependent upon his brother as claimed.

First-tier Tribunal decision

       3. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant
          and  his  brother.   Having  heard  that   evidence   and   having
          considered detailed documentary evidence the  First-tier  Tribunal
          made very clear factual findings that the appellant  has  remained
          dependent upon his brother for all material purposes,  since  1990
          [38 and 39].


       4. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the appeal on  the  basis  that
          it could only be allowed on Article 8 grounds  [6  and  40].   The
          First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  applied  its   positive   factual
          findings  to  the  applicable  Article  8  legal   framework   but
          dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Issues arising

       5. In the grounds of appeal prepared on behalf of  the  appellant  it
          was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  make
          its factual findings but that it erred in law in  its  application
          of the law to those facts.  It was suggested that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal did not have jurisdiction  to  consider  Article  8  (see
          Amirteymour and others [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC)) but that  it  should
          have considered whether the appellant met the requirements of  the
          2006 EEA Regulations i.e. whether or not  he  was  entitled  to  a
          residence card as an EFM.


       6. In her rule 24  notice  the  SSHD  did  not  dispute  the  factual
          findings but submitted that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  have
          jurisdiction to entertain the appeal following Sala  (EFMs:  Right
          of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  The headnote states: "There  is
          no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
          Secretary of State not to grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
          claiming to be an Extended Family Member."


       7. Both representatives accepted that the only issue  in  dispute  is
          whether or not Sala was  correctly  decided.   Mr  Diwnycz  relied
          upon the reasoning in Sala to  support  his  submission  that  the
          failure  to  consider  the  appeal  pursuant  to  the   2006   EEA
          Regulations was not a material error - it  could  not  be  because
          the First-tier  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  any
          ground of appeal arising from the  decision  at  all.   Mr  Karnik
          accepted that  the  grounds  of  appeal  conceded  an  absence  of
          jurisdiction  to  consider  human  rights  but  relied  upon   his
          skeleton argument to submit that Sala  was  wrongly  decided.   He
          therefore argued that the correct course is to  allow  the  appeal
          to the extent that the matter is reconsidered by the SSHD.

Jurisdiction

       8. The arguments employed by Mr Karnik have largely  been  considered
          and rejected by the Tribunal in Sala.  The  Tribunal  acknowledged
          that it had long been assumed that EFMs  had  a  right  of  appeal
          [43] but that upon hearing  detailed  argument,  perhaps  for  the
          first time, the approach adopted previously was  wrong.   For  the
          reasons set out in Sala and Amirteymour  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal in question.  I  have
          also considered the separate argument relied  upon  by  Mr  Karnik
          that Sala should not have retrospective effect.   This  submission
          misses the point.  Whatever the position that existed  previously,
          the question for me is whether or not the First-tier Tribunal  had
          jurisdiction.  For the reasons identified in Sala it did not.

Other matters


       9. In any event, even if Sala is wrong and the appellant has a  right
          of appeal, the Tribunal would be limited to remitting  the  matter
          to the SSHD. Regulation 17(4) of  2006  EEA  Regulations  provides
          discretion to the SSHD to issue a residence card to an  EFM.   The
          SSHD has not  yet  considered  the  exercise  of  such  discretion
          because she did not have the full facts available.


      10. In this case there  have  been  comprehensive  clear  findings  of
          fact.  Although the First-tier Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction
          to make those findings, the reality of the  situation  is  that  a
          Judge has heard evidence from the appellant and his  brother,  and
          accepted  the  necessary  dependency,  in  the  course  of  making
          comprehensive credibility findings.  These findings have not  been
          appealed by the SSHD.

Disposal

      11. The appellant has no right of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal had
          no jurisdiction to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.


      12. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a
          decision that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier
          Tribunal.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
24 January 2017
