
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/29019/2014
                                                               ia/29027/2014
                                                               ia/29033/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2015                           |On 23 December 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                    vimalkumar gopaldas (FIRST appellant)
                   jignaben vilmalkumar (SECOND appellant)
                                                j v    (THIRD appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Makol, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  India.   The  first  appellant  Mr
    Vilmalkumar Gopaldas was born on 25 June 1976.  The  other  appellants,
    his wife and daughter were born respectively on 29 February 1984 and 26
    August 2007.

 2. The appellants appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant  them
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant with two  dependants
    under the points-based system.  Judge Wright in a decision  promulgated
    on 9 April 2015 allowed the appeals because  he  found  the  appellants
    satisfied the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds claim the judge allowed the appeals because  he  found  the
    first appellant met the requirements of paragraph 245(DD) of the Rules.
     The first appellant's father-in-law was claimed to  be  providing  him
    with financial sponsorship but  it  was  claimed  the  first  appellant
    failed to adequately show when the money was to be repaid.   There  was
    no clarification as to when the money would be sent or how it would  be
    sent.  There was no evidence to show the origin of the funds  or  their
    provenance.  On that basis, the respondent argued that the  funds  were
    not accessible to the appellant such points having been raised  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing but which had not been  addressed  by
    the judge.

 4. Further, the first appellant's contract was not valid.  The Director of
    the company with which he signed the  contract,  resigned  in  December
    2013, whereas the contract was signed in April of  2014.   The  grounds
    claimed that as the Director resigned, he had no appointments with  any
    companies such that the contract was not valid.

 5. The appellant had failed to show any form of logical research  for  his
    business.   He  had  failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  his   close
    competitors.  Merely looking at his local area was not a credible  form
    of research.

 6. Having a degree did not necessarily follow that the appellant  had  the
    necessary skills and experience to open and operate a business such  as
    he maintained.

 7. The first appellant's witness statement did not  properly  address  the
    reasons for refusal.

 8. Paragraph 245(DD) of the  Immigration  Rules  had  not  been  met,  the
    balancing exercise had not taken place  and  as  a  result,  the  judge
    erred.

 9. Designated Judge Zucker refused permission to appeal  in  his  decision
    dated 2 June 2015. He found that in essence, the  grounds  merely  took
    issue with the judge's findings.  The judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
    issues and made findings that were open to him, such that  the  grounds
    were nothing more than a disagreement with findings of fact  which  the
    judge was entitled to make.  There was no arguable  material  error  of
    law.

10. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  In a decision dated 29
    July 2015, it was said inter alia:

         "......the grounds do set out an arguable basis for  the  complaint
         that the judge did  not  engage  sufficiently  with  the  basis  of
         challenge that underpinned the refusal of the application.   It  is
         not altogether easy to identify what the reasoning is that leads to
         the findings set out at paragraph  20  of  the  determination.   At
         paragraph 21 the judge sets out a recital of evidence but it is not
         particularly clear that these amount to reasoned findings."

Submissions on Error of Law

11. Ms Pal relied upon the grounds.  The judge purported to  make  findings
    at [21] but failed to do so.

12. Mr Makol conceded that the judge had not engaged with the issues as  he
    might have done, nevertheless, the appellant had addressed the issue of
    the Director of 1Dream Educare Ltd at [18] of his statement.

13. Mr Makol submitted that the judge did make findings, however, it  might
    have been more appropriate if his paragraph [20] followed, rather  than
    preceded [21].

Conclusion on Error of Law

14. I find the judge made material errors of law in  his  approach  to  the
    evidence because he failed to engage with the reasons for  refusal  and
    made no findings or inadequate findings on the issues to be  addressed.
    It is inadequate to set out in detail  at  [21]  the  evidence  without
    addressing that evidence in terms of the specific issues raised by  the
    respondent.  Further, by approaching  the  exercise,  in  a  sense,  in
    reverse, by saying he was satisfied with regard to the issues at [20(i)
    and  (ii)]  the  judge  carried  out  an  inadequate  analysis  of  the
    requirements of the Rules, the reasons why  the  application  had  been
    refused and the evidence.

15. The judge materially erred in law.  I set aside his decision which must
    be re-made following a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 14 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


