
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/29648/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 29 September 2015                   |               On 16 October 2015    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MOHAMMAD ABDUL MONAF
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hasan, Solicitors from Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  the
    Respondent and Mr Monaf is the Appellant.




 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C A Parker (Judge Parker), promulgated on 13 April 2015,
    in which she allowed the Appellant's appeal. That  appeal  was  against
    the Respondent's decision  of  3  July  2014  to  refuse  to  vary  the
    Appellant's leave to remain and to remove him from the  United  Kingdom
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.




 3. The Appellant was born on 6 June 1932 and is a citizen  of  Bangladesh.
    He entered this country as a visitor on 4 January 2014 and then,  on  2
    May 2014 applied to the Respondent for further leave on  the  basis  of
    human rights. The Respondent refused the application having  considered
    Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and whether  any  exceptional
    circumstances existed.



 4. In a detailed decision, Judge Parker sets out the evidence  in  support
    of the Appellant's claim and concludes that a credible account  of  his
    circumstances had been provided to her. She finds  that  the  Appellant
    was in a poor state of health and was dependent upon  his  family  here
    both emotionally and physically. There were deep and significant  bonds
    between the Appellant and his family members in this country. Following
    the death of his wife and  notwithstanding  that  some  care  had  been
    provided for in Bangladesh by a non-relative,  the  Appellant's  health
    and wellbeing had been "seriously compromised". It was  found  that  he
    now requires practical assistance with  washing,  dressing,  toileting,
    and eating. He is wheelchair-bound. A return to  Bangladesh  would,  it
    was found, deprive him of familial  support  (he  having  no  one  else
    there) and leave him isolated and vulnerable. It  was  found  that  his
    family could not be expected to go and live in  Bangladesh  themselves.
    There was no attempt to  deliberately  circumvent  the  Rules,  as  the
    Appellant's true circumstances only became apparent once he had arrived
    in this country. Judge Parker found that was an application  for  entry
    clearance to be made on the basis  of  the  Appellant  being  an  Adult
    Dependent Relative, it would succeed.



 5.  In  respect  of  the  legal  approach  to  the  appeal,  Judge  Parker
    acknowledged that the Appellant could not rely on the  Adult  Dependent
    Relative route under Appendix FM because he arrived in this country  as
    a visitor. She declined to substantively consider the Appellant's  case
    under Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. Instead, and having considered  MM
    (Lebanon) [2015] EWCA Civ 985, she deals with the claim outside of  the
    Rules. She finds there to be family life with the family in the  United
    Kingdom, and that removal would interfere with  that  protected  right.
    Having  conducted  a  balancing  exercise,  Judge   Parker   ultimately
    concludes that removal would be disproportionate.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds are twofold. First, it is asserted that Judge Parker failed
    to have regard to the fact that the Appellant was unable  to  meet  the
    Rules as they relate to Article 8. Second,  there  was  an  "inadequate
    explanation" as to why the judge found family life to exist. Within the
    same ground it is said that the judge failed to  "adequately  consider"
    the facts as they pertained to the United Kingdom-based family going to
    live in Bangladesh.




 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cheales
    on 23 June 2015.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Hasan suggested that the grant of permission was limited to ground 2
    only. This was on the basis that  in  the  grant  the  judge  had  only
    expressly referred to the substance of ground 1. I directed  myself  to
    the decision in Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC), and concluded that  the
    grant was not limited. There were no express words to that  effect,  as
    there should be if a restricted grant is intended. The grant could have
    been worded more clearly, but I was satisfied that  both  grounds  were
    before me. Mr Hasan was content with this decision.




 9. Ms Holmes accepted that ground 2 was weak, but that ground 1  was  made
    out and was material. Mr Hasan accepted that  Judge  Parker  failed  to
    spell out clearly what weight if any she was attaching  to  the  public
    interest and/or the Appellant's inability to meet the Rules. He did not
    concede the point however, and submitted that any error was immaterial.



Decision on error of law

10. I informed the parties at the hearing  that  I  found  there  to  be  a
    material error of law in Judge Parker's  decision  based  on  ground  1
    only. Ground 2 had no merit. My reasons  for  this  conclusion  are  as
    follows.




11. In most respects, Judge Parker's decision is unimpeachable.  There  are
    clear findings following  a  careful  consideration  of  the  evidence.
    However, a material omission  arises  in  respect  of  the  interlinked
    issues of the public interest and the Appellant's inability to meet the
    Rules. The sole reference to the public interest is a line in paragraph
    36 in which Judge Parker states, "I have had  regard  to  the  need  to
    maintain effective immigration control." There is no reference to  what
    weight is being attached to this important factor. There is nothing  on
    the relevance of the Appellant's inability to meet  the  Rules  to  the
    effect that it  would  count  against  him  under  the  proportionality
    exercise.



12. In my view, Judge Parker did not engage with these matters  adequately,
    whether by her reasoning or attribution of weight. This is an error  of
    law. It is material because the  Appellant's  case  was  not  bound  to
    succeed on any view, albeit that it is a strong one.



13. In respect of ground 2, Judge  Parker's  conclusion  that  family  life
    existed was well supported  by  her  findings  and  reasons  (see,  for
    example paragraphs 24 and 27). The conclusion that  family  members  in
    the United Kingdom  could  not  go  to  live  in  Bangladesh  was  also
    adequately reasoned (see paragraph 27).



14. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge  Parker  on  the  basis  of
    ground 1 only.

The remaking of the decision

15. Both representatives were agreed that I should remake the  decision  on
    the evidence before me. Given the detailed findings  by  Judge  Parker,
    this was clearly the appropriate method of disposal.




16. Both representatives were  also  agreed  that  I  should  consider  the
    Appellant's case under Paragraph 276ADE(vi). It  was  somewhat  unclear
    why Judge Parker had declined to do so in her decision, given that this
    was the basis upon which  the  Respondent  has  initially  refused  the
    Appellant's application.



17. There has been  no  successful  challenge  to  any  of  Judge  Parker's
    findings and I preserve them in their entirety. In addition, I have had
    regard to the Respondent's bundle and  Appellant's  bundle  which  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal. No oral evidence was called before me.



Paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules

18. I find  that  there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    Appellant reintegrating into Bangladeshi  society  if  he  were  to  be
    removed at this time. I base this finding upon the following matters.




19. The Appellant has no one to offer support in Bangladesh. His family are
    now all in the United Kingdom and,  for  the  reasons  given  by  Judge
    Parker at paragraph 27 of her decision, it would not be reasonable  for
    them to relocate to Bangladesh, particularly in light of the  existence
    of his daughters' British citizen children and grandchildren.

20. The Appellant is clearly  a  fragile  and  vulnerable  individual,  who
    requires not only emotional support but direct physical assistance with
    almost all of the basic  personal  tasks  encountered  in  daily  life:
    washing, eating, dressing, toileting, and moving around.



21. The Appellant's significant bonds with  his  daughters  in  the  United
    Kingdom are a core aspect of his  private  life,  which  is  of  course
    relevant to Paragraph 276ADE(vi). As  Judge  Parker  found,  "the  very
    nature of the family life he now enjoys with them  is  central  to  his
    wellbeing..."



22. In light of the foregoing, the dislocation of the Appellant  from  this
    emotional  and  practical  care  environment,  provided  as  it  is  by
    immediate family members, and the consequences thereof, will  represent
    very  significant  obstacles  to  any  meaningful  reintegration   into
    Bangladeshi society.



23. The possibility of care provision from outside of the family  does  not
    reduce the significance of the obstacles. There would be  no  means  of
    adequately monitoring any such care (even assuming it  was  available),
    or of intervening if there was a problem. There is also the  matter  of
    social interaction and the lack thereof if the Appellant were  returned
    to live, in effect, alone. His current  state  of  wellbeing  would,  I
    find, make it extremely unlikely that he  could  engage  in  meaningful
    social interaction with others, especially strangers. This would  apply
    even if he  were  in  a  residential  home  (assuming  these  exist  in
    Bangladesh). Such residential care would not lessen the impact  of  the
    severing of ties with the care and support provided by his  own  family
    in this country. It would not  defeat  his  satisfaction  of  Paragraph
    276ADE(vi).



24. I make it clear that I have not treated this case as a 'medical claim'.
    Health is of course relevant to the case  under  Paragraph  276ADE(vi),
    but the question to be addressed under this provision is wider  than  a
    simple consideration of medical treatment availability in  one  country
    compared to that in another.



25. I am aware of the argument that when considering Paragraph  267ADE,  or
    indeed any other part of the  Rules  dealing  with  Article  8,  regard
    should be had to the  mandatory  factors  under  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Although this  point  has
    not been raised before me, I will, for the  purposes  of  my  decision,
    take these factors into account.



26. The need to maintain immigration control is in the public interest. The
    Appellant entered as a visitor only and the  public  interest  is  thus
    engaged. I attached considerable weight to this factor. It is right  of
    course that the Appellant's status here has always been precarious.  To
    this extent I place much less weight  upon  his  private  life  than  I
    otherwise would. The Appellant does not speak English, but the  adverse
    effect of this is reduced by virtue of his advanced years. He is  being
    supported financially by his family and has not had recourse to the NHS
    as yet. It is his family who are supporting him.



27. Although the mandatory factors significantly narrow the margin by which
    I have concluded that the Appellant's  appeal  succeeds,  they  do  not
    reduce it to a vanishing point. This is and always was a  strong  case.
    Whilst the test posed in Paragraph 276ADE(vi) is not, if one takes  the
    section 117B factors as being relevant at all, a trump card, nor can it
    simply be automatically displaced because  a  claimant  is  here  on  a
    precarious basis, or such like: to conclude otherwise would deprive sub-
    paragraph (vi) of any utility. On the facts  of  this  case,  the  very
    significant  obstacles  exist   and   are   not   outweighed   by   the
    countervailing effect of the mandatory factors.



28. If I had not taken the section 117B factors into account, the margin of
    success would have been substantially greater.



29. The appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules. I do not  consider  it
    necessary to go on and consider the case outside of the Rules.

Anonymity

30. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate in this case.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Signed                                       Date: 15 October 2015
H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
This is because the appeal clearly required adjudication by the Tribunal  to
resolve contentious matters.


Signed                                       Date: 15 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



