
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30029/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 October 2015                      |                On 14 October 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                              mr vijay Chauhan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hashim of Counsel instructed by E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of India, appealed  against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent refusing his  human  rights  claim  and  giving  removal
    directions.  His appeal was heard on 11  March  2015  by  Judge  Coffey
    sitting at Hatton Cross.  Both parties were represented, the  Appellant
    by Ms Zahra Ahmed of Counsel.  In a decision  of  9th,  promulgated  on
    10th, April, the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted on 2 July 2015 by Judge Fisher in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  Permission is sought, in time, to appeal against the  decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coffey, promulgated on 10th April
             2015, in which she dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
             the decision to refuse him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom  on  compassionate  grounds  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules.


         2.   The rather lengthy grounds seeking permission assert that  the
             Judge erred in law in her assessment of Article  8  under  the
             ECHR.  The Respondent had accepted that there was family  life
             between the Appellant, his spouse and her two children, but at
             paragraph 80 of her lengthy decision, the Judge said that  the
             Appellant could not 'show any reason which engages Article 8'.
              It may be the case  that  the  Judge  intended  to  convey  a
             finding that the decision was proportionate, but that  is  not
             how she expressed herself.  Furthermore, at paragraph 78,  the
             Judge found that some of the  evidence  before  her  had  been
             rehearsed with  the  use  of  a  notebook,  and  that  it  was
             contrived.   Counsel  who  appeared  for  the  Appellant   has
             provided a witness statement in which,  at  paragraph  5,  she
             indicates that, when the Appellant's spouse was asked in cross
             examination about the notes which were before her, those notes
             were handed to the Judge who then  indicated  that  there  was
             nothing of concern therein.


         3.   It is arguable that the Judge  has  erred  in  law,  confusing
             herself as to whether Article 8 was engaged  at  all,  and  in
             making adverse credibility findings  on  the  basis  of  notes
             which she had accepted  as  innocent.   Accordingly,  I  grant
             permission to appeal.  All grounds are arguable."

3.   In a Rule 24 response on 20 July 2015 the Respondent sought  to  uphold
    the decision, essentially on the basis that the permission  application
    represented a disagreement with its  findings,  which  were  reasonably
    open to the Tribunal.

4.   The Appellant, together with his wife and his  Counsel  and  solicitor,
    attended the error of law hearing before me.  This  took  the  form  of
    submissions,  which  I  have  taken  into  account.   I   reserved   my
    determination.

Determination

5.   At paragraph 78 Judge Coffey wrote:

     "Mrs Kaur's evidence was  regrettably  rehearsed  with  the  use  of  a
         notebook as observed by the Respondent and brought to my  attention
         at the conclusion of her evidence.  I find her  evidence  contrived
         and inherently unreliable."

6.    In  evidence  before  me  is  a  statement  by  Ms  Zahra  Ahmed,  who
    represented the Appellant at the appeal.  At paragraph 5 she wrote:

     "Ms  Kaur,  the  Appellant's  spouse  was  asked  by  the  Home  Office
         representative about the notes she had in front of  her.   Ms  Kaur
         handed  these  notes  to  the  judge  and  to   the   Home   Office
         Representative.  At the hearing the judge indicated  that  she  was
         satisfied there was nothing of concern in these notes."

7.   There is no evidence about this matter from the Presenting Officer  who
    represented the Respondent before Judge Coffey.  I accept the  evidence
    of Ms Ahmed.  It follows that it  was  procedurally  improper  for  the
    judge to draw an adverse inference  from  Mrs  Kaur's  reference  to  a
    notebook after indicating that it did not give rise to concern  without
    having afforded the Appellant the opportunity to  address  this.   This
    conclusion clearly contributed to the negative credibility  finding  of
    the judge about Mrs Kaur.  It was a material error of law.

8.   At paragraph 45 Judge Coffey recorded the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    that Mrs Kaur had only been to India for a  couple  of  occasions.   At
    paragraph 47 she recorded that her  British  passport  was  checked  in
    cross-examination and showed multiple visits to India in 2009.  This is
    factually incorrect.  The passport was produced to me, and  shows  only
    one visit to India.

9.   At paragraph 26  the  judge  correctly  recorded  that  the  Respondent
    admitted that the relationship between the Appellant and his spouse and
    her  two  children  from  a  previous  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting.  This does not sit easily with her marginalisation of  that
    relationship at paragraph 79, nor with her language, albeit unhappy, in
    paragraph 80 that the Appellant could not show any reason which engages
    Article 8.  This was to reopen an issue accepted by the Respondent.  To
    do so was an error of law, material because it was capable of, and did,
    influence the decision.

10.  Cumulatively these errors of law  are  material.   They  undermine  the
    reasoning in the decision, which cannot stand.  I set it aside.

11.  The appeal needs to be reheard in  its  entirety.   This  will  involve
    consideration of a significant quantity of evidence, including that  to
    which I now refer.  It is therefore appropriate for the  appeal  to  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal,  by  any  judge  other  than  Judge
    Coffey.

12.  At paragraphs 4 and 6 of her statement, Ms  Ahmed  refers  to  evidence
    supplied by the Appellant to the Respondent but not placed in  evidence
    by the Respondent  before  the  Tribunal.   This  includes  handwritten
    letters from Mrs Kaur's daughters, family photographs of family  trips,
    occasion cards and other evidence of  family  life.   Even  though  the
    Respondent accepts that the relationship  is  genuine  and  subsisting,
    this evidence is material and should be before the Tribunal.   Pursuant
    to the Procedure Rules I  direct  the  Respondent  to  serve  upon  the
    Tribunal and the Appellant  within  thirty  days  of  receipt  of  this
    decision a supplementary  bundle  comprising  copies  of  all  material
    supplied by the Appellant which the Respondent has not  already  placed
    in evidence.

Decision

13.  The decision contains material errors of law, and is set aside.

14.  The appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross
    before any judge other than Judge Coffey.

15.  Direction to the Respondent in paragraph 9 above.

Signed
    Dated: 13 October 2015




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis



