
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30330/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Notice issued                |
|On 30 May 2014                                |On 2 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                Mr Luchu Duan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Goodman-Smith (non-legal representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant sought permission to remain indefinitely  in  the  United
    Kingdom, together with  his  wife  (IA/30316/2013),  as  the  dependent
    relative  of  his  daughter.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused   both
    applications in decisions of the  3  July  2013,  making  decisions  to
    remove the appellant and his wife at the same time. The  appellant  and
    his wife appealed these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal and  in  a
    combined determination, promulgated on  28  February  2014,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley dismissed  the  appeals  on  all  grounds.  The
    appellant and his wife were thereafter granted permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal by Designated Judge Zucker,  in  a  single  decision
    dated 14 April 2014.

 2. The appellant's wife left the United Kingdom on 24 April 2014  and  her
    appeal was consequently treated as abandoned by operation of s.  104(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. A notice  to  this
    effect has been promulgated under separate cover.

 3. Turning back to Mr Duan's appeal, it was asserted  in  the  grounds  of
    application that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  indicated  at  the
    hearing that Mr Goodman-Smith could not provide evidence on  behalf  of
    the appellant. Mr Goodman-Smith attended before the Upper Tribunal  and
    gave evidence to this effect, which Mr Deller  confirmed  was  not  the
    subject of challenge.

 4. I observe that at page 6 of  the  judge's  record  of  proceedings  the
    following is stated "Mr Roger wanted to add.  Supplen  replies  to  sp.
    Explained he cannot". During the determination the judge referred to Mr
    Niger Goodman-Smith as Roger Goodman-Smith [25]. As far as I have  been
    made aware there was no person in attendance at the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  named  'Roger'.  Consequently  I  infer  that  the
    reference to 'Mr Roger' at page 6 of the judge's record of  proceedings
    is in fact reference to Mr Nigel Goodman-Smith. On my  reading  of  the
    above record it supports the account  given  Mr  Goodman-Smith  of  the
    events said to have occurred before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Deller accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's refusal to  allow  Mr
    Goodman-Smith to give evidence had, in the circumstances of this  case,
    led to  procedural  unfairness  such  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination must be set aside and the appeal  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge
    Greasely.  This concession is entirely appropriate on the facts of this
    case. No good reason has been identified by the judge for  refusing  to
    allow Mr  Goodman-Smith  to  provide  evidence  and  there  is  nothing
    objectionable per se about a non-legal  representative  also  providing
    evidence to the Tribunal [see HH Serbia [2006] UKAIT 00063].

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Mr Duan  is  set
aside for the reasons set out above. Mr Duan's appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Greasley.

The hearing of the appeal has been listed for  4  November  2014  at  Hatton
Cross hearing centre.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 30 May 2014
