

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Appeal Number: IA307682015
                     IA307702015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
           Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 9 July 2017
              On 17 August 2017


                                   Before


                        DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between


                           1) HARPREET SINGH RALLA
                           2) KAMALJEET KAUR RALLA
                                 (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                          Appellants


          And

                            THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

 For the Appellant:    None
 For the Respondent:   Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
      been asked to make one and see no reason to do so.





Background

   2. This is an appeal against the  decision,  promulgated  on  24  October
      2016, of   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  K  Swinnerton  (hereafter  "the
      FTTJ").


   3. The Appellants, husband and wife, are both  nationals  of  India.  The
      First Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom (UK)  on  21  July  2009
      with entry clearance conferring leave to enter as a Tier  4  (General)
      student Migrant valid until 1 January 2013, and then until 30 November
      2014. His wife (the Second Appellant) was admitted to the  UK  as  his
      dependent on 12 March 2011. Also present in the UK is the  Appellants'
      child. I will address his circumstances later in this Decision.


   4. On 28 November 2014, the First Appellant applied for leave  to  remain
      on human rights grounds. On 2 September 2015, the  Respondent  refused
      the application. Central to the refusal was  the  allegation  that  in
      relation to the First Appellant's application made on 24 December 2012
      for further leave to  remain  as  a  student,  he  submitted  a  TOEIC
      certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS). It was  said  that
      ETS had undertaken a check of  his  test  and  had  confirmed  to  the
      Secretary of State that there was significant evidence to conclude the
      certificate was obtained fraudulently by use of a  proxy  test  taker.
      The scores from the test taken on 16 October 2012 at Stanford  College
      had been cancelled by ETS. The Respondent thus concluded in  light  of
      the deception  that  the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
      conducive  to  the  public  good.  She  further  concluded  that   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were not met,  and
      that, there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant  a  grant  of
      leave outside of the Rules.


   5. The Appellants duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In the Notice
      of Appeal the Appellants requested an oral hearing and the appeal  was
      listed to take place on 25 August 2016. By a letter  received  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal  from  the  Appellants  representatives  dated  22
      August 2016, the Appellants waived their right to an oral hearing  and
      requested that the appeal be decided upon the papers.  The  case  was,
      however, reinstated as an oral hearing as the  duty  judge  considered
      that a Home Officer Presenting Officer was required given  the  nature
      of the allegation of fraud against the First Appellant. The appeal was
      listed for oral hearing on 15 September 2016.


       The hearing before the FTTJ


   6. Before the FTTJ,  the  Respondent  was  represented  but  neither  the
      Appellants nor  their  representatives  attended.  Their  absence  was
      unremarkable  given  their  prior  indication  that  the   appeal   be
      determined on the papers. In dismissing the appeal, the FTTJ noted the
      generic evidence of Ms Rebecca Collins and Mr  Peter  Millington.  The
      FTTJ referred to SM and Qadir  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC)
      and noted the Upper  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  generic  evidence
      relied on by the Secretary of State  was  considered  to  suffer  from
      "multiple frailties". The FTTJ also noted that the First Appellant had
      not come forward with any evidence that he had in  fact  attended  the
      college in person to take the test. The FTTJ observed that  the  First
      Appellant had ample opportunity to do  this  and  noted  that  he  had
      elected not to give evidence at the hearing. The FTTJ  concluded  that
      the witness statements relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  were
      sufficient to discharge the burden on her. He thus concluded that  the
      TOEIC certificate was obtained fraudulently.


   7. The FTTJ went  on  to  consider  the  personal  circumstances  of  the
      Appellants and noted, in particular, that their  medical  records  did
      not indicate any significant medical  problems.  He  also  noted  that
      there was some documentation in relation to their 9-year-old son,  but
      noted that he had only lived in the UK for 3 years, and there  was  no
      evidence the Appellants would be unable to maintain a child  in  India
      where there was a functioning education system. In the  circumstances,
      the FTTJ concluded that a grant of leave outside of the Rules was  not
      appropriate.


       The grounds of application and permission to appeal


   8. In the grounds seeking permission, it was argued that the  full  scope
      of the Appellants case had not been considered  by  the  FTTJ  thereby
      giving rise to unfairness. Reference was made to additional Grounds of
      Appeal exhibited in the bundle of documents filed  with  the  Tribunal
      which the FFTJ failed to consider.

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge P Hollingworth granted permission to appeal,
      finding that it was arguable that there had been some unfairness.


  10. There is  a  Respondent's  Rule  24  response  formally  opposing  the
      Appellants' appeal, stating the FTTJ properly  directed  himself.  The
      Respondent noted however that she was unable to comment as to  whether
      there had been a material error of law as she was  not  privy  to  the
      documentation sent to the tribunal or to  any  correspondence  between
      the Appellants representatives and the tribunal.

  11. On 10 May 2017, a Notice of Hearing was served on all parties  of  the
      date, time and venue of the hearing. By letter of  25  May  2017,  the
      Appellants representatives came off the record stating the  Appellants
      wished to represent themselves. By further letter received on  1  June
      2017, the First Appellant advised the Upper Tribunal that he could not
      afford representation and requested  the  tribunal  to  determine  the
      appeal on the papers. By letter of the same date, the tribunal advised
      the First Appellant that there was no option to have a  paper  hearing
      and that his hearing would proceed accordingly on the date  scheduled.




    The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal


  12. At the hearing before me, the Respondent was represented by  Mr  Nath;
      the Appellants did  not  appear.  It  was  plain  from  the  foregoing
      correspondence that the Appellants were effectively  served  with  the
      Notice of Hearing. The First Appellant in his letter, received by  the
      tribunal on 1 June 2017, requested that his attendance be excused.  He
      stated that he, his wife and child were unwell. He was suffering  from
      depression. He denied  using  a  proxy  test  taker.  He  invited  the
      tribunal to determine his appeal. Accordingly, the  hearing  proceeded
      in the Appellants absence.

  13. Mr Nath submitted the FTTJ did not err in  law.  He  pointed  out  the
      First Appellant's failure to set out his case. The FFTJ  was  entitled
      to rely on the generic evidence. Mr Nath submitted that if  there  was
      an error it was not material. The FTTJ would  have  reached  the  same
      conclusion given the absence of an explanation. The  FTTJ  dealt  with
      the medical evidence and the circumstances relating to the child.  The
      grounds were incorrect in stating the child was born in the UK.


Decision on Error of Law

  14. I am satisfied the FTTJ materially erred in law. There is  no  dispute
      that before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellants filed a  bundle  of
      documents consisting of 91 pages. That  bundle  was  received  by  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  on  19  August  2016  and  contains  a  detailed
      statement of additional grounds setting out the Appellants' case  with
      supporting evidence. The FTTJ makes no reference to the  documentation
      submitted or the dates of submission, and thus it is  unclear  whether
      any of this documentation was considered. The brevity  of  the  FTTJ's
      findings suggests that it was  overlooked.  In  the  circumstances,  I
      cannot be satisfied that the full scope of the case adduced by  or  on
      behalf of the Appellants has been considered by the FTTJ. Accordingly,
      I am satisfied that an unfairness has arisen and that the decision  of
      the FTTJ cannot stand in the circumstances. I set aside  the  decision
      of the FTTJ.


  15. The Respondent orally at the hearing through Mr Nath, and the
      Appellants in their written representations of 1 June 2017, invited
      the tribunal to re-make the decision on the documentation before it.
      In the circumstances, it is appropriate to do so.


       Re-making the Decision


  16. In re-making the decision, I have considered the tribunal's bundle
      prepared for the purposes of this appeal, which contains the evidence
      relied upon by the Respondent, and the bundle filed on behalf of the
      Appellants received by the First-tier Tribunal on 19 August 2016
      consisting of 91 pages identified in the index thereto. I have
      assessed the evidence as at the date of hearing.


  17. The background is as follows. On  28  November  2014,  the  Appellants
      applied for leave to remain outside  of  the  Rules  on  human  rights
      grounds. The substance of the application is not particularised in any
      detail  in  the  application  form.  Nevertheless,  in  refusing   the
      application the Respondent considered the application both within  and
      outside of the Rules. She noted the Appellants  did  not  qualify  for
      leave under Appendix FM of the  Rules  as  they  failed  to  meet  the
      eligibility requirements thereof, and neither were they or their child
      qualifying persons as  defined  therein.  Further,  neither  Appellant
      qualified for leave on private life grounds under the Rules  as  their
      period of residence was insufficient,  and  there  would  be  no  very
      significant obstacles to their integration to  India  if  required  to
      leave the UK. In any event, the Respondent concluded that the presence
      of the First Appellant in the UK was not conducive to the public  good
      because he had perpetrated  a  deception,  as  confirmed  by  ETS,  by
      submitting a TOEIC certificate in support of an application made on 24
      December 2012.

  18. The Respondent finally considered whether there was any  reason(s)  to
      grant leave outside of the Rules on an exceptional basis. In doing so,
      she considered Article 8 of the ECHR and took into account section  55
      of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. It was  observed
      the Appellants' child was aged 9 and had been living in the UK  for  3
      years. It was noted the Appellants could return to  India  with  their
      child, and that they would be able to support him through a period  of
      readjustment. It was further noted the  child  would  have  access  to
      education in India. The Respondent concluded that  a  grant  of  leave
      outside the Rules was not therefore appropriate.


  19. The Appellants case is that the First Appellant sought leave to remain
      outside of the Rules for a "short period of time" in order to complete
      his studies in the UK. The First Appellant states  that  he  has  been
      unable to do so due to the suspension of the sponsor's licence(s).  He
      stated that he intended  to  remain  in  the  UK  for  a  limited  and
      temporary period (unspecified). He had  sufficient  funds  to  support
      himself without recourse to public funds.  He  argued  that  he  is  a
      genuine student and that preventing him from  completing  his  studies
      was a disproportionate interference with his private life  and/or  the
      Respondent should have exercised her discretion and her failure to  do
      so was unlawful.


  20. The First Appellant denied using a proxy to take the test  and  argued
      that the Respondent's reliance on generic evidence  was  unlawful.  He
      further stated that he was blind in one eye and that requiring him  to
      leave the UK would interfere with  his  medical  treatment  and  would
      place his life "in danger".  As for the Appellants child, it was  said
      that he was settled in school, he had spent all of his life in the  UK
      and that requiring him to leave would interfere with his education.


  21. Save for the allegation of deception, the burden of proof  is  on  the
      Appellants  to  establish  the  primary  facts  on  the   balance   of
      probabilities. I make the following primary findings of fact.


  22. There is no dispute the Appellants entered the UK  lawfully  and  that
      there stay thus far has been lawful. The Appellants have lived in  the
      UK for a period  of  7  (nearly  8)  and  6  years  respectively.  The
      immigration history of the child is less clear. There is no  reference
      to the child in the application  form  (or  the  original  grounds  of
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal). The Respondent however was plainly
      aware of the existence of a child as  she  briefly  touched  upon  the
      child's position in the refusal.


  23. At the hearing, I was  troubled  by  the  paucity  of  information  in
      respect of the child's immigration history and the  First  Appellant's
      claim that he was born in the UK and has lived here all his life, (see
      page  16  of  the  Appellants  bundle),  which  was  contrary  to  the
      Respondent's position that the child has lived in the UK for  3  years
      at the date of refusal (2 September 2015). While  Mr  Nath  was  given
      time to take instructions he was unable to furnish any information  in
      respect of the child. He was however correct to point out that as  the
      child was 9 years old at the date of  decision,  and  given  that  his
      mother did not enter the UK until 12 March 2011,  he  could  not  have
      been born in the UK. I find that view is likely to be correct  and  it
      is supported by the documentation in the Appellants bundle.


  24. The child's primary school reports from June 2011 to June 2015  record
      his date of birth as 29 September 2005. He is now 11  years  old.  The
      report of June 2011 is based on a four-week period of  attendance  and
      indicates the child was not enrolled until the week commencing 16  May
      2011. It is stated the child is developing his understanding  and  use
      of English and that the school had no previous school records to  draw
      upon.  A  letter  from  a  Dentist  further  confirms  the  child  was
      registered at the practice from October 2012. There is no  documentary
      evidence indicating the existence of the child in the UK prior to  May
      2011. The cumulative effect of the above is that the evidence strongly
      indicates the child is likely to have entered the UK with  his  mother
      in March 2011. I am not therefore satisfied and do not accept that the
      child was born in the UK and has lived here all his  life.  The  First
      Appellant's assertions to the contrary undermines his  credibility.  I
      find the child has lived in the UK since March 2011 and  that  he  has
      now been here for a period of 6 years.


  25. It is a significant part  of  the  First  Appellant's  case  that  the
      Respondent's decision "robbed" him of an opportunity to  complete  his
      studies in the UK and he complains that he should  have  been  granted
      discretionary leave to remain to allow him to do so. The  evidence  in
      respect of his studies is as follows.

  26. For the purposes of entry to the UK he applied to study a degree level
      qualification at Rayat London College. The course  commenced  in  July
      2009 and was expected to end in September  2012.  The  evidence  shows
      that he was unable to continue that course "due  to  his  progression"
      and he transferred  to  another  course  at  the  same  college  which
      commenced in October 2010 and ended in December 2012. While there  are
      copies of his March 2011 Examination Results, it is unclear whether he
      completed that course. In 2012, he applied  to  study  at  the  London
      Metropolitan College to follow a Post-Graduate Diploma in  Hospitality
      and Tourism Management. The course was due to commence in January 2013
      and end in July 2014. In support of that application he  relied  on  a
      TOEIC certificate issued by ETS. His speaking test score is  given  as
      180. There is evidence he completed the course in April 2014  and  the
      qualification was awarded in July 2014.

  27. The evidence does not indicate that the First Appellant's studies have
      been hampered through no fault  of  his  own.  On  the  contrary,  the
      evidence indicates that he successfully completed his last  course  in
      2014. There is no evidence that he has  or  intends  to  enroll  on  a
      further course or that he is part-way through a  course  that  he  has
      been unable to complete  by  dint  of  his  immigration  status  or  a
      suspension of the sponsor's license.

  28. The First Appellant further states that he cannot be expected to leave
      the UK whilst undergoing medical treatment. The only medical  evidence
      relating to any physical problem is a letter stating that  he  was  to
      undergo General Surgery in 2016  and  an  appointment  letter  for  an
      abdominal ultrasound also in 2016. There is no evidence of any ongoing
      issues or treatment. There is also no medical evidence  supportive  of
      the assertion that he suffers from depression and has  lost  sight  in
      one eye. I find that while the  First  Appellant  may  have  had  some
      medical issues in the past, there is  no  evidence  that  he  requires
      ongoing treatment. Should  it  be  the  case  that  he  is  undergoing
      treatment, there is no  evidence  that  a  temporary  interruption  in
      treatment will significantly affect his health if he  is  required  to
      leave or, that such treatment or medication would not be available  in
      India. In the circumstances, his claim  that  his  life  will  be  "in
      danger" if required to leave is one of considerable hyperbole.

  29. There is insufficient detail in  respect  of  the  Second  Appellant's
      circumstances. The relevance of 24 pages of her GP records are neither
      apparent or explained. While she seems to be in receipt  of  treatment
      for diabetes and other ailments, none of which appear to  be  serious,
      there is no evidence that any interruption to a course of treatment in
      the UK would cause a breach of her human rights or that such treatment
      could  not  for  whatever  reason  continue  in  India,  or  that  any
      medication required would be otherwise unavailable there.

  30. As for the child, while there are some appointment letters to  see  an
      Orthoptist, there is no evidence that he is  currently  being  treated
      for any medical condition or that he requires medication.

  31. I find that neither the Appellants or their child are  suffering  from
      any serious medical condition that would cause a serious impediment to
      their removal. Given the paucity and state of the evidence there are I
      find serious reasons to doubt the request of the First Appellant  that
      his absence at the hearing should be excused on medical grounds.

The ETS issue

  32. I next turn to deal with the Respondent's allegation of fraud.  It  is
      not necessary to repeat the history in relation to ETS cases  as  this
      is known to the parties and the information is widely available in the
      public domain. The subject matter has also been debated at  length  in
      cases reported by the Upper Tribunal and the Higher Courts. The burden
      of proof in respect of the allegation  of  deception  rests  with  the
      Respondent.  The  standard  of  proof  is  that  of   a   balance   of
      probabilities.


  33. Mr Nath confirmed that the sole evidence relied upon by the  Secretary
      of State in order to prove the allegation of deception was the generic
      witness statements of Ms Rebecca  Collins  and  Mr  Peter  Millington.
      Following questions from the Tribunal Mr Nath confirmed that there was
      no extract from the  "ETS  Lookup  Tool"  or  any  other  evidence  of
      deception specific to  the  First  Appellant,  but  he  submitted  the
      evidence of Ms Collins and Mr Millington was sufficient  to  discharge
      the burden on the Secretary of State.


  34. The first question that I must address  is  whether  the  Respondent's
      evidence can discharge the evidential burden at the initial  stage.  I
      note that in SM (supra) the Upper Tribunal held that the threshold for
      discharge is "modest", and that the evidential burden  was  discharged
      albeit by a narrow margin in that case [68]. The tribunal  also  found
      that the generic evidence suffered from "multiple  frailties"  and  it
      was described in Gazi v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) as being "lean  in
      detail" and produced by witnesses who "can lay claim  to  no  relevant
      credentials or expertise in the field of voice recognition"  and  were
      "self-serving."


  35. In these cases, the court was seized  of  evidence  that  specifically
      related to each individual concerned. By comparison, in this  case  no
      such material is before me. There is no extract from the  "ETS  Lookup
      Tool" or any other material specific to the First Appellant supportive
      of the claim that he employed a proxy test taker. I  observe  that  in
      the case of the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Shehzad &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615,  LJ  Beatson  (at  [30])  stated  that,  "in
      circumstances  where  the  generic  evidence  is  not  accompanied  by
      evidence showing that the individual under  consideration's  test  was
      categorised as "invalid", I consider that the Secretary of State faces
      a difficulty in respect  of  the  evidential  burden  at  the  initial
      stage." I respectfully concur with that view.  That  is  the  position
      before me and I cannot see how, without any specific evidence  showing
      the First Appellant's  test  was  categorised  as  invalid,  that  the
      generic evidence can be  found  to  be  sufficient  to  discharge  the
      evidential burden and I find accordingly. In the circumstances, I find
      that the burden does not shift to the First Appellant to put forth  an
      innocent  explanation.  It  follows  that  the  Respondent   has   not
      discharged the legal burden of proving deception in this case.


       The Immigration Rules


  36. The Appellants do  not  claim  that  they  meet  the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM or that they qualify for leave under any other category of
      the Rules. While they applied for  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
      Rules, the Respondent duly undertook a detailed consideration  of  the
      Rules and found the Appellants and their child  did  not  qualify  for
      leave for the  reasons  given  in  the  refusal.  Those  reasons  were
      summarised earlier and it is not  necessary  to  rehearse  them  again
      here. In view of the fact that there is no claim under the  Rules,  it
      is sufficient to say that I have considered the Rules for myself and I
      am satisfied and find that the Appellants do  not  qualify  for  leave
      under the Rules for the reasons given by the Respondent.


       Article 8 (ECHR)


      37.   The Appellants rely on Article 8 of the ECHR. The focus  of  the
      First Appellant's statement is essentially in respect of private  life
      that he has established while studying in the UK, but I shall endeavor
      to consider all relevant factors material to the human rights  of  the
      Appellants and their child.


  38. I accordingly proceed to examine the  issues  applying  the  five-step
      approach outlined in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  I have further
      borne in mind the judgements in, Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and  Beoku-Betts
      [2008] UKHL 39. I remind  myself  that  in  assessing  proportionality
      there is no separate test of exceptionality and I  must  consider  the
      Article 8 rights of all affected persons and not just the  Appellants.




  39. The Appellants and their  child  are  a  family  unit.  They  have  an
      established family life in the UK, however, as they  will  be  removed
      together, there will be no interference with family life. There is  no
      dispute that the  Appellants  and  their  child  are  likely  to  have
      established some semblance of a private life and that there will be an
      interference with private life in the event of a removal.


  40. I thus find that the decision interferes with the Appellants and their
      child's respective private lives. I also find that the decision is  in
      accordance with the law  and  pursues  a  legitimate  aim  namely  the
      economic wellbeing of  the  country.  The  issue  boils  down  to  the
      question of whether the Respondent's decision is proportionate. I find
      that it is for the following reasons.


  41. Whilst I am not mandated to consider the  issues  in  any  way  it  is
      sensible to consider the  best  interests  of  the  Appellants'  child
      first. What is in the best interests of the child must  be  considered
      as a primary consideration, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC4, with reference
      to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
      There is limited information about the circumstances of the child. The
      child like his parents is likely to be a national of India. He  is  11
      years old and has lived in the UK for 6 years. The period of residence
      is not significant and he is not a qualifying child under  the  Rules.
      He does not have any serious  health  issues.  There  is  insufficient
      evidence that the  child  has  developed  a  meaningful  private  life
      outside his school or family. It is not claimed that the child has  no
      ties with his country of nationality or that any contact  with  family
      members in India has not been maintained. I do not accept the evidence
      of the First Appellant that his  son  only  speaks  English  given  my
      concerns over his evidence.


  42. While his school reports show that he is  settled  in  school  and  is
      doing well, I am not  satisfied  that  this  dictates  that  his  best
      interests lie in remaining in the UK. There  is  no  evidence  that  a
      temporary disruption to the  child's  education  at  this  stage  will
      undermine his long-term prospects and, as the  Respondent  noted,  the
      child will have access to education in India. It may  not  be  of  the
      same standard of that in the UK, but that is not the point.  There  is
      no evidence that the educational system in India is wanting. I have no
      reason to believe that with the support of his parents  that  he  will
      not be able to adjust to life in India where he has  spent  the  first
      five and a half years of his life.


  43. The Appellants residence in the UK is relatively short. Other than the
      studies of the First Appellant there  is  insufficient  evidence  that
      either of them have established any meaningful ties  to  the  UK.  The
      First Appellant does not have a right to  study  in  the  UK.  He  has
      completed the last course he was enrolled on and there is insufficient
      evidence of further studies. Even if the First Appellant  has  engaged
      in further studies after he completed his course in 2014, he  confirms
      that the course ended in September 2015. I  find  therefore  that  the
      First Appellant has not been robbed of an opportunity to study in  the
      UK and his reliance on the Respondent's failure to exercise discretion
      in his favour and the authority of CDS (PBS: "available":  Article  8)
      Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC) is in the circumstances misconceived.


  44. Neither Appellant has established that they have any  serious  medical
      conditions that would warrant a grant of leave outside of the Rules.


  45. I must and do have regard to the public  interest  considerations  set
      out in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002. It is now made explicit by section 117B(1) that the  maintenance
      of effective immigration controls is in  the  public  interest.  I  am
      prepared to accept that the Appellants speak  English  and  are  self-
      sufficient. The public  interest  is  not  further  fortified  by  the
      presence of these factors. They are neutral factors. I am required  to
      attach little weight to the Appellants' private life established at  a
      time when their immigration status was precarious (section 117B(5)).


  46. I also take into account that the child is not to be  blamed  for  the
      conduct of his parents. However, I find that in this case considerable
      weight  must  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  of  maintaining
      immigration control. The Appellants have no basis to remain here under
      the Rules and the evidence does not show that there are any compelling
      reasons why the public interest in the maintenance of  firm  and  fair
      immigration control should not prevail.


  47. Weighing into the balance all of the above factors on either  side,  I
      find that this is a case where the balance lies  in  the  Respondent's
      favour.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed
                                                   Date: 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral












