
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/30139/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th November 2017                  |           On 28th November 2017      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mrs Roheena Arif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  her
    application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10th March 2017.  The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals
    with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on
    19th September 2017.

 3. It appears from the papers before me that the background to this appeal
    is that the Appellant and her husband made an application  for  further
    leave to remain which was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  20th
    February 2014.  The Appellant and her husband each had a separate right
    of appeal.  The husband exercised his right of appeal in time  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain on 17th  December
    2014 who allowed the husband's appeal on the basis  that  removing  him
    would amount to a disproportionate interference with  his  family  life
    given his dependency upon his two sons.  It appears that following that
    decision the Appellant wrote to the Secretary of  State  on  15th  July
    2015 requesting that she be granted leave to remain in line  with  that
    of her husband.  However that was refused by the Secretary of State  on
    the basis that the Appellant had not exercised her right of appeal  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not found the decision to remove
    her disproportionate.  The Appellant again wrote to  the  Secretary  of
    State on 11th August 2015 informing the Secretary  of  State  that  her
    husband had died. The Appellant lodged an out-of-time Notice of  Appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of  20  August  2015.   In  a
    decision of 18th January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Wolf decided to
    extend time.  The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    and was allowed.

 4. The Secretary of State challenges the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid on the grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to  identify  any
    Immigration  Rule  applicable  and  failed  to  give  any  reasons  for
    apparently allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The  judge
    appears to have relied upon the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain in relation to the Appellant's  husband's  appeal,  but  it  is
    contended by the Secretary of State that in his decision Judge  Hussain
    did not make any independent findings specific to the Appellant.  It is
    contended that the judge failed to identify or to give any  reasons  as
    to what in Judge Hussain's decision could  form  a  starting  point  in
    relation to the Appellant's appeal in the absence of findings  specific
    to her.  It is further contended that the instant appeal was an Article
    8 appeal and should have been considered at the date of the hearing but
    there appears to be  no  consideration  of  the  changed  circumstances
    particularly as the Appellant's husband is now deceased.  It is further
    contended that Judge Majid did not conduct any consideration of Article
    8 under the steps set out in the decision in R v SSHD ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  The  Secretary  of  State  contends  the  decision  is
    therefore fatally undermined  by  a  failure  to  have  regard  to  any
    relevant law and a failure to give reasons.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Raza accepted that there are errors of  law
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid but  contended  that
    these errors are not material.  He submitted that Judge Majid was right
    to have relied on the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain  as
    this was the correct starting point.

Error of law

 6. I have taken into account the submissions made by Mr Raza.   However  I
    cannot accept his submission that any errors are not  material.  In  my
    view the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  is  fatally
    undermined in a number of respects.

 7. Firstly this was an appeal under Article 8 and  Mr  Raza  has  accepted
    that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. However at paragraph 28 Judge Majid  decided  "I  am
    persuaded that the Appellant  comes  within  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules as amended and should have the benefit of discretion".  It is not
    clear here what Rules or discretion the judge was  referring  to.   The
    judge undertook no analysis of Article 8 through the steps set  out  in
    Razgar. Accordingly the judge has failed to consider the very basis  on
    which the appeal was brought.

 8. Another fundamental error in the judge's decision is that the basis  of
    the appeal is not clear from the decision. The judge set  out  what  he
    referred to as 'the dispositive factors' at paragraph 12. However  this
    paragraph refers to the Appellant wanting to visit her husband's  grave
    and not requiring a visa to visit London for that purpose. However  the
    background I have set out above indicates that this was a human  rights
    appeal from an Appellant who wants to remain in the UK with her family.
    There is no analysis of the fundamental part of the appeal. There is no
    proper explanation of the background or of the facts or of the  factors
    relevant to the judge's decision.

 9. A further issue is the apparent consideration of matters  not  relevant
    to the determination of this appeal.  For example at paragraphs  21  to
    28 the judge sets out a number of principles and issues which  have  no
    relevance to the determination of this appeal.

10. In considering the decision in this appeal I have taken account of  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in the case of MM and Others (unreported
    appeal number AA/06906/2014) which levels criticisms in relation  to  a
    number of decisions made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid.   I  take
    into account particularly paragraph 47 where the Tribunal says

         "We regard the body of his work that we have examined in the course
         of these appeals as wholly failing to meet the standards  that  are
         demanded by the office of a judge and expected by the parties.   As
         a result, every one of the decisions under appeal shows  errors  of
         law, in most cases serious error, in  most  case  multiple  serious
         errors.   Whether  the  decisions  are  looked   at   together   or
         separately, they show that nobody should assume  that  Judge  Majid
         has an adequate knowledge of the law of his task as  a  judge.   If
         his decisions continue to have the features we have  identified  in
         the foregoing examination, they are clearly open to criticism".

11. The decision in the  instant  appeal  does  contain  a  number  of  the
    paragraphs highlighted by the Tribunal in the case of MM and  therefore
    does have a number of features identified in that case as demonstrating
    the wrong approach on the part of the judge.

12. Considering the decision in the instant appeal I find that the decision
    discloses the material errors of law identified above which are capable
    of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  In these circumstances and, as
    no findings of fact have been made, I set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Given the fundamental nature of the  errors
    of law found and the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  her
    claim properly determined I consider it necessary for the appeal to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law.

I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 27th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
