
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December 2015                |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  E. T. E.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Bureau for
                    Migrant Advice & Policy


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Given orally on 15 December 2015)

1.   The appellant, Miss E.T.E., who is a citizen of St Lucia, is a  4  year
    old girl.  She was born in St Lucia  and  lived  with  her  mother  and
    grandmother after her  parents'  relationship  had  broken  down.   Her
    father formed a new relationship with a lady who is a  British  citizen
    and in 2012 they were married.  Her father secured leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of that marriage and in May 2013  he  moved
    to the United Kingdom and is now settled with her, living  as  man  and
    wife in the United Kingdom.

2.   Meanwhile the health of the appellant's mother, who for some  time  had
    suffered from a progressive condition, was deteriorating.   That  meant
    that the  appellant's  grandmother  continued  to  care  both  for  the
    appellant and for her mother.   In  December  2013  the  appellant  was
    brought to the United Kingdom by  a  family  friend.   Both  had  entry
    clearance as visitors.  The intention was a  respite  visit  but  after
    their arrival the health of the appellant's mother deteriorated further
    as a result of which an application was made for the  appellant  to  be
    granted leave to remain with her father and  stepmother  so  that  they
    could live together as a family unit in the United Kingdom.

3.   The application was refused in a decision made  by  the  respondent  on
    16th July 2014, the respondent's position being that there was no  good
    reason  why  the  applicant  could  not  return  to  St   Lucia   where
    arrangements for her to be cared for could continue as before.

4.   The appeal came before Judge Khawar on 2nd June  2015  and  he  allowed
    the appeal on the basis that the appellant met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and so was entitled to a grant of leave.  He  allowed
    the appeal also on human rights grounds giving no real separate reasons
    for so doing.

5.   The respondent has been granted permission  to  appeal  effectively  on
    two grounds, the first being that the judge had  failed  to  appreciate
    the threshold of the legal test to be applied and therefore  had  taken
    an approach that was insufficiently  rigorous,  and  secondly  that  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 he had given inadequate reasons. In
    fact it is hard to see that any reasons really were given at all.

6.   The Rule in play with which we are concerned  is  E-LTRC.1.6,  which  I
    need to set out.  The requirement is as follows:

         'One of the applicant's parents (referred to in this Section as the
         'applicant's parent') must be in the UK and have leave to enter  or
         remain or indefinite leave to remain, or is at the same time  being
         granted leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain,  under  this
         Appendix (except as an adult dependent  relative),  and  there  are
         serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
         exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable  arrangements  have
         been made for the child's care.'

    It has not been suggested that the final limb of that requirement is in
    issue.

7.   In advancing the Secretary of State's case Mr Jarvis  relies  upon  the
    reported decision of Mundeba (s.55  and  para  297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT
    00088 (IAC).  This is  a  decision  by  Blake  J.  sitting  with  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dawson.  At paragraph 34 the Tribunal  said  this  about
    the test which was in play in this case, or in analogous terms  in  any
    event:

         "In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than  the
         parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.  'Compelling'
         in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates considerations that
         are persuasive and  powerful.   'Serious'  read  with  'compelling'
         together indicate that the family or  other  considerations  render
         the exclusion of the child from  the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.
         The analysis is one of degree and kind.    Such  an  interpretation
         sets a high threshold that excludes cases where, without  more,  it
         is simply the wish of parties to be together however  natural  that
         ambition that may be."

8.   Mr Jarvis submits that it was simply not open to the judge to  find  on
    the evidence that this demanding test  was  met.   In  his  submission,
    effectively the judge should have found on the evidence that as  things
    were going along pretty much as before, the position would be the  same
    and therefore there was no unmet needs that demanded a grant  of  leave
    in this case.

9.   Mr Jacobs on the other hand submits that before the judge was  a  broad
    range of evidence from those who  were  well-placed  to  speak  of  the
    difficulties that will be facing the applicant on  her  return.   There
    was oral evidence from her father and from her stepmother.   There  was
    evidence from the grandmother and from the mother in written form  from
    St Lucia.  There was evidence from a relative  named  [KF],  who  is  a
    registered nurse and has qualifications which the judge set  out.   Her
    evidence included this:

         "As a health professional I will add that due to the  unpredictable
         nature of hyperthyroidism it is not possible to  make  arrangements
         for [EAE] when [her mother] suddenly falls ill.  The  situation  is
         not only unsafe but also unhealthy and traumatising to the child."

10.  The judge, significantly, heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    father and stepmother and had  regard  to  a  range  of  other  written
    evidence which I have been referred to.  Mr Jacobs took me to  part  of
    the 90 pages or so of medical evidence documenting emergency admissions
    and ongoing treatment incidents  relating  to  the  appellant's  mother
    being taken to hospital in a state of unconsciousness and other  events
    which plainly gave rise to  challenging  difficulties  for  this  small
    child.

11.  This led the judge to findings at paragraph 23 of his judgment which  I
    shall reproduce.  Before doing so I should say that he also had  regard
    to a letter dated 21st November 2014 from Dr Ulric Mondesir,  who  said
    this:

         "This is a letter of confirmation that 35 year old female [EG] is a
         diagnosed  case  of  severe   Graves   Disease   (thyro-toxicosis),
         associated with an episode of a thyroid  storm  which  is  a  life-
         threatening complication.  [EG]'s  symptomology  is  punctuated  by
         episodes of exacerbation of her  thyro-toxicosis  which  makes  her
         undoubtedly unfit healthwise to care for her 4 year old [EAE]."

    And finally, in oral evidence the judge was told that  the  appellant's
    mother was in the midst of such a thyroid storm and was presently an in-
    patient in hospital.

12.  The conclusion reached at paragraph 23 of the judgment was as follows:

         "While the aforesaid medical report is  somewhat  brief  and  lacks
         detail, I am satisfied on the evidence before me and  to  at  least
         the civil standard of proof, that of a  balance  of  probabilities,
         that the appellant's mother is not in a medically fit state  to  be
         able to continue  to  look  after  the  appellant.   Accordingly  I
         conclude that there is more than  adequate  evidence  to  establish
         that the appellant meets the  criteria  set  out  in  paragraph  E-
         LTRC.1.6(c) of Appendix FM - that there are serious and  compelling
         family or other considerations which make the exclusion of a  child
         undesirable and  suitable  arrangements  have  been  made  for  the
         child's care in the United Kingdom."

    This was essentially a fact-based  assessment  and  the  judge,  having
    heard oral evidence  as  well  as  having  reviewed  a  wide  range  of
    documentary evidence, was best placed to make it.

13.  In doing so, in  my  judgment,  he  left  out  of  account  nothing  of
    significance and had regard to  no  immaterial  considerations.   I  do
    recognise though that this may well not  have  been  the  only  outcome
    possible on the facts.  In Mukarkar v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, at paragraph  40,  Carnwath  LJ  said,
    albeit in a slightly different context  but  with  an  eye  on  such  a
    factual assessment exercise:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the nature of  such  judgments  that  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing).  The mere fact  that
         one Tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new.  Nor does it create any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist Tribunal should be respected."

    That in my judgment is the position here.

14.  Mr Jarvis has carefully  identified  and  illustrated  the  legal  test
    applicable that has to be satisfied for a  sustainable  finding  to  be
    made that there exist serious and compelling circumstances such  as  to
    meet the demanding test in the Rule with which we are concerned.  But I
    find it impossible to say that the conclusion of the  judge  that  this
    had been established on the evidence in this case, the evidence which I
    have referred to only in part,  was  irrational  or  otherwise  legally
    unsustainable.  Therefore his decision to allow the  appeal  under  the
    Rules discloses no legal error.

15.  Given that conclusion it is perhaps unnecessary to say very much  about
    the second challenge pursued against the conclusion  of  the  judge  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds despite saying as he did  in  his
    judgment that he did not propose to consider that claim in any  detail.
    It simply did not follow inevitably that the appeal had to  be  allowed
    on Article 8 grounds as a consequence of the claim succeeding under the
    Rules and so it was an error of law for the judge to  proceed  in  that
    way.  However, that error was not  material  to  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal because of what I said about the conclusion under the grounds.

Notice of Decision

For these reasons the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 15 January 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

