
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/30819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2017                            |On 23 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [F S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, of Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ghaffar  promulgated  on  10
    November 2016, in which the appeal against her decision  of  17  August
    2015, to refuse [FS] leave to remain on the basis of private  life  was
    allowed   under   the   Immigration   Rules   pursuant   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv). For ease, I continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, with [FS] as the Appellant and the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in the United Kingdom on [ ]
    2008. At the date of hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she  was  8
    years old.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  set  out  in
    Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.  Specifically,  her  parents  were
    Nigerian nationals, present unlawfully in the United Kingdom, such that
    the child route was not available to her.

 4. In relation to the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  while  it
    was accepted the Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom continuously
    for at  least  seven  years,  it  was  stated  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return to her country of origin with  her
    parents.

 5.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and, in doing so, took into account  her  duty  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  to
    consider the best interests  of  the  Appellant  as  a  child.  It  was
    considered that the family would return to  Nigeria  together  and  the
    Appellant would be able to continue her education there, and that,  she
    remained familiar with the culture. There was nothing to  suggest  that
    her parents would be unable to maintain and provide for their  daughter
    on return.

 6. Judge Ghaffar allowed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10
    November 2016.  Before him, were witness statements from the Appellant,
    her mother (who also gave oral evidence) and her  uncle.  The  evidence
    before the Judge was that the Appellant's father left the family as  of
    June 2015 and his whereabouts were unknown. The  Appellant  was  living
    with her mother and uncle. She was born in the United Kingdom  and  had
    no ties to Nigeria. She was scared and  saddened  by  the  prospect  of
    having to leave the United Kingdom. The Appellant's mother had no  job,
    family, employment or monies to secure accommodation  in  Nigeria.  The
    Appellant's mother entered the United Kingdom in February 2006 to visit
    her brother-in-law. Her husband was already in the United  Kingdom.  He
    had entered on a visit visa  and  overstayed.  The  Appellant's  mother
    discovered that she was pregnant and decided that it was too  dangerous
    for her to travel to Nigeria in her condition. Following the birth, the
    Appellant developed breathing  problems  and  has  been  on  medication
    since.

 7. In respect of the Immigration Rules, it was found  that  the  Appellant
    satisfied the requirements set out in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  as  she
    had, at the date of application,  been  continuously  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years and it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    her to leave and return to Nigeria. This is because she had resided  in
    the United Kingdom since birth and had spent all her school life  being
    educated here. She was excelling academically. Her only  connection  to
    Nigeria was through her nationality. The Appellant had no relatives  in
    Nigeria. Her parents were in the United  Kingdom.  Her  mother  had  an
    outstanding  application  that  was  submitted  ten  months  after  the
    Appellant lodged her application. The delay had not been explained. The
    Appellant's father had not participated in her  life  since  2015.  The
    Appellant was not to be blamed for the poor immigration history of  her
    parents.

 8.  Against  that  backdrop,  Judge  Ghaffar  found  that  it   would   be
    unreasonable to expect  the  Appellant  to  return  to  Nigeria.  Judge
    Ghaffar accordingly allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and
    stated that it was not therefore necessary to consider  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds contrary to Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

The appeal

 9. The Respondent's grounds of appeal are brief and state as follows:

    "Judge Ghaffar has failed to properly assess the  "best  interests"  of
    the appellant and has failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that
    it would be unreasonable for the  A  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  her
    mother."

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osbourne
    on 24 April 2017.

11. At the hearing, Mr Nath relied on the written  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted briefly, that the Judge had not considered the best interests
    of the child and that paragraph [17]  and  [18]  of  the  decision  was
    inadequately reasoned.

12. In response, Mr Solomon for the Appellant submitted that there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision and  that  adequate  reasons  had
    been provided. He submitted that the Immigration Rules were  Article  8
    compliant and that it was implicit the  Judge  considered  the  child's
    best  interests.  Mr  Solomon  referred  to  various  passages  in   MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined
    family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) and submitted that the
    Judge adopted the correct approach. Mr Solomon further  submitted  that
    if there was an error it was not material.

13. In reply, Mr Nath submitted the Judge  was  required  to  consider  the
    Appellant's private life. He reiterated the Judge  had  not  spelt  out
    what was in the Appellant's best interests.

Discussion

14. The applicable Immigration Rule in contention in  this  appeal  is  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1), which  so  far  as  is  relevant,
    provides as follows:


    "the requirements to be met by an applicant to leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK that at the date of application,  the
    applicant;
       i) ...
      ii) ...
     iii) ...
     iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for at least seven years (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; ..."

15. There was no dispute and the Judge accepted that the Appellant was born
    and had resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than  seven
    years  at  the  date  of  application.  Thus,  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules, concerned the sole issue of whether it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

16. Lord Justice Elias in MA  (Pakistan)  made  the  following  preliminary
    observations about paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (and section 117B (6)) at [13]:

    "... First, they  are  similarly  framed:  both  require  seven  years'
    residence  and  in  both  the  critical  question  is  whether  it   is
    unreasonable for the child to be expected to leave the UK.  Second, the
    concept of seven years' residence may not be  calculated  in  precisely
    the same way in the two provisions.  Rule 276ADE (1) states in terms of
    the period must be assessed as at the date  of  application.   However,
    the Secretary of State conceded that as a result of  section  85(4)  of
    the 2002 Act, the relevant date for the purpose of section 117B is  the
    later date when the court is making a determination.  We have acted  on
    the assumption that this is correct.  Third, only the child  can  apply
    under rule  276ADE(1)(iv),  whereas  section  117B  is  concerned  with
    article 8 applications under which both the child and the  parents  can
    apply.  Fourth, rule 276ADE is concerned with applications made on  the
    basis of private life, whereas  claims  article  8  may  rely  on  both
    private and family life.  Fifth, it is in  my  judgement  a  legitimate
    assumption that the question whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave should be approached in the same way  in  each  context,
    and no party has sought contend otherwise."

17. Lord Justice Elias went on to hold that the concept  of  reasonableness
    required regard to be had to the conduct of the applicant and any other
    matters relevant to the public interest, but that where the  seven-year
    rule was satisfied, it was a factor of some weighing in favour of leave
    to remain to be granted and at [46] stated thus:

    "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that a  child
    has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight  when
    carrying out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed,  the  Secretary  of
    State published guidance in August 2015  in  the  form  of  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)
    and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that
    once the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there need to
    be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing  leave   (para.   11.2.4).   These
    instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to  appeal
    were determined, but in my view they merely confirm what is implicit in
    adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period of time the child
    will have put down roots and developed social, cultural and educational
    links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive  if  the
    child is required to leave the  UK.  That  may  be  less  so  when  the
    children are very young because the focus of their  lives  will  be  on
    their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as  they  get
    older. Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong expectation
    that the child's best interests will be to remain in the  UK  with  his
    parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
    consideration in the proportionality assessment."

18.   In PD, a Presidential panel of the tribunal stated thus:

      "39. We remind ourselves that the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
      reasonableness.  Other legal tests which have gained much currency  in
      this  sphere  during  recent   years   -   insurmountable   obstacles,
      exceptional  circumstances,  very  compelling  factors   -   have   no
      application in the exercise we are  performing.   Self-evidently,  the
      test of reasonableness poses a less exacting and  demanding  threshold
      than that posed by the other tests mentioned.

      40. Judicial decision making in the sphere of immigration  and  asylum
      law is rarely straightforward.  The present appeals are  no  exception
      in  this  respect.  We  consider   that   the   application   of   the
      reasonableness test involves a  balance  of  all  material  facts  and
      considerations.  The application  of  this  test  will  invariably  be
      intensely fact sensitive, see EB (Kosovo)  v Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41, at [7] - [12], per  Lord  Bingham.
      Ultimately, the factors to which we give determinative weight are  the
      length of the third Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  (some
      11 years), which has spanned three quarters  of  his  life;  his  deep
      immersion in all aspects of life in this country; the  critical  stage
      of his personal and educational development which  has  been  reached;
      his minimal connections with his country of origin; and the likelihood
      that he will make a useful contribution to United Kingdom society."

19. In the present case, Judge Ghaffar found that the Appellant  was  fully
    integrated into life in the United Kingdom. She had spent all her  life
    here and was excelling  academically  at  school.  He  referred  to  MA
    (Pakistan) and PD and noted the  Appellant  had  "participated  in  the
    United Kingdom culture, values, pastimes,  living  standards,  language
    and the prevailing education system". Conversely, the Judge  noted  the
    Appellant's connections to Nigeria was "minimal"; she had no  relatives
    or  support  in  Nigeria.  The  Judge  further  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom for more than  seven  years
    must  be  given  significant  weight.  The  Judge  factored  into   his
    assessment the "poor" immigration histories of her parents to which  no
    blame could be attached to her, and the fact that  the  mother  had  an
    outstanding application.

20. I find that in substance, there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  of  the  Appellant  under  the
    Immigration Rules, for the reasons given by Judge Ghaffar following  an
    assessment of the reasonableness of expecting the  Appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. That assessment  considered  and  gave  appropriate
    weight to all relevant  factors  including  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's parents. I reject the submission  that  inadequate  reasons
    were  provided.  While  the  Judge's  decision  could  have  been  more
    structured and detailed, his findings and reasoning  at  [13]-[14]  and
    [17]-[18] are adequate and are fully supported by the evidence set  out
    at [5]-[8]. While the  Judge  did  not  expressly  refer  to  the  best
    interests of the child, I am not satisfied that this is an error or, if
    it is, that it is material. The  Respondent's  guidance  confirms  that
    "the criteria set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) reflect  the  duty  in
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the UK, by which we mean their best  interests."  That  supports
    the submission of Mr Solomon that the best interests' assessment is  an
    intrinsic part of the applicable Immigration Rule and thus  it  can  be
    inferred  that  the  Judge's  findings  are  supportive  of   such   an
    assessment. Even if the Judge had given voice to the expression,  I  am
    satisfied given his findings in respect of the Appellant's  integration
    and education and her lack of ties to Nigeria supported by the evidence
    of her mother which he fully accepted, the likely conclusion would have
    been is that the best interests of the child  were  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

21. Notwithstanding, it does not automatically follow that  leave  must  be
    granted whenever the child's best interests are in favour of  remaining
    - the best interests assessment  does  not  automatically  resolve  the
    reasonableness question (see paragraph  47  of  MA  (Pakistan)).  Judge
    Ghaffar took into account  the  wider  public  interest  considerations
    including the parents' immigration histories and the  circumstances  in
    Nigeria and the United Kingdom. In my judgement, the limited criticisms
    to his approach do not identify a material error of law. It may be that
    another Judge would have reached a contra conclusion, but the  question
    is whether this Judge reached a conclusion which was not open to him. I
    am not satisfied that he did.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error  of  law.  The  Respondent's  appeal  is  dismissed.  The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





Signed                            Date       15 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



