
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30635/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 February 2019                       |On 01 March 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  ZOYA RIAZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar of West Midlands Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By a decision handed down on 25 September  2018  the  Upper  Tribunal
       found an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge who allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 4 May 1989. The appeal
       had been allowed outside the Immigration Rules but was challenged  on
       the basis the Judge failed to give adequate weight to the Rules  when
       making the proportionality assessment. The issue that  arose  in  the
       appeal was the inability of the appellant to show she could meet  the
       English language requirements and had failed to provide  evidence  of
       compelling reasons as to why she should be excused from doing  so  or
       to warrant consideration of the matter outside the Rules.

    3. The appeal was adjourned following the finding of  an  error  of  law
       with an extended period being allowed to  permit  the  appellant  the
       opportunity to arrange and take the requisite English language  test.
       The appellant did so and provided both to the respondent and Tribunal
       a copy of a certificate issued on 14 December  2018  confirming  that
       she had been awarded a Grade 3 qualification in spoken English (GESE)
       equivalent to Entry Level Certificate in ESOL International  Speaking
       and Listening (Entry 2) and CEFR Level A2.1, with distinction.

    4. The original decision of the respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's
       application has not been  shown  to  be  unlawful  in  light  of  the
       inability of the appellant to satisfy  an  important  aspect  of  the
       Rules.

    5. It was accepted by Mrs Aboni that the production of the  certificate,
       establishing the minimum language requirement has now been satisfied,
       meant the appellant would now be able to meet the requirements of the
       Rules. It was, accordingly, accepted that in  the  circumstances  now
       prevailing it was appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to substitute  a
       decision allowing the appeal pursuant to article 8 ECHR; as there  is
       no provision following the introduction of the Immigration  Act  2014
       to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    6. In  light  of  recent  developments  coupled  with  the  respondent's
       findings in the  original  decision  and  acceptance  by  the  Senior
       Presenting Officer of the situation appertaining at the date  of  the
       hearing, this Tribunal finds that any interference with the protected
       family and/or private life of the appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom
       will not be proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon.

Decision

    7. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed pursuant  to
       article 8 ECHR.

  Anonymity.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 February 2019
