
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/30001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 February 2016             |On 28th April 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                         MR ABIDUR RAHMAN CHOUDHURY
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     no appearance
For the respondent:    Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh, born  on  27  April  2014
   appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  14  July  2014  to
   refuse him leave to remain in  United  Kingdom  outside  the  Immigration
   Rules and pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  North  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a
   determination promulgated on 21 October 2014.


2. Permission to appeal was  first  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Chohan on 21 January 2015 and later  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge McGinty on 24 April 2015 stating that  it  was  arguable  that  the
   Judge made a material error of law with respect to its application of the
   case of Chickwamba [2008]  UK  HL  42  in  not  considering  whether  the
   appellant provided  sufficient  documents  to  be  able  to  satisfy  the
   Immigration Rules "under appendix FM-SE in respect of his  wife's  income
   before the Judge of the first-tier Tribunal in considering their  article
   8 claim, before Chikwamba considerations applied  to  the  assessment  of
   proportionality".


3. Before the hearing, a letter from the appellant's  representative  stated
   that the appellant cannot attend the hearing because he is not  well.  No
   medical certificate was  enclosed.  There  was  no  appearance  from  the
   representatives although they did not mention that they would also not be
   attending. I therefore proceeded with the appeal  and  heard  submissions
   from the Home Office presenting officer. I have taken  into  account  the
   documents in the grounds of appeal on behalf of the appellant's case.

4. The Judge at paragraph 10-20 made findings of  fact.  He  made  it  clear
   that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the immigration  rules
   and then went on to consider his claim under  Article  8  in  respect  of
   family and private life. The judge took into account all the  factors  at
   play and concluded that it would be entirely proportionate to remove  the
   appellant.


5. The Judge took into account that the appellant's partner's was a  British
   citizen settled in the United Kingdom. The judge noted that she gave oral
   evidence that she had last visited Bangladesh  13  years  previously  and
   that she presently worked as a paralegal at a firm of solicitors and  was
   hoping to qualify as a legal executive. He also  noted  in  the  evidence
   section of his determination that the appellant's  partner  did  not  see
   herself settling in Bangladesh because of her profession  and  family  in
   this country.


6. The judge stated at paragraph 12 that he  has  considered  whether  there
   are any exceptional circumstances, which warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom. He took into account at paragraph  17  that
   it would be reasonable for the appellant to return to Bangladesh and make
   an application to enter  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge  recorded  the
   position of the Home Office which was that it was wrong for the judge  to
   assume that the evidential requirements of an entry clearance application
   would be met by the appellant. The judge agreed with this. He  said  that
   he was not satisfied that an application of entry clearance is  therefore
   a mere formality and there are no sensible reasons for the  appellant  to
   make an application for Bangladesh.  He  stated  that  it  would  not  be
   unreasonable for the appellant to return to Bangladesh  and  to  make  an
   application of entry clearance in the normal way as either  financier  or
   spouse.


7. I find that there is no material error of law  as  the  Judge  considered
   all the factors relevant. The Judge properly took into account  the  case
   of Chikwamba and applied  the  principles  therein.  The  length  of  any
   separation of the parties did not have to be specifically  considered  as
   there are no children. Even if he did not specifically take into  account
   the length and degree of family disruption, in the  appellant's  case  as
   there are no children and therefore it is not a material error.


8. The judge found that the interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for
   family life of both parties to the marriage required by  the  refusal  of
   this application is proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  the  United
   Kingdom  in  its  economic  well-being  and  maintenance  of  immigration
   control.


9. The comments of Elias LJ, in Hayat versus  Secretary  of  State  for  the
   Home Department, bolsters my conclusion. It states that the situation  is
   fact sensitive and there may be circumstances  where  there  would  be  a
   disruption to family life with particular importance where  children  are
   involved. This was not the position in the instant appeal.


10. The grounds are a mere disagreement with the findings made by the  Judge
   who considered all the  evidence  and  applied  the  correct  burden  and
   standard of proof. The Judge directed himself properly.

11. I find that there is no error of law in the determination of the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge and I uphold the decision.





   Decision


   Appeal dismissed


   I make no anonymity direction
   I make no fee order





Signed by,

    Dated this 26th day of April 2016
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

.............................................

Mrs S Chana

