
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30500/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2014                               |On 6th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              Miss Sally Touray
                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Gambia born  on  26th  January  1990.
    The Appellant's immigration history  is  extensive.   She  was  granted
    entry clearance originally on 2nd January 2002 as the  dependant  of  a
    student.  Thereafter her immigration history is set out in some  detail
    both in the notice letter of the Secretary of  State  dated  11th  July
    2013 and thereafter in an immigration chronology provided by  the  Home
    Office dated 30th April 2014.  The Appellant's  final  application  was
    made on her behalf by her then instructed solicitors Gracelands on 29th
    May 2013.  That application sought leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of her  private  life.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by notice of refusal dated 11th July 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Seelhoff sitting at Hatton Cross on 23rd April 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated on 14th May 2014 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed under the Immigration Rules on the ground of private  life  and
    in the alternative under Article 8 outside the Rules.

 3. On 22nd May the Secretary of  State  lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Grounds of Appeal allege two material mistakes of law:

    (i)  That the Tribunal erred in law in finding that the  Appellant  had
         completed ten years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom and,

    (ii) that the Tribunal had erred in law in its approach to the  Article
         8 assessment.

    In particular it was contended that following Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC) the Article 8 assessment is only to be carried out when there are
    compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules.  The Secretary of
    State contends in the Grounds of  Appeal  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
    identify such compelling circumstances and its findings  are  therefore
    unsustainable.

 4. On 2nd June 2014 Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  granted
    permission to appeal.  He considered that all  grounds  were  arguable.
    Following standard directions being issued by the Tribunal I note  that
    the Appellant's  legal  representatives  have  not  served  a  Rule  24
    response.

 5. The  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  successful.
    Strictly speaking therefore the Secretary of State should  be  referred
    to as the Appellant as this is the Secretary of State's appeal  however
    for the sake of continuity throughout these  proceedings  and  for  the
    purpose of this determination Miss Sally Touray is referred to  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State the Respondent.

 6. The appeal comes before me firstly to determine whether or not there is
    a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The Appellant appears  in  person.   She  initially  sought  an
    adjournment and I explained to  her  the  nature  of  the  proceedings.
    After giving the matter due thought however the Appellant withdrew that
    request and indicated that she was prepared to proceed in  the  absence
    of legal representatives and  to  rely  on  her  own  submissions.   Mr
    Bramble did not oppose this approach on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 7. Whilst before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant contended (she  was
    legally represented at that hearing) that she met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(v) namely,

         "Is aged 18 years or above and under 25 and has spent at least half
         of his (her) life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting  any
         periods of imprisonment)."

 8. At paragraph 18 of his  determination  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had spent twelve years and two months of her life in  the  UK
    and that she was still under the age of 25 and that those facts are not
    contentious and accordingly the only  issue  was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's absences from the UK could  be  treated  as  breaching  the
    period of continuous residence.  The judge went on to set out paragraph
    276A(a) of the Immigration Rules which  sought  to  define  "continuous
    residence".

 9. Mr Bramble points out that when the matter came before  Judge  Seelhoff
    he indicated at the end of the proceedings that he sought clarification
    with regard to the Appellant's immigration history  and  this  prompted
    the Home Office letter of 30th April 2014 which set  out  the  detailed
    chronology of the Appellant's history.  From  that  letter  Mr  Bramble
    points out that it is clear that the Secretary of State's case is  that
    the Appellant was granted leave on 12th November 2007 to  remain  as  a
    student until 31st October 2008 but that thereafter the  Appellant  was
    without leave until she received entry clearance to enter the UK  as  a
    Tier 4 Student from 25th February 2011.  Consequently the Secretary  of
    State's position was that for a minimum period of at  least  two  years
    three months between 31st October  2008  and  25th  February  2011  the
    Appellant did not have leave to be in the UK albeit that the  Secretary
    of State acknowledges that on 6th January 2011 the  Appellant  returned
    to Gambia for the purpose of submitting a fresh application as a Tier 4
    Student.

10. Mr Bramble acknowledges that the chronology as set out from the view of
    the Secretary of State is  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant in her witness statement of 18th  April  2014
    in particular paragraph 2 where she states,

         "My visa was extended as a student until October 2008.   I  further
         made an in-time application to extend my visa.   I  thought  I  did
         everything right and was expecting my passport  and  visa  back  as
         usual.  This was the first time I made the application  myself  and
         which required the issue of biometric."

    He submits that the letter was provided by the Secretary  of  State  at
    the judge's behest and once that letter was available the judge drafted
    his determination.  He takes me to paragraph 21  of  the  determination
    pointing out that the judge states therein,

         "The difficulty I have with this letter is that it  is  unsupported
         by  copies  of  the  alleged  decision  letters   or   notices   of
         invalidation.  The language of the letter referring to applications
         being rejected is unclear as to whether what is meant is a refusal,
         or an invalidation of an application.  I am  unable  to  treat  the
         letter as anything other than  an  assertion  by  a  party  to  the
         proceedings."

11. It is the view of Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that
    bearing in mind the letter had been provided  to  assist  the  Tribunal
    post-hearing that if the judge was  not  happy  with  that  letter  the
    Secretary of State should have been given the  opportunity  to  provide
    the evidence that the judge says was  lacking.   He  submits  that  the
    judge should have found that there is no continuity and  that  to  give
    weight to the letter in the manner in which he has done was to create a
    scenario of procedural unfairness to the Secretary of State.

12. However further he states that the judge has not properly looked in any
    event at all of the facts and he  takes  me  to  paragraph  24  of  the
    determination.  He submits the judge has merely accepted the  assertion
    made by the Appellant that there was a further application in 2008 when
    the Secretary of State clearly states that there was not and  that  the
    judge has accepted the assertion without  supportive  evidence  and  he
    submits that those factors create a material  error  which  affect  the
    whole decision.  He asks me to find that there are material  errors  of
    law, to set aside the decision and to remit  the  matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

13. Miss Touray indicates that she understands what has been said but  that
    she did make her application and that she has spent the majority of her
    life in the UK, that she has no  connection  whatsoever  now  with  the
    Gambia and that she even went so far as to return to the Gambia to make
    her further application so as to ensure  that  she  complied  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  She is uncertain what further steps,  if  any,  she
    could possibly have taken.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

16. The manner in which this appeal has been addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does, on the way in which it is put to me, cause  me  concern.
    I acknowledge that the historical immigration history of the  Appellant
    is  crucial  and  that  the  judge  appears  to  have  sought   further
    clarification by way of a letter from the Home Office.  The end product
    of that appears to have been the letter of 30th April  2014  which  was
    forwarded to the judge along with a copy to the Appellant's  instructed
    solicitors.  The judge has drawn conclusions based on  that  letter  to
    the effect that as the Secretary of State  has  not  attached  to  that
    letter  copies  of  the  alleged  decision  letters   or   notices   of
    invalidation that he is unable to do anything further  than  treat  the
    letter  as  anything  other  than  an  assertion  by  a  party  to  the
    proceedings and he goes on so far as to say what he needed to see  were
    copies of the decision letters or  the  Home  Office  case  notes  that
    clarified what the decisions actually were and that if the applications
    were invalidated the Respondent would need  to  prove  that  they  were
    correctly invalidated.

17. The author of the letter was the Home Office Presenting Officer  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Bramble is adamant that on no occasion was
    the Secretary of State  asked  to  produce  the  additional  supportive
    documentation merely a detailed chronology and that it  does  not  fall
    well for the judge to then draw conclusions when the Secretary of State
    has provided the information that was requested without going  back  to
    the Secretary of State and seeking that further documentation.  Such  a
    scenario in my view constitutes a procedural unfairness.

18. Further it is not appropriate to ask for further  documentation  to  be
    provided and  then  not  to  give  the  Appellant  the  opportunity  to
    challenge it.  I acknowledge the copy of the letter  was  sent  to  the
    Appellant's solicitors but for what I understand is  financial  reasons
    she is not in a position to retain their instruction at present and has
    sought fit to attend on her own.

19. The Appellant is adamant that  she  submitted  a  further  application.
    There is clearly a conflict of evidence which has not been resolved nor
    I am satisfied by the manner in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge set
    about reaching his conclusions has a full and proper  opportunity  been
    given firstly to the Secretary of State to show  that  the  contentions
    they make with regard to the periods when the Appellant  did  not  have
    valid leave are appropriate and alternatively for the Appellant to show
    that she meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(v).

20. Such a failing in my view undermines the whole  determination.   It  is
    consequently appropriate to find that there is a material error of  law
    and to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  to  remit
    the matter back to Hatton Cross for hearing on all  issues  before  any
    Immigration Judge other than Judge Seelhoff.

21. I consequently in the decision of this determination set out directions
    for the continuance of this matter.  It is of course a matter  for  the
    Appellant as to whether she is or is not  legally  represented  at  any
    future hearing.  Bearing in mind that this will be a rehearing  of  the
    matter i.e. that the case is remitted with none of the findings of fact
    to stand back to the First-tier Tribunal it would probably  be  in  her
    best interest for legal representation to appear on her behalf.

Decision and Directions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law.  The decision is consequently set aside and none of  the  findings
    of fact are to stand.

 2. The matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  at
    Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours.  The appeal is to be heard before any Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Seelhoff.

 3. That both parties do file at the Tribunal and serve on the other  party
    at least 14 days pre-hearing a copy of such further bundle of documents
    upon which they seek to  rely  at  the  rehearing.   Such  bundle  must
    include (but not exclusively) all documentary evidence relating to  the
    Appellant's previous applications for visas and  the  outcome  of  such
    applications upon which they seek to rely in maintaining or challenging
    whether the Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(v)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. It is accepted by the Tribunal that the appeal extant before the First-
    tier Tribunal is  both  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    potentially thereafter an appeal outside the Immigration Rules pursuant
    to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.   It  is
    expected that all  submissions  and  documentation  will  address  both
    issues.

 5. No interpreter is required.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  Rule
45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


