
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/30052/2014
                                                               IA/30053/2014
                                                               IA/30054/2014
                                                               IA/30055/2014
                                                               IA/32219/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DANIEL AMANOR PECKU
                             JEANNETTE EKU BOHAM
                             RONALD OTUTEY PECKU
                              IVAN OTUTEI PECKU
                            JUSTIN ORELEANS PECKU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Anthony, French & Company Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are husband, wife and their three children. They are all
    nationals of Ghana. They appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decisions of the Secretary of State of 14 July 2014 to refuse their
    applications for leave to remain on the  basis  of  their  private  and
    family life in the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha  allowed  their
    appeals and the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. The first appellant entered the UK in  1999  and  claimed  asylum,  his
    application was refused in May 2002. The second appellant  was  granted
    entry clearance as a visitor in 2002 and claims to have entered the  UK
    in 2003 and remained here ever since. The children were born in the  UK
    in 2004 (third appellant), 2012  (fourth  appellant)  and  2006  (fifth
    appellant). Therefore at the time of  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the third appellant was 10 years old and the  fifth  appellant
    was 8 years old. The First-tier Tribunal Judge firstly considered  each
    of the appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules. He  found  that
    the first and second appellants could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE. He found that the two elder children (the  third  and
    fifth appellants) had been living in the UK continuously for at least 7
    years and that it would not be reasonable to expect them to  leave  the
    UK. He then found that removal of the parents and younger  child  would
    not be a proportionate interference with their  right  to  private  and
    family life in the UK and allowed their appeals under Article 8.

 4. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in that focussing  on
    the educational situation of the children. It  is  contended  that  the
    Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874
    made clear that the desirability of being educated  in  the  UK  cannot
    outweigh the benefit to children of remaining with their  parents.  The
    Secretary of State also contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to undertake consideration  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the
    appeal. It is contended that the Judge erred in his assessment  of  the
    best interests of the children by concentrating only on the  children's
    length of residence rather than all of the factors set out in MK  (best
    interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC). The third ground  of
    appeal is that these errors  affected  the  proportionality  assessment
    which was further in error because the Judge treated section 117  B  as
    determinative.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Melvin submitted that the  main  thrust  of
    the grounds of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    properly consider the removal of the family together,  he  has  singled
    out the children. He submitted that the Judge failed to have regard  to
    the fact that the family have not had leave to remain  since  2003  and
    that they had no leave to remain when the application was  made  or  at
    the time of the hearing. He submitted that the Judge failed to take  as
    his starting point the fact that it is in the  best  interests  of  the
    family to remain together. He submitted that  DP5/96  which  the  Judge
    considered is not longer applicable and that the Judge  should  instead
    have had regard to current case law.

 6. Ms Anthony submitted that the proportionality assessment under  Article
    8 is not a part of the reasonableness assessment under paragraph 276ADE
    of  the  Immigration  Rules.  She  submitted  that  the  case   of   EV
    (Philippines) is relevant to an Article  8  assessment  and  not  to  a
    decision as to 'reasonableness' under paragraph 276ADE.  She  submitted
    that the first question for the Judge was whether  the  appellants  met
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. She  submitted  that  it  is
    clear that the Judge considered  all  of  the  evidence  and  that  the
    conclusion he reached was open to him  on  that  evidence.  Ms  Anthony
    submitted that the decision read as a whole showed that the  Judge  had
    in fact had regard to the factors set out in the case law and  did  not
    have regard to only one factor. She accepted that  the  Judge  did  not
    mention  section  117B  (5)  in  the  proportionality  assessment   but
    submitted that it is clear that he had in mind that the family are here
    unlawfully (section 117B (4)) which encompasses presence here which  is
    precarious therefore she submitted the error is not material.

 7. In response Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  Judge's  findings  are  not
    sufficiently clear and that there is no finding dealing with all of the
    relevant considerations.

Error of Law

 8. Mr Melvin relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Azimi-Moayed
    and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC) in support of his submission that  the  starting  point  is
    that the best interests of children is to remain with their family.  In
    that case the Tribunal summarised its findings in relation to decisions
    affecting children in the head note as follows;

         "Decisions affecting children

         (1) The case law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the following
         principles to assist in the determination of appeals where children
         are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children
             to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

             iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

             v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave
             or the reasonable expectation of leave  to  enter  or  remain,
             while claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely  to  give
             rise to private life deserving of respect in  the  absence  of
             exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the  economic
             well-being of society amply justifies removal in such cases."

 9. Mr Melvin relied on paragraph  (1)  (i).  However  that  case  is  very
    different from the instant appeal as in that case the family  had  been
    residing in the UK for a period of only two months at the date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The guidance given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  also
    makes clear at paragraph (1) (iii) and  (iv)  of  the  head  note  that
    lengthy  residence  (which  has  been  identified  as   seven   years),
    particularly from the age of four,  can  lead  to  the  development  of
    social and educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,
    in the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.

10. In EV (Philippines) Christopher Clarke LJ said;

         "35.     A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
         into account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

11. Lewison LJ said;

         "58.     In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

         59.      On the facts of ZH it was not  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because  the
         family would be separated and the children would be deprived of the
         right to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60.      That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

12. On the facts of EV (Philippines) the family had been in the UK for four
    years at the time of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  so  there
    was no issue there as to the length of residence of the children of the
    family. The court identified relevant factors to be taken into  account
    in the context of the assessment of the best interests of the child  in
    the proportionality exercise. In MK the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on
    the factors to be considered when undertaking an assessment of the best
    interests of the child in the context of an Article  8  proportionality
    assessment. However as Ms  Anthony  rightly  submitted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in this  case  was  firstly  required  to  consider  the
    children's  appeals  under  the  Immigration   Rules   which   requires
    determination of a different question from that of proportionality.

13. In the present case the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  firstly  considered
    the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules. This was the  correct
    approach being the current approach in light of the current case law in
    relation to Article 8 and the Immigration Rules. The  Judge  considered
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules in relation  to  each  family
    member. Having found that the parents could not establish  a  right  to
    stay under paragraph 276ADE he considered each of  the  children  under
    that provision. I do not see how he could have gone straight to Article
    8 in relation to the claimed private lives of the children; this  would
    surely have amounted to an  error  of  law.  In  considering  paragraph
    276ADE in relation  to  the  children  the  relevant  provision  is  as
    follows;

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i) does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             ...

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; ..."

14. The Judge had therefore  to  determine,  in  relation  to  each  child,
    whether it would be reasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the  UK.  In
    considering that question the Judge took account of the fact  that  the
    oldest child was then over the age of 10 and his brother was  over  the
    age of 7, that they are well integrated into British society  and  well
    established in mainstream education in the UK [27]. He took account  of
    the fact that they have been living in the UK  for  at  least  7  years
    [33].  Although not expressly stated as a factor in the  reasonableness
    assessment I accept that the Judge had evidence  before  him  that  the
    parents do not have family left in Ghana [25-26]. I  also  accept  that
    the Judge took account of the fact that the children were all  born  in
    the UK and the parents have not told them that they do not have  status
    in the UK to protect them from being disrupted [42]. It is  also  clear
    that he took account of the  fact  that  there  are  no  countervailing
    factors. I accept that these are all relevant factors along  the  lines
    of those identified in EV (Philippines).   I  accept  that  an  overall
    reading of the determination is required to establish  that  the  Judge
    took account of all relevant factors in considering the application  of
    paragraph 276ADE. However I also recognise that the wording  of  276ADE
    (iv) states only that the child should have lived continuously  in  the
    UK for at least 7 years and that it would not be 'reasonable' to expect
    the child to leave the UK. The Judge  decided,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him, that it would not be reasonable  for  two  of  the
    children to leave the UK based mainly on their length of residence  and
    establishment in the education system here. I find that this conclusion
    was open to the Judge on the evidence before  him  in  the  context  of
    paragraph 276ADE (iv).

15. Having made that finding the Judge was entitled to take it into account
    in assessing the proportionality of the interference with  the  private
    and family life of  the  parents  and  younger  child.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to weigh this as a significant factor  in  their  favour.  The
    Judge did take into account the considerations in section  117B.  I  do
    not accept that the Judge  can  be  criticised  for  not  referring  to
    section 117B (5) when he had already taken into account section 117B(4)
    which is more relevant given that the parents were overstayers and were
    therefore here unlawfully rather than having  'precarious'  immigration
    status whilst establishing their private and family  life.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge therefore  did  take  account  of  the  immigration
    status of the family when assessing proportionality. The Judge properly
    considered, as he was required to do under section 117B (6),  that  the
    parents have a genuine relationship with children who has lived in  the
    UK for over 7 years and that he  had  decided  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

16. I am satisfied that the conclusions reached by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge were open to him on the basis of the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed      Date: 27 April 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


