
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9th March 2015                    |On 24th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                           OLOLADE KAMALDEEN AJOSE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adejumobi, Legal Representative of Immigration
                    Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 2nd December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal De Haney  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to revoke a residence card issued  to
    the appellant as an extended  family  member  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of paragraph 8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. In summarising the grounds of application Judge Andrew  noted  that  it
    was contended that the  judge  had  not  considered  Article  8  issues
    despite these being raised in a skeleton argument before  him  and  the
    grounds of  appeal.   Judge  Andrew  considered  this  amounted  to  an
    arguable error on a point of law.

 3. At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  in
    relation to the claimed error on a point of law and  then  reserved  my
    decision which I now give.

Claimed Error on a Point of Law

 4. Mr Adejumobi drew my attention to the bundle of documents submitted  on
    13th February 2015 which contained a copy of relevant parts of the 2006
    Regulations, particularly Schedule 1 which refers to  Section  84(1)(a)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, giving a right  of
    appeal on human rights grounds to appeals brought under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  He also referred me to  his
    skeleton  argument  making  that  point  and  providing  copies  of  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 and Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Reg 15A(3)(c)
    2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC) in support of the argument  that
    the judge should have dealt with the Article 8 claim raised.

 5. Mr Adejumobi also put it to me that he thought the Upper  Tribunal  was
    about to produce a decision  relating  to  the  issue  in  this  appeal
    although, at the date of preparing this decision, no precedent on  this
    matter has been put before me.

 6. In his grounds  of  appeal  Mr  Adejumobi  refers  to  the  passage  at
    paragraph 43 of Ahmed quoting  submissions  by  Counsel  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and paragraph 79  of  that  decision  in  which  the  Tribunal
    allowed that appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds on  the  basis  that  the
    Court of Appeal decision in JM (Liberia) entitled them to do so.

 7. Mr Harrison drew my attention to the response  of  12th  December  2014
    which quotes from the letter of revocation by the respondent dated  7th
    February  2014.  This,  he  contended,  made  it  clear  that  although
    arrangements should be made for  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and that if he did not do so voluntarily, his  departure  might
    be enforced, he would first be contacted again  and  given  a  separate
    opportunity to make representations against the proposed removal.

 8. The respondent argues that, as no removal was being  considered,  there
    was no need for the Tribunal to conduct an Article 8 analysis at  first
    instance.  The response  also  refers  to  the  decision  in  R  (Daley
    Murdock) [2011] EWCA Civ 161 and also Patel UKSC 72 [2013] which, it is
    argued, showed that the respondent did not  have  to  issue  a  removal
    decision with an immigration decision.  The respondent emphasises that,
    when  a  removal  decision  comes,  an  appellant  would   have   ample
    opportunity to make representations on why he should not be required to
    leave the United Kingdom.  It was therefore submitted that there was no
    material error in the decision of  Judge  De  Haney  as  there  was  no
    prejudice to the appellant in him not dealing  with  the  human  rights
    claim.

 9. Mr Adejumobi did not expand upon his initial  submissions  although  he
    requested that, if an error were found, the matter should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing a fresh as the Article  8  issue
    had not been dealt with.  No issue was taken that the appellant was not
    entitled to a residence card.

Conclusions and Reasons

10. The decision shows that  the  judge  was  aware  that  the  appellant's
    representative, both in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  in  a  skeleton
    argument, wished to proceed on the basis of an alleged infringement  of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights.  It is also evident,  from  the  case
    law to which the appellant's representative has  already  referred  and
    the provision of Schedule 1 to the 2006  Regulations,  that  the  judge
    could have proceeded to deal with Article 8 issues.  I am not satisfied
    that the reference to paragraph 43  of  Ahmed  (which  only  refers  to
    submissions made by Counsel before the Upper  Tribunal)  obligates  the
    First-tier Tribunal to hear an Article 8 claim in all appeals to  which
    the 2006 Regulations apply although the Tribunal in Ahmed did not  feel
    constrained in allowing the Article 8 appeal.  Such a course of  action
    is also consistent with JM (Liberia) where it was concluded, in effect,
    that where an  immigration  decision  in  question  gives  rise  to  an
    imminent threat of removal and thus an imminent potential violation  of
    ECHR rights, the Tribunal is obliged to deal with it.

11. However, I conclude that the issue before me  is  whether  or  not  the
    judge was materially in error in failing to deal  with  the  Article  8
    claim in circumstances where, as stated in the revocation letter itself
    of 7th February 2014, the appellant was told (page 2) that:

         "As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay in  the  United
         Kingdom you should now make arrangements to leave.  If you fail  to
         do so voluntarily your departure may be enforced.  In that event we
         would first contact  you  again  and  you  would  have  a  separate
         opportunity to make representations against the proposed removal."

12. In the response the  respondent  has  emphasised  that  the  revocation
    letter showed that no removal was currently being considered and  there
    was therefore no need for the Tribunal to conduct an  Article  8  human
    rights exercise.  The appellant would have the opportunity to bring his
    human rights claim if and when removal directions were issued.

13. With the above in mind, I am led to conclude that the  judge's  failure
    to deal with the Article 8 claim put before him is not material as  the
    appellant has suffered no prejudice thereby.  That is  because  of  the
    future opportunity clearly given to the appellant to bring such a claim
    if and  when  a  decision  to  remove  him  is  formally  made  by  the
    respondent.  At that stage the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  can  be
    considered in the light of all the circumstances which then  appertain.
    Therefore, I do not conclude that the judge's  decision  amounts  to  a
    material error and can stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  was  one
requested before me.



Signed        Date 23rd April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
