
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30888/2014
                                                               IA/30891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2015                               |On 22 April 2015             |
|Prepared on 20 March 2015                     |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                REHMENA KHAN
                                 HASHIR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1.  The  Appellants  are  mother  and  son.  Both  are   citizens   of
         Afghanistan,  although  they  also  have  rights  of  residence  in
         Pakistan. The First Appellant grew up  in  Pakistan,  and  she  was
         living in Pakistan when she first met  her  husband,  Mr  Habib,  a
         citizen of Afghanistan, who  also  has  a  right  of  residence  in
         Pakistan. The couple married in Pakistan in 2008, and Mr Habib  was
         able to visit her there and live with her as her husband. He did so
         on a number of occasions between 2008 and 2013.

      2. Mr Habib presently enjoys a grant of DLR in the UK, expiring on  20
         November 2016.  The Appellants entered the UK as family visitors in
         December 2013,  following  a  successful  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
         against the refusal of their applications  for  a  visa.  It  would
         appear that the entry clearance officer's suspicions  as  to  their
         motives were entirely justified, for on 13 May 2014 the  Appellants
         applied for a variation of their leave to remain. In  the  meantime
         the First Appellant had borne Mr Habib a second  child  in  January
         2014. The Appellants' applications were refused on 18 July 2014.

      3. The Appellants brought appeals against the immigration decisions of
         18 July 2014 and they were heard on 21 October 2014, and  dismissed
         in a Determination promulgated on 31 October  2014  by  First  Tier
         Tribunal Judge Mark-Bell. His conclusion, based upon the admissions
         made to him in evidence, was  that  there  had  been  a  deliberate
         attempt to circumvent the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,
         and to deceive the ECO, and that the Appellants had always intended
         to attempt to settle in the UK [16].

      4. By a decision of  Designated  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
         Garratt dated 5 January 2015 the First Tier  Tribunal  granted  the
         Appellants permission to appeal on the basis it  was  arguable  the
         Judge had erred in his approach to  the  proposed  removal  of  the
         Appellants to Afghanistan, and  not  to  Pakistan  where  they  had
         previously lived.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission
         on 15 January 2015 in which she argued that there was no  error  of
         law. The Judge  was  entitled  to  note  that  the  Appellants  had
         Pakistani residence cards, and that Pakistan was their  country  of
         habitual residence, and that they could therefore move to  Pakistan
         if they wished to do so. Their husband/father had no settled status
         in the UK (and was not a British citizen as claimed) and could live
         with them if he chose to do so.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The grounds

      7. On any view the grounds are not well drafted  and  have  served  to
         obscure the Appellants' case, and true circumstances,  rather  than
         to focus upon and seek to identify an arguable error of law.

      8. Thus it is now accepted that the husband of  the  First  Appellant,
         and father of the Second Appellant is not a British citizen as  was
         asserted in the grounds (although not at  the  hearing  before  the
         Judge).

      9. Contrary to the complaints made in  the  grounds  it  is  also  now
         accepted that the Judge made no error in approaching the appeals as
         he did, on the basis that Mr Habib was  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan
         with a right of residence in Pakistan,  and  with  DLR  in  the  UK
         expiring in November 2016.

     10. The grounds, and indeed the grant of permission,  assume  that  the
         Respondent  has  made  removal  decisions  in   relation   to   the
         Appellants. It is well arguable that  the  Notices  of  Immigration
         Decision issued to the Appellants and dated 18 July 2014 contain no
         such decision, formally identified  in  the  usual  way.  The  only
         reference to any decision having been made pursuant to s47 is under
         the heading of "right of appeal".

     11. Assuming however that removal decisions were made  in  relation  to
         the Appellants, the Judge was perfectly entitled  to  look  at  the
         position of  the  Appellants  as  he  did.  They  are  citizens  of
         Afghanistan with a longstanding right  of  residence  in  Pakistan,
         which they have enjoyed for very many  years,  and  which  a  large
         number of their extended family continue  to  enjoy.  The  evidence
         points overwhelmingly to Pakistan being  the  country  of  habitual
         residence for the Appellants; even if they have not yet naturalised
         as citizens of Pakistan. Ms Cleghorn  accepts  that  there  was  no
         evidence that would have allowed the Judge to  conclude  that  they
         had lost the right of residence in Pakistan  by  the  date  of  the
         appeal.

     12. Accordingly there was no error  in  the  Judge  proceeding  on  the
         footing that it was at all material times open to the Appellants to
         return in safety from the  UK  to  Pakistan,  as  indeed  they  had
         undoubtedly  declared  an  intention  to  do  in   their   original
         applications for  a  family  visitor  visa,  and  their  subsequent
         appeals to the Tribunal.

     13. Even if the Appellants were to continue to refuse to leave  the  UK
         voluntarily, as Ms Cleghorn  argued  upon  instructions  that  they
         would do, it would be open to the Respondent to remove them  either
         to Afghanistan, or to Pakistan. It would be her election. In either
         event, Ms Cleghorn accepted that Mr Habib could travel with them in
         safety, so that there was no reason for either  the  Respondent  or
         the Judge to assume  in  the  Appellants'  favour  that  the  First
         Appellant would be returned to Afghanistan as a  single  mother  of
         infant children, and without male protection.

     14. The Appellants conceded before the Judge that they could  not  make
         out the requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules  [8],
         and also  accepted  that  their  removal  from  the  UK  should  be
         considered in the context of a removal to Pakistan  [9].  That  was
         the basis upon which the Judge approached the  appeals,  and  there
         was in the circumstances of these appeals no arguable error of  law
         in his doing so.

     15. It follows that there was no  error  in  the  Judge's  decision  to
         dismiss the appeals under the Immigration Rules, and  his  decision
         to that effect must be confirmed.

     16. Now was there any error in the Judge's approach to  the  Article  8
         appeals. The decision to remove the Appellants would  not  pose  an
         interference in the "family life" they enjoyed together, or with Mr
         Habib, since they would be removed together  and  he  was  free  to
         travel with them. He could live with them full time in Pakistan, or
         he could revert to the pattern of visits to them that he  has  made
         historically, but either way he could do so in  safety,  and  these
         removals  could  not  be  said  to  be  disproportionate  in  these
         circumstances.

     17. To the extent  that  it  could  be  argued  the  removal  decisions
         constituted interference in the "private lives" of the  Appellants,
         Ms Cleghorn realistically accepted that she could find  no  support
         for the positions of the Appellants in the decision of the  Supreme
         Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72, or the guidance to be  found  in  EV
         (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

     18. In short therefore this was a decision which properly took  account
         of all the material  facts,  properly  applied  ss117A-D,  and  the
         relevant jurisprudence, and discloses no material error of law. The
         decision on proportionality was one that was well open to the Judge
         on the findings of fact he made, which were in  turn  made  on  the
         basis of admissions in the course of evidence. The children of this
         couple have no right, or legitimate expectation,  to  education  at
         public expense in the UK, and  their  best  interests  are  plainly
         served by growing up with their mother who has no right  to  remain
         in the UK. To sum up then, the appeals do not rely  upon  the  core
         concepts of moral and  physical  integrity.  In  my  judgement  the
         evidence  relied  upon  does  not  establish  that  there  are  any
         compelling compassionate circumstances that mean  the  decision  to
         remove the Appellants, leads to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 31 October 2014 did not involve the making of an error of law in
         the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeals  and  those  decisions  are
         accordingly confirmed.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated  20 March 2015
