
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/30307/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |                Decision & Reasons      |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 16 November 2017                 |                On 7 December 2017      |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                              fahmid khan milky
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, of Counsel instructed by PGA Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Davey who in a determination promulgated on  29
    November 2016 dismissed the appeal of the appellant against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave to remain on human rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 29 October  1989.   He
    came to Britain in January 2009 with entry clearance as a student valid
    until 31 May 2011.  His leave was extended but then curtailed  and  his
    appeal against the decision to curtail was  dismissed  on  14  November
    2014.  On 27 November 2014 he applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of private and family life.   That  was  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal. After a judicial review application he was  again  refused  but
    this time was granted a right of appeal.

4.    The appellant met the sponsor, his wife, in September  2011  and  they
    were married in July 2014.  The judge noted that  at  the  hearing  the
    sponsor was fourteen weeks pregnant and  expecting  their  first  child
    towards the end of 2016.  The judge noted  that  the  sponsor  and  her
    parents, although of Bangladeshi origin,  were  British  nationals  and
    that she had been born and brought  up  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant's wife had made one unsuccessful visit  to  Bangladesh  which
    she had found "thoroughly objectionable".  She  had  gone  through  the
    British education system, obtaining  a  degree  and  was  in  full-time
    employment, subject to maternity leave.  He noted that it was  asserted
    that her family had no direct ties either by family  or  property  with
    Bangladesh.

5.    The appellant stated that  he  had  no  property  or  family  ties  in
    Bangladesh which would provide him with support  or  assistance  there.
    The sponsor had, the judge found, a well-paid job in the United Kingdom
    and "no prospects of being in work and having to care for  a  child  in
    due course (sic) ".  He noted that she had said  that  she  needed  the
    family support that she has in the United Kingdom with the  arrival  of
    her first child but he went on to say that "it is not accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant and sponsor could not make a life
    for themselves in Bangladesh".

6.   In paragraph 9 the judge  said  that  the  appellant  could  return  to
    Bangladesh but added :-

         "I do however regard, in the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the
         evidence that it would be unreasonable to  expect  the  sponsor  to
         move to Bangladesh.  In the light of her current pregnancy, and the
         uncertainties for accommodation, hospital arrangements,  management
         of her pregnancy and those steps necessary to  set  up  a  home  in
         Bangladesh she may  chose  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  at
         present.  She cannot be removed, as a British national.  It is  the
         sponsor's choice that it is undesirable for her to make a life with
         her partner in Bangladesh.  I accept that  she  has  a  significant
         income working in the United Kingdom, whatever arrangements may  be
         made during maternity, and that is likely to continue in her  work.
         In the circumstances I do not find there are, on the evidence,  any
         insurmountable   obstacles   for   the   appellant   returning   to
         Bangladesh."

7.   In the following paragraph he wrote:-

         "10. I note it is accepted by the  respondent  that  the  appellant
             meets   the   suitability   requirements   of   paragraph   R-
             LTRP.1.1.(d)(i),  and  it  is  accepted  that  he  meets   the
             eligibility requirements of paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).   I
             find that as a fact by reference to qualifications under leave
             to remain, that EX.1. needs to be  considered.   I  find  that
             there is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
             appellant and his wife who is in the United Kingdom, a British
             citizen settled in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  there  are  no
             insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the
             United Kingdom.  I consider the  circumstances  in  which  she
             currently is a pregnant lady, without family support or social
             network in Bangladesh for her to move, her circumstances could
             or would entail serious hardship for her  in  Bangladesh.   On
             the evidence before me, which was not substantially challenged
             by the Presenting Officer, I do not  find  the  appellant  has
             family members  in  Bangladesh  to  whom  he  could  turn  for
             funding, employment or support."

8.   The judge went on to say that  the  effect  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    would make it very difficult for the appellant, married  or  not  to  a
    British national, to remain in the United Kingdom.   He  said  that  it
    might seem harsh that a person of British origin who has known nothing,
    effectively, other than life in the United Kingdom, should be  expected
    to relocate when they do not want to but that marriage and family  life
    were their choice.  He concluded that:-

         "Accordingly, I find that the appellant  meets  the  provisions  of
         paragraph D-LTRP.1.3 with reference  to  paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1.(d),
         but not under paragraphs EX.1. or EX.2. of Appendix FM."


9.   He also found that the appellant could not succeed  under  the  private
    life provisions of the Rules.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

10.  The grounds of appeal referred to the fact  that the  judge,   when  he
    had stated that the circumstances in which the sponsor   lived  -  that
    she was pregnant and without family support and  a  social  network  in
    Bangladesh had found that  her  circumstances  could  or  would  entail
    serious hardship for her in Bangladesh.  They argued that  that  showed
    that the judge found that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to go to Bangladesh and it was stated the judge, in the light
    of those findings, had failed to give sufficient reasons for concluding
    that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  relationship
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.   The  grounds  stated  that  in
    light of the earlier findings the conclusion of the judge was perverse.



11.  It was also argued that the judge had failed to make a  proper  Article
    8 consideration or whether  or  not  it  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's family and private  life  to  require
    him to be separated from his wife in the period of time that  it  would
    take to make an application for entry clearance.

12.  Permission was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ford  who
    focused on the finding of the First-tier Judge that  he  did  not  find
    that there was any evidence of any  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the
    appellant returning to Bangladesh and stated that that was a wrong test
    under Appendix FM, EX.1.(b) of the Rules.

13.  At the hearing before me Ms Reid argued that the judge  had  not  given
    reasons for concluding that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the sponsor living with the appellant in  Bangladesh  given  his  other
    findings including that she would face serious  hardship  there.   That
    she argued is a material  error  of  law.   Moreover  she  argued  that
    clearly  there  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference   in   the
    appellant's Article 8 rights if the appellant were required  to  return
    to Bangladesh.   She stated that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    arguments in the skeleton argument before him where reference had  been
    made to the determination of the Tribunal in Chen [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC)
    which referred to the formal requirement of obtaining  entry  clearance
    being reduced if there would be a significant interference with  family
    life by temporary removal and distinguishing between  situations  where
    children were not involved and those where the rights of children  were
    involved.  Where children  were  involved  the  determination  in  Chen
    stated:

         "It would be easier to show that the individual circumstances  fall
         within a minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang  or  the
         exceptions referred to in the judgments of the ECtHR rather than in
         the latter case."


14.  She emphasised that this was not a case where the  appellant  had  been
    considered to have used deception. She  referred  to  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter, at paragraph 10,  where  it  was  stated  that  "it  is
    accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the  suitability  requirements  of
    paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i)" and in paragraph 11 of the letter where it
    was accepted he met the eligibility requirements of R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).



15.  In reply Mr Tufan emphasised that the appellant's situation in  Britain
    was precarious and referred to the judgment in  Agyarko  [2017]  WLR(D)
    126 [2017] UKSC 11  where  at  paragraphs  33  the  Supreme  Court  has
    endorsed the comment that in a situation where one party was  reluctant
    to  relocate  to  continue  family  life  that  would  not   constitute
    insurmountable obstacles.   He  stated  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    sponsor was used to Bangladeshi culture.  In any event  the  child  was
    not born at the time of the hearing.  He accepted that there  was  some
    evidence that the financial requirements of the Rules for marriage were
    met but stated that the appellant  could  not  succeed  in  a  marriage
    application because of the status requirements.  He relied on the  Rule
    24 statement which said that there was merely a typing error  when  the
    judge said that the circumstances in which the sponsor was living would
    mean that her circumstances could, or would  "entail  serious  hardship
    for her in Bangladesh".

16.  I have considered the determination of  the  judge.   I  consider  that
    there is a material error of law therein.  I do not accept the argument
    in the Rule 24 statement that there is merely a typographical error  in
    paragraph 9 of the determination. I reach that conclusion on the  basis
    that the judge has given in the determination a number of  reasons  why
    he finds that the sponsor would have difficulties living in Bangladesh.
     I therefore consider that his conclusion is illogical as  I  take  the
    view  that  serious  hardships  and  "insurmountable  obstacles"   have
    distinct overlap in meaning and it is therefore not clear why the judge
    should find that the requirements of paragraph EX.1. were not  met.   I
    therefore set aside his decision.

17.   In remaking the decision I take into account  the  clear  findings  of
    the judge regarding the difficulties which the sponsor  would  face  if
    forced to go to Bangladesh with her child as I consider it is  relevant
    to consider, on human rights grounds the situation as it is  now.   Not
    only do I  consider there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the
    sponsor to go to Bangladesh for the reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
    Judge but I also bear in mind the provisions  of  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 where  at  117B(6)  it  is
    stated:-

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

18.  It is clearly the case here the appellant  has  a  British  child  with
    whom it appears he has a parental relationship - there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that he, the sponsor and the child are not living together in a
    family unit. Secondly the child is British and cannot be expected to be
    removed.  I would also add that it is clear that the appellant's  leave
    was originally curtailed because of difficulties with his  college  and
    not because he had used deception, that he had Section 3C  leave  until
    14 November 2014 and that he made the application for leave  to  remain
    on human rights grounds on 27 November that year.

19.   Taking  all  these  factors  into  account  I  consider  that  it   is
    appropriate that, having set aside  the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge I should allow this appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                      Date 29 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy












