
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30085/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2016                           |On 8 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               SHEHRIYAR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by M&K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated  on  3  October  2016  dismissing  the
    Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Decision").
    Permission to appeal the Decision was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker in a decision dated 28 October 2016 on the basis that  the
    Decision contains an arguable error of law.  The matter comes before me
    to determine whether there is a material error of law in  the  Decision
    and, if so, whether to set it aside and either re-make it or remit  the
    appeal for re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds  of  appeal.  The  first  three  deal  with  the
    challenge to the Respondent's decision in relation to what I shall call
    the  ETS  certificate  and  also  the  evidence  in  relation  to   the
    genuineness of the Appellant's relationship with his partner.  I do not
    need to deal with those grounds.  In light of the  concession  made  by
    the Respondent (see below) it is not necessary for me to do so.

 3. The fourth and fifth grounds concern the conduct of the hearing  before
    Judge Chana. Ground four relates to the Judge's  refusal  to  hear  the
    evidence of a Mr Shafique Yousaf who had attended to give  evidence  on
    the Appellant's behalf.

 4. What the Judge says about this is recorded at  paragraph  [19]  of  the
    Decision as follows:

         "The next witness to give  evidence  was  Mr  Shafique  Yousaf  who
         adopted his letter dated 29 July 2016.  Asked whether  he  has  any
         identity document with him he said he has no document to say who he
         is. I asked him to leave because his identity has not  been  proved
         and his evidence would be of no relevance in that event."

 5. There was a similar objection, it appears, by the Judge in relation  to
    the evidence of Mr Samaj Ahmad.  That is recorded at paragraph [18]. It
    appears that the Judge did receive some evidence from Mr Ahmad but  the
    point is again made that this witness did not bring his passport to the
    hearing.

 6. In the Rule 24 statement although the Home Office  does  say  that  the
    Presenting Officer's minute does not record any difficulties  with  the
    hearing, it does note that the  representative  (that  is  to  say  the
    Appellant's representative) opposed a  witness  being  asked  to  leave
    because they had no identity document.  Indeed, this is  the  point  on
    which permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  as
    follows:

         "I am concerned by the alleged attitude of the judge  to  Mr  Sumaj
         Ahmad. Though the Judge  had  general  case  management  powers  in
         addition to those set out at paragraph 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         Rules, it is not clear whether the identity of the witness was  put
         in issue by the Respondent, and even if it were,  arguably  it  was
         open to the Judge to take the evidence  but,  for  example,  direct
         that sufficient identification be submitted to the  Tribunal  by  a
         particular date and time. The evidence which the Judge did not hear
         was arguably capable of affecting the findings in relation  to  the
         test and the overall impression of the evidence more generally."

 7. There is also a wider point taken about the conduct of the  hearing  in
    ground five and in this  regard  Miss  Peterson  who  appears  for  the
    appellant today drew my attention to a letter of complaint addressed to
    the First-tier Tribunal in Hatton Cross dated 15 September 2016.   That
    raises a complaint against the First-tier Tribunal Judge who heard  the
    appeal.  To that complaint letter are appended three witness statements
    of the Appellant, his partner, and the legal representative Mr Wells.

 8. I understand that there has been no response to the complaint and I  do
    not therefore wish to prejudge what might be said in response  to  that
    letter.  However, Mr Tarlow who appears for the Respondent  today  very
    fairly indicated that in light of what was said in those statements (if
    accepted) and in light of the reasons  why  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted, he accepted on behalf of the Respondent that  an  independent,
    fair minded observer faced with a hearing at which the matters set  out
    in the statements occurred might consider that there  had  not  been  a
    fair hearing.  In those  circumstances  he  conceded  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  it  to  be
    reheard.

 9. Having read the statements and in light of the approach which the Judge
    took to the witness evidence, which witness evidence could be material,
    particularly in relation to the  genuineness  of  the  relationship,  I
    agree that it is appropriate that the Decision be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal be remitted.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is an error of law in the Decision of Judge Chana.  I  set
aside that Decision and remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  be
heard by a Judge other than Judge Chana.

Signed   [pic]    Dated:   7 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

