


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30246/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 31 January 2017                     |On : 7 February 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 rasel ahmed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Eurasia Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 1 January  1985.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Coates, dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his application for leave to remain on human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 25 October 2009 with leave
      to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 28 October  2012.
      Further to an application made on 26  October  2012,  he  was  granted
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 30 October
      2015. On 18 August 2014 he made an application for leave to remain  as
      the spouse of his British wife.

   3. The appellant's  application  was  refused  on  24  August  2015.  The
      respondent accepted that the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting
      marriage with his British wife and that he lived with his wife and one-
      year-old British daughter. However the respondent considered that  the
      appellant failed to meet the suitability requirements in paragraph  S-
      LTR.1.1 to 3.1 as his presence in the UK  was  not  conducive  to  the
      public good because his conduct made it undesirable to  allow  him  to
      remain in the UK. The relevant conduct was  fraudulently  obtaining  a
      TOEIC certificate and thus willingly participating in an organised and
      serious attempt to defraud the Home Office and others. The  respondent
      noted that the appellant had submitted, with  his  application  of  26
      October 2012, a TOEIC certificate from the Educational Testing Service
      (ETS) in relation to an English language test he claimed to have taken
      at European College  for  Higher  Education  on  24  April  2012.  The
      respondent had been informed by ETS that a proxy test taker  had  been
      used and that they had therefore declared the appellant's test  result
      as invalid and cancelled it. The appellant  was  therefore  unable  to
      meet the requirements in Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1).  The
      respondent considered further, and in any event,  that  the  appellant
      could not meet the eligibility requirements as a  parent,  that  there
      were no significant obstacles to integration in  Bangladesh  and  that
      there were no exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave
      outside the immigration rules.


   4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      9 December 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coates. The  judge  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant and submissions from both parties. He
      was satisfied that  the  appellant  had  sought  to  obtain  leave  by
      deception through the use of a fraudulently obtained English  language
      test certificate provided by ETS and that the respondent's decision to
      refuse his application on suitability grounds was justified. The judge
      went on to consider  Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules  and
      concluded that there were no  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a
      grant of leave.


   5. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      asserting that the judge had applied the wrong burden of proof to  the
      deception allegation and that the evidence produced by the  respondent
      was insufficient to discharge the burden of proof that  she  bore.  It
      was asserted that the appellant had given evidence in  fluent  English
      before  the  judge  and  had  obtained  a  further  English   language
      qualification. The judge had  therefore  erred  by  finding  that  the
      suitability requirements were not met. With regard to his findings  on
      Article 8 it was asserted that the judge had failed  to  consider  the
      British child and that it was unreasonable to expect a  British  child
      to leave the UK and had failed to consider the child's best interests.


   6. Permission was granted on all grounds, but with  particular  reference
      to the judge's findings on deception.


   7. At the hearing before me both parties made submissions.


   8. Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge had erred by attaching weight to the
      respondent's generic evidence in regard to  the  deception  allegation
      and had failed to consider the respondent's failure to meet the  legal
      burden by producing any additional evidence. Even  if  the  judge  was
      correct in his finding on the deception point, he had erred by failing
      to go on to consider why the appellant's presence was not conducive to
      the public good. Mr Ahmed submitted that a deception exercised in 2012
      could not be determinative of paragraph S-LTR.1.6,  particularly  when
      the appellant had not been charged with any criminal offence and had a
      family life in the UK with his wife and child. There was  no  evidence
      to suggest that he was a risk to the public. He relied on the case  of
      Ruhumuliza (Article 1F and "undesirable" : Rwanda) [2016] UKUT 284  in
      submitting that it was wrong to only consider past conduct.  Mr  Ahmed
      submitted that the judge had erred in his  Article  8  assessment.  He
      relied on the case of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 in submitting that the
      rules were not a complete code and that the  Secretary  of  State  was
      wrong to require there to be compelling  circumstances  in  order  for
      leave to be granted outside the rules. The judge  had  not  considered
      section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
      His finding that it would be reasonable for the  appellant's  daughter
      to go to Bangladesh was contrary to the Home Office  guidance  and  to
      the principles in Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-
      34/09. There was  no  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant's daughter. Mr Ahmed submitted  that  the  judge's  decision
      ought to be set aside  and  the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be considered afresh.

   9. Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  on  deception  were
      consistent with those in SM and Qadir v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  00229
      and with the burden of proof "boomerang" referred to at [44]  of  that
      decision.  The  respondent  had  submitted  sufficient   evidence   to
      establish a prima facie case and meet the evidential burden of proving
      deception. The appellant's assertion that he had taken  the  test  was
      insufficient to rebut that evidence  when  it  was  evident  from  the
      judge's findings and his record of the appellant's  evidence  that  he
      had not given a credible account. The judge was entitled to find  that
      the allegation of deception had been  proven  by  the  respondent.  Mr
      Mills accepted that the judge did not specifically set out paragraph S-
      LTR.1.6 and that the refusal decision did not  specifically  refer  to
      that paragraph, but it was clear that  that  was  the  basis  for  the
      findings  on  suitability.  The  findings  in  Ruhumuliza   were   not
      applicable to the appellant's case  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the suitability requirements  had  not  been  met.  With
      regard to Article 8 outside the rules, the judge applied  the  correct
      test of compelling circumstances as confirmed in Treebhawon and Others
      (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test : Mauritius) [2017]
      UKUT 13 and, whilst he did not specifically refer to section  117B(6),
      he considered it in substance and was entitled to  find  that  it  was
      reasonable for the appellant's daughter to leave the UK.

  10. Mr Ahmed responded and reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and Findings

  11. Whilst it is the case that the decision  made  by  the  judge  in  the
      appellant's appeal preceded the decision in SM and Qadir, it seems  to
      me that the approach he took in regard to the evidence and the  burden
      of proof was entirely consistent with that set out in SM and Qadir and
      I reject Mr Ahmed's submission to the contrary. Mr Ahmed's  submission
      appeared to be that there was no burden of proof  upon  the  appellant
      and  that  the  generic  evidence  produced  by  the  respondent   was
      insufficient to discharge the legal burden of proof.  However  such  a
      submission betrays a clear misunderstanding, or misapplication, of  SM
      and Qadir, where it was found that there  was  a  shifting  burden  of
      proof and that the evidence such as that produced by the respondent in
      this appellant's case was sufficient to meet  the  initial  evidential
      burden of proof. The judge's assessment of the  respondent's  evidence
      at [17] to [19] therefore reflected the initial evidential  burden  of
      proof consideration in SM and Qadir. His subsequent  consideration  at
      [20], of whether the appellant's evidence was sufficient to rebut  the
      respondent's evidence, reflected the requirement in SM and  Qadir  (at
      [68]), for the appellant to raise an "innocent  explanation"  to  meet
      the evidential burden which had shifted to him, and to then shift  the
      legal burden back to the  respondent.  Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  the
      appellant had provided that evidence by his denial of any  wrongdoing.
      However it is plain from the findings in SM  and  Qadir  that  he  was
      required to do more than that and that  his  ability  in  English  and
      subsequent qualification some years later (of which no details  appear
      to have been provided by the appellant in any event) were not  at  all
      sufficient when there were otherwise credibility concerns.

  12. In the appellant's case there  were  plainly  significant  credibility
      concerns, which the judge  set  out  when  recording  the  appellant's
      evidence at [9] to [11], in particular that the appellant did not even
      know which college he had attended to take the English  language  test
      and kept changing his evidence in that regard. At one point he claimed
      to have had no dealings with European College  for  Higher  Education,
      yet that college was named in the ETS SELT Source data as the  college
      where he took the test. Another significant  credibility  concern  was
      that the appellant had travelled 300 miles to take the test in  London
      when he was living in Newcastle. Further, the appellant had not  tried
      to contact ETS after being notified that his test was invalid. On  the
      basis of that evidence the judge was entirely entitled to conclude, as
      he did at [20], that the appellant had failed to rebut the evidence of
      fraud. Contrary to Mr Ahmed's submission, that was clearly  sufficient
      for the judge to conclude that the respondent had fully discharged the
      burden of proving deception. I find no error of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision in that respect.


  13.   Neither  do  I  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  findings  on
      suitability. Whilst  the  judge  did  not  specifically  set  out  the
      provisions of paragraph S-LTR.1.6, it is clear from his  recording  of
      the respondent's decision, at [8], that he  was  fully  aware  of  the
      basis upon the respondent considered that the appellant fell  foul  of
      the suitability requirements. Mr Ahmed submitted that  the  judge  was
      wrong to treat the deception as determinative of  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6
      and that his approach to paragraph S-LTR.1.6 was inconsistent with the
      approach in Ruhumuliza. However I do not agree. The  circumstances  in
      Ruhumuliza were entirely different and  it  cannot  be  said  in  this
      appellant's case that there was any evidence before the judge to  show
      that he had changed since the exercise of deception. On  the  contrary
      he had continued to benefit from his deception, remaining in the UK on
      the basis of leave which had been fraudulently obtained. It is in  any
      event clear  from  the  judge's  reference  to  and  consideration  of
      discretion, at [21], that he took all  the  appellant's  circumstances
      into account when considering whether the refusal under S-LTR.1.6  was
      justified. He was fully entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
      attempt to deceive the UK authorities was sufficient  to  justify  the
      refusal on that basis and I find no error of law in such a conclusion.



  14. Mr Ahmed then challenged the judge's findings on Article 8 outside the
      immigration rules. His submission, that the judge  applied  the  wrong
      test and wrongly considered "compelling  circumstances",  was  clearly
      incorrect and was contrary to the guidance  given  in  Treebhawon.  In
      Treebhawon the President specifically confirmed that "Where  the  case
      of a foreign national who is not an  offender  does  not  satisfy  the
      requirements of the Article 8 ECHR regime of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      the test to be applied is that of compelling circumstances." The judge
      therefore applied the correct test at [22].


  15. Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge had erred  by  failing  to  consider
      section 117B(6) and to consider  that  the  appellant  had  a  British
      child, that he had failed to consider the best interests of the  child
      and that he had failed to consider  the  Home  Office  guidance  which
      stated that it was unreasonable to expect the British child  to  leave
      the UK. It is indeed the case that the judge's findings  at  [22]  and
      [23] could have benefitted from  a  more  structured  assessment  with
      particular reference to section 117B(6), but I  would  agree  with  Mr
      Mills'  submission  that  the  relevant  matters   were   nevertheless
      considered in substance. The judge plainly considered the  appellant's
      child and the child's interests which, at the age of one  year,  would
      in any event not have involved considerations outside the family unit.
      Although not specifically referring  to  her  British  nationality  at
      [23], the judge was plainly aware that the child was British, and made
      specific reference to her nationality earlier  in  his  decision.  The
      judge properly focussed on the question of whether it  was  reasonable
      for the child to leave the UK and  his  broad  consideration  of  that
      matter, taking account of all the circumstances, was  consistent  with
      the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R
      (on the application of)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

  16. Whilst Mr Ahmed submitted that no consideration was given to the  Home
      Office Guidance in relation to British children, and that the  judge's
      decision was inconsistent with the guidance,  I  see  nothing  in  the
      evidence to show that that was in fact  a  matter  raised  before  the
      judge. In any event the judge,  at  [23],  was  clearly  contemplating
      different options and choices open to the family so that  it  was  not
      the case that the child would be forced to leave the  UK  contrary  to
      the terms of the guidance and the principles in Zambrano. It  is  also
      of some relevance, given the findings on the  appellant's  involvement
      in fraud and deception, to note  that  Mr  Ahmed's  reference  to  the
      guidance at page 6 of his  skeleton  argument  stopped  short  of  the
      following, which seems  to  me  to  be  consistent  with  the  judge's
      findings:

      "It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where  the
      conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
      such weight as to justify separation, if  the  child  could  otherwise
      stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or  in
      the EU.


      The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


      ( criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398 of
      the Immigration Rules;
      ( a very poor immigration  history,  such  as  where  the  person  has
      repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

  17. Accordingly, whilst the judge's decision  could  in  parts  have  been
      better expressed, I find nothing in it amounting to an  error  of  law
      requiring it to be set aside. It is clear that the judge  applied  the
      correct legal tests  and  considered  all  relevant  matters.  On  the
      evidence before him he was perfectly entitled to reach the conclusions
      that he did.

  18. The appellant produced, at the hearing, further evidence  relating  to
      the medical condition of his second  child  who  was  born  after  the
      hearing before Judge Coates. Clearly that was not evidence  which  was
      before the First-tier Tribunal nor evidence that existed at  the  time
      and therefore it is of no relevance to the error of law  question.  It
      is open to the appellant to make representations to  the  Home  Office
      with that further evidence, which he will no doubt  do,  but  for  the
      purposes of the appeal before me, it is not evidence that I  can  take
      into account.

  19. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the grounds and  I  uphold
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. The  decision
      to dismiss the appeal stands.






Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
