
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30329/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2014                                 |On 13th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                         Ms Oluremi Adenike Onolaja

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill of Counsel instructed by Anthony
Ogunfeibo & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McDade promulgated on 23 April  2014  in  which  he
    dismissed her appeal against the respondent's removal decision made  on
    3 July 2013.  In his decision Judge McDade erroneously  identified  the
    basis of the appeal as

         "...the Secretary of  State's  refusal  to  allow  [the  appellant]
         further leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules and/or on  Article  8  (family  and
         private) life grounds under the ECHR"

    but it is quite plain from the history of this matter that  it  is  the
    removal decision which forms the basis  of  the  appeal  under  Section
    82(2)(h) of the 2002 Act.

 2. The appellant's position has a complicated history.  She came  lawfully
    to the United Kingdom on 12 September 2002 as  a  student  joining  her
    mother and brother to live here and remained  here  lawfully  until  28
    February 2011 always as a student.  On  arrival  she  would  have  been
    almost 19 years old and she is now 32 years old and will  be  33  later
    this year.

 3. The appellant applied for further leave to remain as a student  in  the
    United Kingdom on 27 February 2011, one day before her  existing  leave
    expired, and on 1 August 2011 that leave was refused.  She appealed and
    her appeal rights were exhausted on 4 November 2011.

The Rintoul determination

 4. In the present appeal, the appellant did not disclose the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Rintoul (the Rintoul determination) in the First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to that appeal.  There is no doubt in my mind that
    she should have done so.  Whether or not the decision was known to  her
    advisers it was certainly known to  the  appellant.   On  a  Devaseelan
    basis that decision is the starting point and  in  relation  to  family
    life the relevant passages  begin  at  paragraph  22  and  continue  to
    paragraph 32 of the determination.

 5. Judge Rintoul accepted that the  appellant  would  have  established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom where she had then  lived  for  some
    nine years although there had been periods during that  time  when  she
    did not have leave. There  was  very  little  evidence  before  him  of
    private or for that matter family life,  no  letters  of  support  from
    friends or from family, save a short letter from her  mother  dated  22
    September  2011  making  no  mention  of  any  emotional  ties  to  the
    appellant.  That letter relates solely to the fact that the appellant's
    mother was responsible for paying the appellant's fees and at the  time
    the application was made she was short of funds. The only  evidence  of
    closer ties was in the appellant's oral evidence.

 6. At paragraphs 25 to 26 of his determination, the  judge  drew  together
    his findings as to the appellant's claim to have  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom:

         "The appellant is 29 years of age.  While I accept that it  appears
         from the documentary evidence that she lives  with  her  mother  it
         does not necessarily follow that there still exists between them  a
         protected family life for the purposes of Article 8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention.  It is for the appellant to prove  that  such  a
         protected family life exists and I find that, on the paucity of the
         evidence before me, I am not satisfied  that  such  a  family  life
         exists.  I accept that the appellant has studied here and the  fact
         that she has been here  for  nine  years  indicates  a  substantial
         private life yet beyond her oral evidence and the evidence  of  her
         studies there is little or no evidence of its content."

    Judge Rintoul went on to find that removal of the  appellant  would  be
    proportionate.

The judicial review application

 7. The next application made  by  the  appellant,  on  10  November  2011,
    presumably on receipt of Judge  Rintoul's  decision,  was  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  Article  8  grounds.   On  17
    December 2011 the respondent refused to grant her leave on that  basis.
    The appellant subsequently made an application for judicial  review  of
    that refusal, issued out of time.  The judicial review application  was
    compromised by a consent order at some time during 2013, which recorded
    that on 1 July  2013,  the  respondent  had  made  a  removal  decision
    attracting an in-country right of appeal, and that  the  applicant  had
    appealed that decision on 17 July 2013.

Appeal against removal directions

 8.  The appellant's grounds of appeal filed on 17 July 2013 were:

         "1.  The decision of the Secretary of State is hasty and unfair  in
             that he has simply taken the view that the appellant does  not
             qualify for leave under new FM  Rules  and  as  a  result  has
             promptly  refused  her  application  without   giving   proper
             consideration to her application.

         2.   The Secretary of State erred by concluding that the  appellant
             does not meet the requirements  of  sub-section  (vi  of  Rule
             [276ADE] given the lack of ties in her country of origin which
             formed part of the appellant's application.

         3.   The decision of the Secretary of State in concluding that  the
             facts of  this  matter  are  not  sufficiently  compelling  is
             incorrect given the facts of this aspect  of  the  appellant's
             case which was equally put to the Secretary of State.

         4.   Contrary to the views expressed by the Secretary of State  the
             Article 8 rights of the appellant, her relationship  with  her
             family and the effect of any removal on [her]  have  not  been
             fully considered especially given the  decision  in  the  land
             mark cases of Chikwamba v SSHD and the Beoku-Betts case.

         5.   More grounds could be settled and lodged in due course."

    It does not appear that any more grounds were settled and/or lodged.

 9. That is the appeal which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  determined.
    Unsurprisingly he applied himself to the provisions of paragraph 276ADE
    which he dealt with  very  shortly  at  paragraph  3  and  it  was  not
    suggested that the appellant was able to bring herself within paragraph
    276ADE.   The determination did not mention the decision of Sales J (as
    he then was) in  Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  but  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge expressly considered:

         "...whether or not the appellant's circumstances are compelling and
         exceptional  such  that,  despite  being  unable  to   fulfil   the
         Immigration Rules, she should nonetheless be considered to  require
         protection under Article 8 of the ECHR"

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not  refer  in  his  determination  to  the
    decision in  Edgehill  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402, which was published on  1  April  2014.
    Although the appeal was heard on 2 February 2014, by the  time  it  was
    promulgated on 23 April 2014 the Edgehill  judgment  should  have  been
    taken into account.  I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing  to  consider  whether  this  application  should   have   been
    considered under the old Article 8 test rather  than  the  276ADE/Nagre
    exceptionality and compassionate circumstances approach  which  is  now
    appropriate.

11. At paragraphs 4 to 6 of  his  determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge considered private life and family life.  He was unable to  treat
    Judge Rintoul's decision as  the  starting  point,  as  ought  to  have
    occurred,  because  the  appellant  had  not  put  it  before  him.  He
    considered  the  family  relationships  carefully,  noting   that   the
    appellant and her mother had been economical with the truth  about  the
    number of relatives they  had  in  the  United  Kingdom:  after  cross-
    examination, and questions from the Tribunal, the judge found that  the
    appellant had her mother, a maternal uncle, three maternal  aunts,  and
    her own brother and his children, all of  them  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

12. On the evidence, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  the
    relationships between the appellant and her mother, her brother and her
    nieces and nephews did not indicate  Kugathas  dependency  between  the
    parties.  Whilst there were clear bonds of  natural  affection  between
    the appellant and her sibling and mother, they  were  not  such  as  to
    amount to evidence of continued family life between them.  Despite Miss
    Revill's very full  submissions  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  is
    anything therein which was not dealt with adequately in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

13. I must also have regard to the statutory changes introduced on 28  July
    2014 into the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  s.19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014.  A new Part 5A "Article 8 of the ECHR: public
    interest considerations" directs the Tribunal as to the approach to  be
    taken to private and family life.  The  relevant  provisions  for  this
    appeal are paragraphs 117A and 117B:

         "117A    Application of this part

                (1)    This part  applies  where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts
                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and
                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under Section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or Tribunal must (in particular) have regard
                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        Section 117B. ...

                (3)    In sub-section (2)  'the  public  interest  question'
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.  ...

                (4)    Little weight should be given to
                    (a)    a private life, or
                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner
                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious."

    If  I  find  that  the  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    determination are such that in principle it should  be  set  aside  and
    remade, I would be obliged to apply those provisions to any remaking of
    the decision.

14. Miss Revill has correctly pointed out that neither 177B(4) nor  177B(5)
    with the exception of 177B(4)(b) has any relevance to considerations of
    family life, and therefore that if family life were to  be  established
    between the appellant and her mother, the appellant and her brother, or
    the appellant and her nieces and nephews the position would  be  as  it
    was before 28 July 2014.  That is plainly right.

15. Neither Judge Rintoul in 2011,  nor the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in
    the present appeal were satisfied that there the ties of affection  and
    mutual  assistance  between  the  appellant  and  her  mother,  or  the
    appellant, her brother and his  family,  were  such  as  to  reach  the
    Kugathas standard for continuing family  life  between  adults.    Miss
    Revill sought to persuade me that the First-tier  Tribunal  placed  too
    much weight on the mechanics of the relationships that is, the analysis
    of the nature of the assistance she  gives  her  mother  with  hospital
    appointments and general care and the assistance she gives her  brother
    with the care of her nieces and nephews.

16. Having read the First-tier Tribunal  determination,  I  disagree:   the
    case was put to the Tribunal in that way and the arguments  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal were properly considered.  I do not  consider  that
    the First-tier Tribunal overlooked any  material  factor  in  assessing
    whether there was family life or that the evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, or the fuller evidence (including the  determination  of
    Judge Rintoul) on which the determination  would  have  to  be  remade,
    establishes a breach of Article 8 in relation to family life.

17. Dealing with the wider issue of private life, while both Judge  Rintoul
    and the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal accepted that there must  be
    some private life, the evidence relied upon was limited to  the  family
    relationships between the appellant and her extended family.  There  is
    no evidence of any other private life accrued  during  the  many  years
    this appellant has spent studying in the United Kingdom. If there were,
    on remaking the determination the Upper Tribunal would  be  obliged  to
    give it little weight, pursuant to sections 117B(4) and (5) if  I  were
    to set aside the decision.

18. Drawing together these considerations, I am satisfied that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  in  two  respects,  both  of  them
    potentially significant since he has  misdirected  himself  as  to  the
    decision which was under  appeal  and  failed  to  apply  his  mind  to
    Edgehill.  However, his consideration of the Article 8 ECHR question is
    fully and cogently reasoned, arriving at a similar conclusion  to  that
    reached by Judge Rintoul in 2011  before  either  paragraph  276ADE  or
    Appendix FM of the Rules, or Part 5A of the Act, had been introduced.

19. It follows that the errors of law which I have found are  not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal.   I do not set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

         [pic]
Signed                              Date:  12 August 2014
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
