
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/30303/2015

                                                   IA/33213/2015

                                                   IA/33216/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th August 2017                       |On 04th October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                  THUSHYANTHAN THANGAVEL (FIRST appellant)
                   KAVITA THUSHYANTHAN (SECOND appellant)
                            U T (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal, with permission, against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls who dismissed their  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal of  their  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant, his wife and  child  are  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka  who
    entered the United Kingdom on 13th September 2010 with entry  clearance
    for the first  appellant  as  a  student.   Thereafter  his  leave  was
    extended until it was curtailed on 20th May 2013.  He was again granted
    leave in the capacity of student until 28th February 2015 and  on  that
    date he made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  that  he
    had "always aspired to obtain a PhD in my area of study".  He asked for
    his application to be put on hold or for a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules to enable him to enrol at a later date.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  noted  at  paragraph  2  of  his
    determination that none of the three appellants attended the hearing of
    the appeal on 24th November 2016.

         "2.      None of the three Appellants attended the hearing  of  the
             appeal on 24 November 2016.  They  had  not  notified  of  any
             legal representative in the UK.  Notice of the date, time  and
             place of the hearing was sent to the  first  Appellant  on  18
             November 2015 and to the second and  third  Appellants  on  11
             July 2016, all to the last known address shown on the  notices
             of appeal.  No alternative address had been  provided  by  the
             Appellants.  No message or explanation for their  absence  was
             received prior to calling the case on the  scheduled  date  of
             hearing.  With the consent of the Respondent, this  appeal  is
             now decided on the basis of the  documents  provided  by  both
             parties".

 4. The appellants applied for permission to appeal against the decision on
    the basis that the judge had made a significant error of law by hearing
    the case in the absence of the main appellant and his  family  members.
    The appellant accepted that he did not turn up for the hearing  but  he
    disputed he did not provide an explanation for his absence and states:

         "In fact I have sent a fax  to  Taylor  House  to  the  fax  number
         provided in the notice of hearing  explaining  the  reason  for  my
         incapacity to be present  during  the  hearing  namely  the  severe
         injury I suffered in my left knee and ankle  by  falling  from  the
         stairs".

 5. He added that he was an appellant in person  and  did  not  have  legal
    representation so it was crucial for him to attend the hearing.  He did
    not have the skill to represent his case and would have relied on  oral
    submissions.

          "When I had the accident and following it had to be  on  complete
          bed rest for at least fifteen days, I have no other  way  but  to
          request an adjournment of the hearing and  to  reschedule  for  a
          later date to allow me to have access right to justice".

      The appellant added that the judge had made an error  of  law  by  not
      taking his request and compelling circumstances into consideration.

 6. Permission was granted on the basis that the medical evidence  supplied
    by the appellant in his application for permission to appeal did  cover
    the date of hearing.

 7. The Secretary of State was not represented at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the  Rule  24  notice
    submitted by the Secretary of State and opposed the appellant's appeal.
     The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately and there
    was nothing attached to the respondent's copy of the grounds of  appeal
    to show that a fax was sent to the Tribunal as stated in the grounds of
    appeal.  That was a matter that the appellant would have  to  establish
    by way of documentary evidence.

Conclusions

 9. The appellant did not attend the hearing before me. He was notified  of
    the date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on  19th  July  2017.
    He made an application for an adjournment  on  29th  August  2017  (the
    appeal hearing was 30th August 2017), stating that he  wished  to  have
    representation as his case was complicated and exceptional but  he  was
    not in a financial position to pay a representative.  That  application
    was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 29th August 2017.  The case is not
    complicated.  I considered that it was in the interests of justice  for
    the hearing to proceed before me on 30th August 2017 on the basis  that
    the appellant was clearly aware of the date,  time  and  venue  of  the
    hearing  and  could  have  attended   in   person   himself   to   make
    representations as to the evidence he  would  have  placed  before  the
    judge and therefore underlining the error of law made.  He did not. The
    best person to give evidence as to his circumstances was the  appellant
    and he chose not to attend. At no point was the appellant advised  that
    the hearing would not proceed before the Upper Tribunal.

10. I turn to a consideration of whether there was an error of law  in  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He considered  the  grounds
    of the appellant's private life appeal and noted  that  this  has  been
    developed whilst he was in education.  The judge added at  paragraph  9
    of his decision:

         "9.      Like much of the grounds of appeal, the comments which the
             Appellant made are now somewhat  out  of  date.   The  current
             provision is that the Immigration Rules deal with all relevant
             article 8 aspects unless there are additional  exceptional  or
             compelling factors revealed by the  evidence.   There  are  no
             such factors in this appeal, not least because  the  Appellant
             has not submitted any evidence in support  of  these  appeals.
             The immigration history set  out  by  the  Respondent  in  the
             reasons for refusal letter shows that the first Appellant  has
             been in the UK as a student from 13 September 2010  until  the
             expiry of his last leave on  28  February  2015,  even  though
             there was at one time a problem because the sponsor licence of
             his college  was  surrendered.   He  has,  therefore,  a  good
             immigration record.  He said in his original application  form
             at section 3 that he  had  completed  an  MSc  in  information
             technology but wanted to go on to study for a PhD in IT.   The
             first  Appellant  has,  therefore,   a   high-grade   academic
             qualification even if it may not be of the final standard that
             he wished.  As the  Respondent  rightly  pointed  out,  if  he
             wishes to pursue another course of study it is open to him  to
             make a new application for entry clearance.

         10.      There is no other evidence about the circumstances of this
             Appellant or of his wife and son.  I have no information about
             the child other than his date of birth on  29  February  2012,
             making him now four years old.  There is no  question  of  him
             being separated from either of his  parents  and  if  enforced
             removal takes place, it is clear this family would be  removed
             together.  There would be  no  interference  with  the  family
             life.  Taking into account the provisions of paragraph 276ADE,
             none  of  the  Appellants  would  qualify  under  any  of  the
             provisions except for, possibly, sub-section (vi) but there is
             no evidence of any difficulties in this  family  reintegrating
             in Sri Lanka,  let  alone  difficulties  of  any  seriousness.
             There is no indication that there are  any  aspects  of  their
             life in  the  UK  which  cannot  be  adequately  and  properly
             replicated in Sri Lanka and no basis for a claim that it would
             be in any way unreasonable for this family to return to  their
             country of nationality".

    In sum, the judge at paragraph 12 set out the following:

         "12.     I find, therefore, that the  decision  of  the  Respondent
             refusing leave to remain on grounds  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules was a proper and justified interference with the private
             lives that will, certainly, have been developed in the UK over
             the last six years.  The first Appellant is not close  to  the
             end of a course of study which it would be reasonable for  him
             to complete.  His desire is to start a  new  course  of  study
             which, so far as the evidence before me shows,  has  not  been
             arranged.  He can make those arrangements from Sri Lanka if he
             wishes to do so.  Although there would be an interference with
             the private lives of all three Appellants, they do not qualify
             under the provisions of paragraph  276ADE  and  there  are  no
             compelling  or  exceptional  factors  which  would  require  a
             separate consideration outside the terms  of  the  Immigration
             Rules".

11. Did the judge procedurally err  in  failing  to  adjourn  the  hearing?
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC)  clearly  sets
    out the principles to be applied in relation to  adjournments  and  the
    head note of which reads:

                 ".  In practice, in most cases the question will be whether
                 the refusal deprived the affected party of his right  to  a
                 fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal  is  challenged
                 on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the
                 question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the  FtT
                 acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is  that
                 of fairness:  was there any  deprivation  of  the  affected
                 party's right to a fair hearing?  See  SH  (Afghanistan)  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ
                 1284.

12. I have taken into account the concept of fairness  and  the  overriding
    objective.

13. First, I am not satisfied that there was  indeed  documentary  evidence
    before the judge by the date of the hearing to explain the  appellant's
    absence or requesting an adjournment.  Overall I am not persuaded  that
    by the date of the hearing the appellant had notified the  Tribunal  of
    his request for an  adjournment,  the  surgery  stamp  on  the  medical
    certificate is illegible.  There is a stamp at the bottom of the letter
    dated 23rd November 2016 but it is not clear to where this was sent.

14. On file was a note of the letter sent by the appellant  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and which purports to be dated 23rd  November  2016.   On
    the letter is written by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls:

         "Received by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  at  10:45  a.m.
         Tuesday 29th November 2016 -  by  which  time  decision  completed,
         filed and file posted back to TH".  29.11.16.  [the hearing was  on
         24th November 2016]

    That note is signed by the judge.

15. There is no indication of  any  date  stamp  as  to  when  this  letter
    requesting an adjournment and indicating a knee and  ankle  injury  was
    received by the Tribunal.  I can see the medical  certificate  attached
    but that certificate purports to  date  from  22nd  November  2016  but
    exempts him from work from 20th November  2016.  This  would  mean  the
    certificate itself  was  backdated.   The  radiology  notes  which  are
    attached indicate that they are  dated  21st  November  2016  but  also
    indicate that the appellant had the fall at least two  weeks  prior  to
    the radiology report, which would date the  injury  from  7th  November
    2016.

16. It is clear from the documentation that it contrasts with  the  grounds
    of application for permission to appeal  whereby  the  first  appellant
    states he  had  to  have  complete  bed  rest  following  the  accident
    "therefore, when I had the accident and  following  it  had  to  be  on
    complete bed rest for at least fifteen days". If that was  correct  the
    appellant  could  have  attended  the  First-tier   Tribunal   hearing.
    According to the  medical  records  provided,  the  appellant  had  the
    accident on 7th November 2016 and the appeal hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was 24th November 2016.

17. I have also taken  into  account  the  overall  circumstances  of  this
    appeal.    I note from the file that on 11th July 2016, at  least  four
    months before the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the appellant was  given
    a direction that he should send all copies of any evidence on which  he
    intended to rely in support of his appeal.  The appellant and his  wife
    submitted no further evidence.  In relation to the evidence before  the
    judge, the appellant was clearly able to write a letter to the Tribunal
    requesting an adjournment but apparently unable  to  submit  a  witness
    statement

18. There is mention that in his grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that he did not have the skill to represent his  case  by  writing  any
    grounds but it is clear that  he  was  able  to  write  sufficient  and
    coherent grounds to submit an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant is clearly able to put pen to paper and  to  have  written  a
    witness statement and failed to do so.

19. Secondly and furthermore, the second main appellant, his wife, did  not
    attend the hearing either and there was no explanation for her absence.
     There was no indication she had any problems or  that  she  could  not
    have attended to give evidence.  In my view,  the  judge  was  entitled
    against the background and context of the appeal, which I have set  out
    above, to proceed in the manner that he did.

20. It was open to the judge to proceed on the evidence that he did  and  I
    find no error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 3rd October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington












