

                                            [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30267/2013


                                      THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On August 27, 2014              |On September 1, 2014     |
|                                |                         |


                                       Before

                             DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MR WINSTON CONROY SHAW
                             (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop, Counsel, instructed by
      Greenland Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born January 24, 1977, is a citizen of Jamaica. On April
    16, 2002 the appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and  has
    lived here ever since. On May 9, 2012 he was granted further  leave  to
    remain/enter until  November  9,  2012  and  on  November  6,  2012  he
    submitted his current application for leave to remain under article  8.
    The respondent refused his application on July 2, 2013 on the basis  he
    did not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and  she  found  no  exceptional
    circumstances to allow the appeal outside of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (hereinafter  referred  to
    as the "2002 Act") on July 17, 2013 and on May 1,  2014  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Boyd (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard
    his appeal and dismissed it in a determination promulgated on  May  14,
    2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on May 22, 2014 and on June  16,
    2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  White  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ had erred in his approach.

 4.  The  appellant,  his  son  and  the  child's  mother  along  with  the
    appellant's current partner were  all  in  attendance  at  the  hearing
    before me but none were required to give evidence.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. I raised with the representatives whether  this  appellant  could  have
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules and in particular whether he  met
    all of the requirements of Section  E-LTRPT  or  was  entitled  to  the
    benefit of EX.1 of Appendix FM.


 6. Both representatives agreed that the appellant could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of Section E-LTRPT 2.3 and 3.1.  Consequently  whilst  the
    FtTJ may have been wrong in paragraph [15] of his determination it  was
    not material because he could not meet the relevant Rule. Additionally,
    the appellant could not satisfy EX.1 of Appendix FM because firstly his
    last grant of leave had been  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  (he  had
    originally been given port entry in 2002) and secondly, his  leave  was
    for only six months. EX.1 was not a standalone application and  it  did
    not attach to any of the Rules  that  the  appellant  sought  to  apply
    under.

 7. Both parties  agreed  that  the  only  issue  was  whether  the  FtTJ's
    assessment of article 8 contained an error in law.

















    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Balroop submitted:-


     a. In light of the length of time he had been  here  and  his  contact
        arrangements with his son, article 8  was  engaged.  The  FtTJ  had
        accepted there was a good arguable case and the issue  was  one  of
        proportionality.


     b. The child's mother in both her written statement and oral  evidence
        confirmed that the appellant saw his  son  on  a  daily  basis  and
        shared responsibilities for looking after him.

     c.  In  considering  proportionality  the  FtTJ,  in  paragraph  [21],
        rejected the child's mother's evidence without any  foundation  and
        this finding then formed part of his findings  in  paragraph  [23].
        The FtTJ overlooked the fact the appellant had leave to stay in the
        country based on his contact with his son and whilst he had been an
        overstayer he was not an overstayer when he made this application.

     d. The FtTJ failed to attach sufficient weight to the  best  interests
        of the child.

     e. The FtTJ erred.

   9. Mr Duffy submitted:

     a. The FtTJ made findings that were clearly open to him.


     b. The FtTJ found the appellant did not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
        either as a parent, under either Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE.
        Whilst the test out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 000640 had been modified
        in MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on the application  of)  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 985 there  was
        nothing further to consider outside  of  the  Rules  and  therefore
        there was no error in law. The Rules were a complete code  in  this
        appeal and there was no  point  in  the  Rules  if  they  were  not
        applied.

     c. There was no material error.


10. In the event there was an error then both parties agreed the case could
    be dealt with on the evidence currently before me  save  that  I  would
    have to have regard to the Immigration Act 2014  and  section  19  that
    introduced Section 117B into the 2002 Act.


11. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

12. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor for six months in
    May 2002 and he should have left in  November  2002.  He  did  not  and
    between November 2002 and May 2012 he attempted  to  establish  both  a
    family and private life in the United Kingdom.


13. There was no dispute that his son was both conceived and born at a time
    when he was here illegally. The FtTJ commented in paragraph  [21]  that
    he was satisfied the appellant supported himself by living and  working
    here illegally and rejected his claim that he  had  been  supported  by
    relatives. He  also  rejected  his  claim  that  he  had  attempted  to
    regularise his stay between November 2002 and 2011. The appellant is no
    longer with the child's mother and has been with  his  current  partner
    for two years.

14. The appellant did not meet the  Immigration  Rules  and  Mr  Duffy  has
    submitted that although the test in Gulshan has been modified  slightly
    the position remains the same as the Immigration Rules are  a  complete
    code.

15. Mr Duffy's argument is that the Rules are a complete code  although  Mr
    Balroop challenges this. The FtTJ assessed the issue of whether private
    or family life was engaged  based  on  the  appellant's  claim  he  had
    contact and in paragraph [20] the FtTJ indicated he would consider  the
    case on the basis that article 8 was engaged.


16. I am satisfied the FtTJ was entitled to approach the issue of article 8
    in the way he did and his general approach does not display any error.

17. The real issue is whether this is an  appeal  where  the  FtTJ  wrongly
    considered proportionality and reached a finding that was not  open  to
    him.

18. Mr Balroop's main submission is that the FtTJ erred in  his  assessment
    of the level of contact that existed between the appellant and his son.
    The grounds of appeal do not assist me  because  they  concentrated  on
    issues that no longer concern me.

19. I was invited  to  consider  the  child's  mother's  written  and  oral
    evidence. Mr Balroop submitted to me that she adopted her statement and
    she had not been challenged on her evidence. Her written  statement  is
    contained at page 4 of the appellant's bundle and she stated-

             "Winston is still playing a father role in his son's life as a
             good and caring dad as always from  the  beginning.  He  still
             takes Conroy to and from school sometimes as  well  as  taking
             him  to  his  home  where  they   both   spend   the   weekend
             together...."

20. The FtTJ recorded her evidence in his determination at paragraphs  [11]
    to [12]. She did not, as Mr Balroop submitted, state that the appellant
    saw his son daily. This was evidence given by  the  appellant  but  the
    FtTJ rejected this evidence as he was entitled to do  so.  He  accepted
    that the appellant was involved in his son's life but he  rejected  his
    claim that this was on a daily basis. The FtTJ's finding  in  paragraph
    [21] was therefore one that was open to him.  Similarly,  his  findings
    regarding the school letter were an interpretation  that  was  open  to
    him.


21. Between paragraphs [23] and [25] the FtTJ assessed all the evidence. He
    took into account not only the interests of the child but he also  took
    into account that the child's mother had only  been  granted  leave  to
    remain because of her son's status. Their son had been granted leave to
    remain under the British Nationality Act on the basis he had been  born
    here and had lived here for ten years. He automatically became entitled
    to British citizenship.


22. The FtTJ did not ignore the best interests of the child. He had  regard
    to them and ultimately  concluded  that  on  balance  removal  was  not
    disproportionate. He had regard to the evidence presented  to  him  and
    the law as it stood at the date of hearing. Ironically, the new Section
    117B(vi) of the 2002 Act may assist the appellant  but  in  considering
    whether there has been an error in law I cannot  have  regard  to  this
    piece of legislation.

23. I am satisfied the FtTJ's assessment of the evidence does not  show  an
    error in law and the findings were findings that were open to him.

    DECISION


24. There is no material error of law and I uphold the original decision.

25. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal failed.


Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
