
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/30664/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |    Determination Promulgated |
|On 16 July 2015                              |    On 13 August 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                               miss pak yu lee
                       (Anonymity Direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sajid Khan, Solicitor, of SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Taylor) dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on  1  July  2014  to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK on grounds of long residence.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a British national  overseas  but  requires  leave  to
    remain in the UK. She first arrived in the UK on 8  September  2002  in
    order to attend boarding school. She renewed her leave to remain in the
    UK on several occasions  in  order  to  study  at  boarding  school  or
    university. She eventually made an application on 17 February 2014  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  the
    appellant had been absent from the UK on numerous occasions in the last
    ten years amounting to 705 days in total; well over the  540  days  (18
    months) permitted under paragraph 276A of the Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules"). The appellant's representatives  unsuccessfully  submitted  to
    the respondent that 174 days absence should be discounted  because  two
    periods of absence were due to the ill health of the appellant and  the
    appellant's mother.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Nottingham Justice Centre  on  21  November  2014.  She  was
    represented  by  Mr  Khan.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    provisions  in  the  Rules  were  mandatory  and  did  not  permit  any
    discretion. The respondent had given due regard to the  long  residence
    policy. As the Rules did not permit the exercise of discretion  it  was
    not a matter for the judge to review the exercise of discretion  or  to
    say that the discretion exercised  should  have  been  exercised  in  a
    different way. The appropriate course was to commence  judicial  review
    proceedings.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Doyle  on  12
    May 2015. It was arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by  giving
    inadequate consideration to discretion which could have been  exercised
    in the appellant's favour by the respondent.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me





Discussion

 9. Mr Khan submitted that the decision of the respondent was  procedurally
    unfair because the respondent failed to exercise discretion  in  favour
    of the appellant in light of the compelling evidence  of  compassionate
    circumstances which fell for consideration under the  respondent's  own
    policy on long residence.  The  judge  failed  to  conduct  independent
    findings. The policy guidance was put before  the  judge.  One  of  the
    grounds of appeal  was  that  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently. The provisions in the Rules are not mandatory. It  was  an
    error of law to suggest that the only remedy was judicial  review.  The
    judge should have found  that  the  respondent  should  have  exercised
    discretion. The Upper Tribunal should remake the decision and allow the
    appeal.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted that the most that the Upper Tribunal could do is
    to remit the decision to the respondent. Paragraph 12 of  the  decision
    contains a concession by Mr Khan that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules. Paragraph 14 of the decision could be  viewed  as  the
    judge  being  satisfied  with  the  exercise  of  discretion   by   the
    respondent.

11. I have considered the refusal letter dated 1 July  2014.  There  is  no
    reference to the long residence policy (Guidance  -  Long  Residence  -
    version 12.0 valid from 17 October  2014).  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    respondent  has  not  exercised  discretion  under  the   policy.   The
    discretion arises from the policy and not from the Rules.



12. I have considered paragraph 50 of AG (Policies; executive discretion;
    Tribunals powers) Kosovo (2008) UKAIT 00082.  There are cases in which
    a failure to apply a policy should lead to a substantive decision in
    the claimant's favour with a direction that leave be granted. There
    will be no need to base such a decision on human rights grounds. But
    the cases in question are unusual. They are those in which (1) the
    claimant proves the precise terms of the policy, which (2) creates a
    presumption, on the facts of his case, in favour of granting leave, and
    (3) there is either nothing at all to displace the presumption, or
    nothing that, under the terms of the policy, falls for consideration.
    If all of those factors apply to the case, the appeal should be
    allowed, with a direction as indicated. I find that this is not a case
    where the failure to apply the relevant policy leads to a substantive
    decision in the appellant's favour with a direction that leave be
    granted. I have also considered Ukus (discretion: when reviewable)
    [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) which leads me to the same conclusion; where
    the decision maker has failed to exercise a discretion vested in him,
    the Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited to a decision that the failure
    renders the decision not in accordance with the law.

13. I find that the judge erred in law at paragraph 15 of the  decision  by
    finding that the only remedy open to the appellant was judicial review.
    The judge did not consider the possibility of remitting the decision to
    the respondent for a lawful decision to be made.  That  is  a  material
    error of law. The relevant authorities do not appear to have been cited
    to the judge.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand. I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent's  failure  to  exercise
    discretion under the long residence policy renders the decision not  in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

15. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision by allowing the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law  and  a  lawful
    decision is still awaited by the appellant.

16. The respondent must now make a fresh decision and if that  decision  is
    not in the appellant's favour then the appellant will have a  right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. If the decision maker  has  lawfully
    exercised his  discretion  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  such  a
    statutory power then the First-tier Tribunal  must  either  uphold  the
    decision or reach a different decision  in  the  exercise  of  its  own
    discretion.





Signed   [pic]                      Date 8 August 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


