
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/30841/2014
                                                               IA/30850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2015                           |On 5 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          MISS SDO (FIRST CLAIMANT)
                         MISS SAO (SECOND CLAIMANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Ms Jones, Counsel instructed by A & P Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as "the Secretary of
    State" and  to  the  appellants  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
    "Claimants".

2.   The Claimants are citizens of Ghana whose dates of birth  are  6  March
    1976 and 16 May  2002.   They  are  mother  and  daughter.   The  first
    claimant came to the UK as a visitor in  September  2004  returning  in
    November 2005.  She then travelled between the UK and Ghana during 2006
    to 2008 and further made several visits to  Italy  where  she  held  an
    Italian residence permit.  She applied for a  registration  certificate
    as an EEA national in 2007 but this was refused.  She last entered  the
    UK as a visitor on 15 August 2008 with valid leave until 17 July  2009.
    The second claimant accompanied her on all visits.

3.   In a determination promulgated on 28 November 2014  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Sangha) the appeal was allowed on human rights  grounds
    and dismissed under the Immigration Rules.   The  Tribunal  found  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged and that the removal of both claimants would
    be disproportionate as it would have  a  "devastating"  effect  on  the
    family life that would be destroyed.

4.   An application for permission to appeal was made  contending  that  the
    Tribunal's decision was wrong  in  light  of  findings  made  that  the
    Claimants could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and could reintegrate
    into Ghanaian society. The Tribunal further failed to  have  regard  to
    the fact that the second claimant was  not  a  "qualifying  child"  and
    accordingly ZH (Tanzania) was not applicable.  The  Tribunal  ought  to
    have concluded that family life could continue in Ghana. It was further
    contended that the Tribunal failed to consider the issue of  legitimate
    expectations, in circumstances that the Claimants  could  have  had  no
    expectation to live in the UK. There is no  obligation  on  the  UK  to
    provide educational support for the second  claimant  who  has  special
    educational needs notwithstanding that  there  may  not  be  comparable
    provision in Ghana.  The Tribunal  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to
    relevant jurisprudence including Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 [24] and
    EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  [59-61].  The
    Tribunal  erred  by  placing  little  weight  on  their   fundamentally
    "precarious" private life which  could  reasonably  be  established  in
    Ghana and that they could reasonably be expected  to  reintegrate  into
    Ghanaian society.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    the following grounds;

         "It is arguable that  the  following  matters  constitute  material
         errors of law in the Tribunal's determination of these appeals:


         (i)  in the case of both appellants and contrary to Section 117B(4)
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, attaching
             substantial weight to their private lives despite them  having
             been established at a time when their presence in the  UK  was
             unlawful or at best precarious,


         (ii)     in the case  of  the  first  appellant,  and  contrary  to
             Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, assessing the public interest
             question by reference to whether it was reasonable  to  expect
             the second appellant to leave  the  UK  when  she  was  not  a
             'qualifying child' for the purpose of that subSection, and


         (iii)    in the case of the second appellant  failing  to  consider
             her best interests  against  the  background  that  the  first
             appellant did not have leave to remain  in  the  UK  and  thus
             failing  to  ask  itself  the  'ultimate  question':  'is   it
             reasonable to expect the child to follow the  parent  with  no
             right to remain to the country of origin?'  (EV  (Philippines)
             per Lewison LJ at paragraph 50).  Insofar as  the  application
             contains other grounds that  are  not  covered  by  the  above
             summary, these may also be argued".


Error of Law Hearing

6.   The First-tier Tribunal decision specifically referred to the  skeleton
    argument prepared on behalf of the claimants and placed weight  on  the
    factors set out therein at [24].  At the hearing before me  a  copy  of
    the skeleton argument was provided for Ms  Holmes  which  she  had  the
    opportunity to consider.  Ms  Holmes  relied  on  the  grounds  of  the
    application and submitted that  in  essence  the  Tribunal  disregarded
    significant relevant legal precedents and had not approached the issues
    within the appropriate legal framework, for example failing  to  follow
    the principles established in ZH  (Tanzania)  where  the  claimant  was
    neither a qualifying child nor a British citizen and  failing  to  have
    regard to principles in Zoumbas and EV (Philippines).


7.   Ms Jones submitted that it had been accepted that the  Claimants  could
    not meet the  requirements  under  Appendix  FM  and  that  the  second
    claimant was not a  qualifying  child  under  paragraph  117B(6).   She
    submitted that the finding under the Rules  that  the  Claimants  could
    reintegrate in Ghanaian society was not inconsistent with her  decision
    under Article 8 ECHR.

8.   The Tribunal placed weight on the fact that  the  second  claimant  had
    spent  over  six  years  residing  in  the  UK  which  was  a   weighty
    consideration having regard to the guideline figure of seven years used
    to establish a substantial period of time.  Ms Jones placed emphasis on
    the  significant  and  important  evidence  of  the  second  claimant's
    vulnerability, which had weighed heavily in the Tribunal's  assessment.
    There was expert evidence as to  the  considerable  restrictions,  both
    physically and mentally, on the second claimant as a result of profound
    autism.  The  Tribunal   found  the  interference  disproportionate  as
    regards private life (my emphasis), not family life. The  Tribunal  did
    not misapply ZH (Tanzania); the  principles were not restricted only to
    British citizen  children [46] and further,  citizenship  was  not  the
    only factor in assessing  where  a  child's  best  interests  lie.  The
    Tribunal placed significant weight on the impact  and  consequences  of
    removal on the child to Ghana including special education. The Tribunal
    considered  all  of  the  relevant   issues,   provisions   and   legal
    requirements with reference to the relevant case law  as  evidenced  in
    the skeleton argument relied  on.   Finally  Ms  Jones  emphasised  the
    consideration of the welfare of children was not limited nor restricted
    by the immigration failures of their parents.

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now  give
    with my reasons.



Discussion and Decision

10.  I am satisfied that there was no material error of law in the  decision
    and reasons made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I take the view that  the
    issues raised by  the  Secretary  of  State  amount  effectively  to  a
    disagreement with the findings and conclusions and indeed the  decision
    made by the Tribunal.  The Tribunal  found  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) in respect of the first appellant were not met.

11.   In considering Article 8 ECHR the Tribunal emphasised the strength  of
    the child's private life and where her best interests lie in  light  of
    her autism, severe  learning  difficulties,  and  severe  communication
    difficulties, as a full time student of a special needs  school,  under
    the mental health team and in receipt of speech  and  language  therapy
    [18 &21] .   It is certainly arguable that the Tribunal could have  set
    out in more detail the strong evidence relied on, in  particular,  that
    from the expert witness Esther Quarcoe and  the  statement  of  special
    educational needs.  However, I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  made
    clear that it placed weight on the contents of  the  skeleton  argument
    which set out all of the appropriate and relevant case law on Article 8
    ECHR issues [21 & 24].  The Tribunal had regard to the provisions under
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended)[26]. The Tribunal fully considered all of the relevant  public
    interest factors and found none that were capable  of  outweighing  the
    very strong private life established by the second claimant in  the  UK
    together with that  of  her  mother  in  establishing  where  her  best
    interests lie.  Having regard to the totality of  the  evidence,  I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal did ask itself the ultimate question as  to
    the reasonableness to expect the child to follow  the  parent  with  no
    right to remain to the country of origin ?  The Tribunal found this  to
    be an exceptional case and notwithstanding that the first claimant  had
    a poor immigration history to the extent that she  was  without  lawful
    leave since 2009 [26], the strong evidence  of  the  second  claimant's
    private life was the significant feature determining that  the  removal
    would be disproportionate.    I find that this conclusion was  open  to
    the Tribunal to make on the evidence before it.

Notice of Decision

12.  There is no material error of law  in  the  Tribunal's  decision.   The
    decision and reasons shall stand.

    Anonymity order made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimants and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 4.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  has  been  dismissed  and  the
claimants' appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds, I make  no  award
for any fee repayment.






Signed                                  Date 4.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

