
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30839/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 5th August 2015                        |On the 14th August 2015       |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                       Miss Anne Ann Lorraine Sorongon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Anne Sorongon against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Onoufriou, who heard the appeal at Richmond on the 18th
    March 2015.  The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and had
    applied under the points-based system for further leave to remain.
    Previous grants of leave had been extended to the 28th June 2014, the
    application under consideration was made by the Appellant on the 25th
    June 2014.  It was not supported by a valid CAS, the reason for that is
    that the Appellant had not taken and passed a relevant English language
    test to the required standard.

 2. The Appellant applied quite late to undertake the test.  She started
    making enquiries in March 2014 and applied to the Flexilearning Centre
    in Ilford to take the test on the 4th June.  That test was cancelled
    because problems arose between Flexilearning and City & Guilds, the
    awarding body.  Attempts to sit the test with Pearsons and IELTS gave
    her dates on the 30th June and the 25th July 2014, both of course after
    the expiry of the visa.

 3. The appeal was based on submissions that it was not fair and reliance
    was placed on the case of Thakur Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC).
    Those submissions were rejected and the appeal was dismissed.  The
    Appellant sought permission to appeal and that was granted on the basis
    that in the course of the decision the Judge had observed that the
    college's licence had been revoked in 2013 when in fact it had been
    revoked in July 2014.  That, the Judge believed, was an arguable error
    of law and may have influenced the decision making process.

 4. Having read the papers and looked at the chronology I am satisfied that
    the error, if there is an error on the date the college lost its
    licence, is irrelevant.  The fact is the Appellant had until almost the
    end of June 2014 before her leave expired and yet did not take steps to
    take the appropriate English language test until March 2014, by that
    time it was too late to be able to avoid the problems which then arose.



 5. This is not unfair because those problems that arose were not caused by
    the Secretary of State but were problems between the test centre and
    the awarding body City & Guilds.  Fairness was given to the Appellant
    by the time that she had available to make her preparations.  It is not
    unfair that she failed to use that time productively.

 6. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.  Notice of hearing was sent
    on the 3rd July 2015 indicating that the case would be heard today at
    2pm.  It was sent to the address given by the Appellant herself on the
    form IAFT-4, [                               ].  I am satisfied that
    proper notice was sent.  There has been no communication from the
    Appellant as to why she could not attend or to seek an adjournment.  I
    see no reason why this case should not have continued particularly
    given the nature of the issue raised.

NOTICE OF DECISION

For the reasons given I find that any error within the decision of the
Judge is not material.  The decision remains at the disposal of the
Appellant's appeal in this case.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 7th August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

To The Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 7th August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

