
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30279/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2016                    |On 3 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 foysol alom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar of Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rayner,  whose  Decision  and  Reasons
    were promulgated on 17 November 2015.  The Respondent, to whom I  shall
    refer as the Claimant, is a national of Bangladesh  born  on  10  April
    1979.  He first entered the United Kingdom in January 2001 although  he
    is unable to provide any  evidence  of  his  entry  at  that  time  and
    essentially he has remained unlawfully since  that  time.   He  made  a
    number of applications for  leave  to  remain.   The  last  application
    including additional grounds and information, was refused with a  right
    of appeal on 9 July 2014.  By that  time  the  Claimant  had  formed  a
    relationship and his partner had given birth to their son K on 17 March
    2015.  The basis of the Claimant's application was his private life and
    his relationship with his partner and son, both of whom are British.

 2. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the  Claimant  and
    his partner gave evidence and were cross-examined.   In  his  decision,
    the findings in which run to 24  paragraphs,  the  Judge  gave  a  very
    detailed and careful consideration of the Claimant's case.  He accepted
    that the Claimant had arrived on 4 February 2004 in the absence of  any
    evidence that he had arrived earlier than that  time  but  he  did  not
    accept that the Claimant had significant personal,  cultural  or  other
    private life in the United Kingdom, apart from his length of residence.
     He noted that the Claimant has family in  Bangladesh  whom  he  is  in
    contact with.  He took into account at [27] that the Claimant's arrival
    and stay has been unlawful  since  its  inception.   He  noted  that  a
    traditional marriage ceremony had taken place between the Claimant  and
    his partner on 18 November 2013  and  at  [33]  he  accepted  that  the
    Claimant had established on  balance  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his partner who is a British  citizen  and
    that the couple now have a child who is a British  citizen,  they  were
    living together as a family and intended to continue to do so  if  they
    were permitted.  He also noted  at  [33]  that  if  the  Claimant  were
    required to leave the United Kingdom his partner would  visit  him  and
    spend time with him in Bangladesh and it would be open to the  Claimant
    to apply for entry as a spouse from  Bangladesh.   At  [34]  the  Judge
    found that whilst the Claimant had not indicated any health issues, his
    partner  suffers  from  diabetes,  high  cholesterol  and  high   blood
    pressure.  However, he did not accept that her health conditions were a
    significant bar to her taking appropriate care of their child.

 3. The Judge then considered the Claimant's  case  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and also Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  He found at paragraphs [37]-[38] that the Claimant  did  not
    qualify under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules  nor  under  Appendix  FM
    because it was conceded the Claimant had not lived with his partner for
    two years in a relationship akin to marriage.

 4. The Judge then at [39-[49] considered Article 8 outside the  Rules  and
    he found at [39-[40] that in terms of the Claimant's relationship  that
    this had been formed at a time when his status was  unlawful  and  thus
    the scales in the proportionality exercise weighed heavily in favour of
    refusing his appeal.  However,  at  [41]  onwards  the  Judge  properly
    directed himself that he must consider the situation of the  Claimant's
    child and the jurisprudence including ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  and
    the fact that as Baroness Hale made clear, British nationality is not a
    trump card in assessing the best interests of  a  child  and  also  the
    precariousness of the Claimant's immigration status could not be blamed
    on his son.  The Judge also  considered  the  decision  in  AJ  (India)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 at [42] and at [44] adopted the Razgar  assessment
    set out in Omatunde (best interests: Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 247 (IAC).

 5. He concluded at [48]-[49]  that  taking  into  account  the  Claimant's
    child's best interests as a British citizen and noting at [49] it was a
    closely balanced decision, he took into account Section 117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act and that there is no public interest in requiring  a  person's
    removal where that person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a British citizen child and it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.  The Judge  proceeded  to  allow
    the appeal on that narrow basis.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal,  in  time,  on  19
    November 2015.  The grounds of appeal  essentially  asserted  that  the
    Judge had diluted the public interest element of the case by  reference
    to Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 because there  was  no  requirement
    that the child could be removed and that the family  had  a  choice  to
    continue family life in Bangladesh.  It was further submitted that  the
    decision was both confusing and contradictory which rendered it  unsafe
    and that the judge had in fact used the best interests of the child  as
    a trump card which was not  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) per Baroness Hale.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 5 July
    2016 on the basis that:

         "It is arguable that the decision is contradictory and in error  in
         finding it unreasonable for the child to leave  the  UK  where  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge also finds that the Appellant's wife  has
         spent extended periods of  time  in  Bangladesh  recently  and  has
         extensive family links there and where  it  is  based  on  guidance
         relevant to EU law rather than Article 8 ECHR."

    Hearing

8.   At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from  Mr  Avery  in  line
    with the grounds of appeal, where he  submitted  that  the  fundamental
    problem with the decision was that it was full  of  contradictions  and
    one might have expected the Judge to dismiss the appeal on the basis of
    his findings of fact.  He submitted  that  the  Claimant's  immigration
    history was very poor and the Judge had made a finding to  that  effect
    at [48] and that there was a clear error  in  terms  of  assessing  the
    reasonableness of the situation, which must be done in the  context  of
    the overall situation that prevailed, which includes a poor immigration
    history.  The Judge found there was nothing  to  prevent  the  Claimant
    seeking entry clearance as a spouse and there was  no  reason  why  the
    family could not relocate to Bangladesh as a whole.

9.   In his submissions, Mr Gajjar asked me to preserve the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and dismiss the appeal by the Secretary  of  State.
    He submitted that the determination  grappled  with  the  issues,  that
    there was no material error of law.  It was plain from looking  at  the
    final paragraphs,  48  and  49,  that  the  Judge  did  not  treat  the
    Claimant's child as a trump card  and  that  the  determination  was  a
    balanced one.   He  submitted  that  the  Claimant's  account  was  not
    accepted at face value.  The Judge  had  not  accepted  the  Claimant's
    evidence as a whole, i.e. that he had been in the United Kingdom for as
    long as he said he had.  The Judge found the family  did  have  choices
    and considered the issue of whether they could go back  but  also  took
    into account the fact that the Claimant's  immigration  history  should
    not be held against his child in accordance with the jurisprudence.  Mr
    Gajjar submitted that the Secretary of State's appeal was no more  than
    a disagreement with the findings of fact  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge that it had been open to him to make.

10.  In his reply Mr Avery submitted that [49] was a  prime  example  as  to
    where the Judge has gone wrong, because it  is  in  contradiction  with
    [48] and that this did constitute a material error of  law  because  it
    was necessary for a party to understand why he had lost.  He  submitted
    that paragraph 49 was not sustainable in light  of  the  Judge's  other
    findings.

    My findings

11.  I announced my decision at the hearing, which was  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
    which I uphold.  I now give my reasons.

12.  As  set  out  above,  the  Judge  gave  a  very  detailed  and  careful
    consideration to the issues arsing in this appeal.   In  essence,  this
    was a proportionality exercise outside the Rules where  the  very  poor
    immigration history of the Claimant needed to be balanced  against  the
    best interests of his British  child.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    Judge's findings are  contradictory  but  rather  that  the  Judge  was
    endeavouring to  set  out  the  arguments  both  for  and  against  the
    Claimant.  At [48] the Judge stated, "there is little of merit  in  the
    appellant's situation even taking account of his family life  with  his
    British citizen partner" but the Judge then took account  of  the  best
    interests of the Claimant's British child and found that removal of the
    Claimant would deny his child the benefit of a close relationship  with
    him.  The Judge then considered what choices the family had  and  found
    that the Claimant could go to Bangladesh and make  an  entry  clearance
    application from there and that his partner and child  could  accompany
    him.  If there was any  short  separation,  this  was  unlikely  to  be
    damaging to the Claimant's son  but  at  [49]  the  Judge  applied  the
    statutory provision set out  in  section  117B(6)  and  the  fact  that
    Parliament had stated that there is no public interest in  requiring  a
    person's removal  where  that  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  a  British  citizen  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    clear, in my view, that the  definition  of  "leave"  in  this  context
    envisaged a permanent rather than a temporary departure from the United
    Kingdom.

13.  The Judge further relied on the  Home  Office  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction  on  Family  Migration,  August  2015,  which  provides  as
    follows: "Where a decision to refuse the application  would  require  a
    parent or primary carer to return to a country outside of  the  EU  the
    case must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
    to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent  or
    primary carer". It was on this basis that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    public interest in requiring the Claimant's  removal  was  reduced  and
    thus the Judge found in his favour on this narrow basis.

14.  I note that in the grant of permission there is reference  to  guidance
    relevance to EU law rather than Article 8  of  the  European  on  Human
    Rights.  That regrettably is a misapprehension.  The Home Office IDI on
    Family Migration in respect of the extract cited by the judge  at  [49]
    is essentially sets out the principle in  Sanade  and  others  (British
    children -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC)  which  is
    applicable to this case, in that the Secretary of State is not entitled
    to require a British child to leave the  European  Union.  I  find  the
    Judge was entitled to  rely  on  that  principle  in  determining  this
    appeal.  I find that the grounds of appeal by the Secretary of State do
    in truth amount to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings of fact which he  was  entitled  to  make  and  I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



Notice of Decision

15.  The appeal by the Secretary of State  is  dismissed,  with  the  effect
    that the decision by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Rayner  to  allow  the
    Claimant's appeal is upheld.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


