
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30158/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE mahmood


                                   Between

                             NEDU MARK NWA-AMADI
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Akaho, Solicitor, BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is my ex tempore decision at the  hearing  today.  The  Appellant
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J S Pacey. She  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    which was considered on the papers at  the  Appellant's  request.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. On 14 May 2014 he had applied for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He had said that he was divorced from an EEA  national.   That
    EEA national is called Miss Veronique Mathern. The marriage was said to
    have taken place on 10 January 2009 and the divorce on 28 August  2012.



2.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination had stated  in  part  as
    follows: Firstly,  that the Appellant had not discharged the burden  of
    proof on him in  relation  to  Regulation  10(5)  and  in  relation  to
    Regulation  10(5)(d)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)   Regulations   2006.
    Secondly, that the appeal was to be dismissed. Thirdly, that all of the
    evidence that had been submitted had been taken into account  including
    P60s tax documents in the Appellant's name.

3.    In relation to the documents before me, the Appellant  has  sought  to
    rely upon a bundle of documents with an index page marked A1 to F4.  In
    addition the Respondent  provided  during  the  hearing  a  copy  of  a
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Ghaffar   which   was
    promulgated on 20 March 2014.  I shall return  to  that  determination,
    but it is to be noted that the  decision  had  related  to  a  previous
    application which  had  been  made  by  the  Appellant  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, but which had also been dismissed.

4.    It is relevant to  set  out  the  Regulations  themselves  and  it  is
    Regulation 10(5) and 10(6) in particular which are relied upon.

5.    In these Regulations a family member who has  retained  the  right  of
    residence means subject to paragraph  8  a  person  who  satisfies  the
    conditions in paragraph 2, 3, 4 or 5

         "(5)     A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

             (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified  person  or
                  of an EEA national with a permanent right of residence  on
                  the termination of the marriage or  civil  partnership  of
                  that person;

             (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
                  these Regulations at the date of the termination;

             (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

             (d) either-

                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                      termination of the marriage or the civil  partnership
                      the marriage or civil partnership had lasted  for  at
                      least three years and the parties to the marriage  or
                      civil partnership had resided in the  United  Kingdom
                      for at least one year during its duration;

                  (ii)       the former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                      qualified person or the EEA national with a permanent
                      right of residence has custody  of  a  child  of  the
                      qualified person;

                  (iii)      the former spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                       qualified person or the EEA national with a permanent
                       right of residence has a right of access to  a  child
                       ....  "

         (6)      The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

             (a) is not an EEA national  but  would,  if  he  were  an  EEA
                  national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-
                  sufficient person under regulation 6; or

             (b) is the family member of a person who falls within
                  paragraph (a).

6.    In relation to the grounds of appeal, the ground of appeal  which  was
    stressed was that there was a material error of law because  the  judge
    had failed to consider the contention that there was  no  necessity  to
    show that the couple had to be living together and there was  reference
    to the European Court's decision in Aissatou Diatta v Land  Berlin.  It
    is said a marital relationship  is  not  affected  merely  because  the
    spouses have lived separately.

7.    The summary of the case at paragraph 2 of the report states:

         "For the purposes of Article 10 of Regulation number 1612/68  which
         provides for the right of a  migrant  worker's  spouse  to  install
         herself with him the marital relationship  cannot  be  regarded  as
         dissolved so long as it has not been terminated  by  the  competent
         authority.  It is not dissolved merely because the spouse has lived
         separately even where they intend to divorce at a later date."

    This then also takes into account the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  of
    Amos v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 552.

8.    Mr Norton conceded that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision because the First-tier Tribunal Judge did expect the couple to
    be living together, but that was not necessary. In the circumstances Mr
    Akaho on behalf of the Appellant invited me to remake the decision  and
    as I have indicated, a large bundle of  documents  was  provided,  many
    items of which includes documents that were not before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

9.    As I indicated during the  submissions  of  the  parties  there  is  a
    difficulty which arises and that difficulty stems from  the  fact  that
    Judge Ghaffar made adverse credibility findings in  his  determination.
    That determination was not available to Judge Pacey. Judge Ghaffar  had
    said in part at paragraph 12 of his determination as follows:

         "There were payslips provided how the enquiry with the HMRC damages
         the credibility of these documents. The Appellant has not  provided
         any evidence from the employers to verify the  employment.  He  has
         not sought to provide any explanation with regards to  the  records
         held by the HMRC. Accordingly I find the Appellant  has  failed  to
         provide  satisfactory  evidence  that  his  former  wife,  an   EEA
         national, was exercising her treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom
         for the purpose of the EEA Regulations."

10.   Mr Norton says that there is still a lack of  evidence  to  show  that
    the EEA national was exercising treaty rights in the UK for the purpose
    of the EEA Regulations with reference to Regulation 13.  He says  while
    one needs to look at page C1 of the bundle now before me,  document  C1
    states in part as follows in relation to checks which were made by UKBA
    with Her Majesty's Revenue  and  Customs:  "No  employments  have  been
    traced for the period requested according to HMRC systems and for self-
    assessment no trace on HMRC systems."

11.   Therefore on  the  one  hand  I  have  the  HMRC  document  and  Judge
    Ghaffar's findings (which incidentally were  not  the  subject  of  any
    appeal and therefore at the very least those findings are the  starting
    point for the decision which has to be considered).  But on  the  other
    hand I have now the documents at C6 and at C7.  C6  is  for  the  years
    2012 to 2013 and it is said therefore this  is  indicative  of  showing
    that treaty rights must have been  exercised  because  the  Appellant's
    former wife was working according to this tax calculation.

12.   However, the difficulty which arises,  as  I  indicated  to  Mr  Akaho
    during his submissions, is that there is no actual  explanation  as  to
    how it is that there continued to be documents sent from  for  example,
    the HMRC, to the Appellant's former wife at her  previous  address  and
    how it is that these documents have been obtained at all.  This  cannot
    be explained by way of submissions and as  I  have  discussed  with  Mr
    Akaho that what he says cannot be evidence. Indeed as eloquent  and  as
    helpful as he has been, I cannot accept his submission as  equating  to
    evidence, as much as I would want to do so. This is an  important  part
    of the case.

13.   The difficulty is in reality of the Appellant's making. The  Appellant
    had chosen to have his case considered on the papers before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and similarly the Appellant has chosen to have  his
    case considered without any evidence from him.  There  was  no  witness
    statement from him for this hearing, despite the large  bundle  and  he
    has not therefore been heard in respect of any oral evidence.

14.   There remains a difference in the documentation which I am  unable  to
    resolve.  I make it clear that I am not making any findings that  there
    has been deception or fraud on the part of the Appellant.  To  do  that
    would be to go too far. What I conclude however is that the  burden  of
    proof  has  remained  on  the  Appellant  throughout  and  he  in   the
    circumstances has failed to discharge that burden of proof. It on  that
    basis that although I find a material error of  law  in  Judge  Pacey's
    decision, when remaking the decision, I have no alternative and  indeed
    no hesitation in  concluding  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  based  on
    seeking a residence card has to be dismissed.

15.   In the circumstances the appeal is  dismissed.   Of  course  it  is  a
    matter for the Appellant as to what he does next. As explored  with  Mr
    Akaho during submissions, it appears open to the Appellant should he so
    choose, without any indication one way or the other from me, to make  a
    further application  to  the  Secretary  of  State  based  on  the  EEA
    Regulations.  For present purposes, I say no more than that the  appeal
    fails and is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The original appeal involved the making  of  a  material  error  of  law.  I
remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.

There is no anonymity direction



Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
