
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Face to Face            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 25th May 2021                         |On the 28th June 2021         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  mr A U O
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, instructed by D J Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the  decision  by  the  respondent  dated






















    15th July 2014  (served on 21st July 2014) to remove the appellant from
    the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999, and the refusal under the immigration rules and on  human  rights
    grounds on 15th July 2014 of the appellant's application dated 30th May
    2014.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 3rd May  1989,  and  had
    been granted entry clearance as a visitor on 22nd July 2004 valid until
    22nd January 2005,  He landed in the United Kingdom on 1st August 2004,
    aged 15 years old.

 3. In 2006 he was  included  as  a  dependent  child  on  the  application
    submitted by his mother but that was withdrawn in July  2007.   He  was
    included as a dependant of his father  in  an  application  dated  20th
    April 2007 which was rejected, and the resubmission rejected  again  on
    14th November 2007 and the  appellant  was  served  with  a  notice  of
    liability to removal in line with his father  as  an  illegal  entrant.
    His  father  had  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1981  and  the
    appellant's mother joined her husband in London  in  1999.   A  further
    application made by the appellant's father was refused on 2nd  December
    2009, a humanitarian protection claim was refused on  28th  July  2010.
    The appellant made an application on his own behalf which  was  refused
    on 30th August 2013.  The appellant made a further application on  30th
    May 2014 which was refused and which generated this right of appeal.

 4. The human rights' decision dated 15th July 2014 under appeal considered
    that the appellant met the suitability requirements  for  consideration
    of limited leave to remain either as a partner or parent under Appendix
    FM.  At the time, the appellant however had no partner and was rejected
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because  he  was  not  in  a
    relationship and was further rejected under Appendix FM because he  was
    not a parent of a child in the United Kingdom.

 5. The appellant appealed on  30th  July  2014,  in  accordance  with  the
    previous  appeal  regime  under  Sections  82   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  (amended  with
    transitional provisions on 6th April 2015),  that his return to Nigeria
    and the decision was not in accordance with the law, not in  accordance
    with the immigration rules, the discretion should have  been  exercised
    differently and the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 and would breach his human rights.

 6. The appeal against the decision of  15th  July  2014  has  a  long  and
    protracted history.  His appeal against removal was allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell on  4th  March  2015  who  noted  that  the
    appellant had been present in the UK for over  ten  years,  came  as  a
    child, had spent his time well obtaining qualifications, including  his
    masters degree in pharmacy and was  capable  of  making  a  significant
    contribution to the community in the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant
    stated that he had ambitions to study further and qualify as a surgeon.
     Judge Kimnell found it to be  a  marginal  case  but  on  balance  the
    decision to remove him was a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    Article 8 rights.

 7. The Secretary of State appealed that decision on  the  basis  that  the
    judge failed properly to apply Section 117B of 2002  Act  and  secondly
    failed to conduct an adequate balancing  exercise  attaching  too  much
    weight  to  the  respondent's  qualifications  and   potential   future
    contribution to the United  Kingdom.   On  8th  September  2016,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kamara and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris found  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  attached  too  much  weight  to   the
    respondent's ability to speak English and  to  the  likelihood  of  him
    becoming financially independent given his qualifications in  pharmacy,
    in line  with  Rhuppiah  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  803.   Additionally  the  judge  erred  in
    relation to Section 117B(4) and (5) in that there  was  no  recognition
    that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was  overwhelmingly
    unlawful and initially precarious.  The  judge  did  not  identify  any
    "compelling reasons" which merited  allowing  the  appeal  outside  the
    Rules.

 8. The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  It was heard again
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 15th March 2017.   The  appellant
    did not learn until  16th  November  2017  that  his  appeal  had  been
    dismissed.  The judge noted the appellant was gifted  academically  and
    had a younger brother who was a successful professional footballer  but
    found that he had gone to university and  lived  an  independent  life.
    The appellant had not established that he had enjoyed family life  ties
    above normal family ties within the meaning of Article 8 as per  'AA  v
    United Kingdom' (sic).  She noted that the three  years  the  appellant
    had spent in the United Kingdom as a minor unlawfully was entirely  the
    responsibility of his parents  but  that  as  an  adult,  he  knew  his
    immigration status was precarious and he had no  right  to  be  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   She  found  he  was  integrated,  motivated  and  an
    upstanding member of his local community and did not arrive at his  own
    behest. She  found  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into Nigeria and that he had a brother  there
    already with whom although he was not in contact, and an  aunt  and  he
    could locate and old friends from school.

 9. That decision of the First-tier Tribunal was again challenged  on  29th
    November 2017 by an application for permission to appeal, this time  by
    the appellant.  The matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal I A  Lewis
    on 11th July 2018.  Regrettably,  no  decision  was  promulgated  until
    14th June 2019, over two years since the refusal by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Grant.  When the decision was promulgated Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Lewis found an error of law in the  approach  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the  family  life  of  the  appellant  and  set  aside  the
    decision.

10. On 16th January 2016, a child had been born to the appellant  following
    a relationship.  That relationship had broken down by the date  of  the
    birth of the child.  I acknowledge that the decision of Judge Grant was
    set aside but the evidence recorded is relevant.  It is right to  state
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant  noted  that  the  appellant  has
    numerous family members in the UK, comprising his father,  his  mother,
    his younger brother, six cousins and two aunts.  She  also  noted  that
    the appellant has a daughter in the UK called GF and that the appellant
    and the mother had split up when the child was  a  few  weeks  old  and



         "He has not been allowed to have contact with the child since.  The
         mother of the child has now moved back to Hull  where  her  parents
         live and taken GF with her.  The appellant has sought legal  advice
         about seeking contact with his daughter but was told  that  because
         he has no lawful presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  would  not
         qualify for any kind of legal aid and the fact he is unlawfully  in
         the UK would also be considered a negative factor in terms of being
         able to provide any kind of stability for his daughter.

         The appellant is not seeking to capitalise on the fact that he  has
         a child in the UK.  He cannot prove that GF is his daughter because
         he does not have a  birth  certificate  showing  his  name  as  the
         father, but he presumes DNA testing could prove that,  but  in  the
         absence of the mother volunteering to allow the child to be  tested
         he would have to pursue this through the Family Court".

11. The above sets out the position of the appellant vis-�-vis his daughter
    as in 2017.  At that point there was no evidence that he was indeed the
    father of his child, but it does indicate that he had been  considering
    attempts to have contact with his child and that  he  had  not  ignored
    those prospects.  In the bundle before me there  was  a  DNA  Profiling
    test report dated  19th  December  2018  which  demonstrated  that  the
    appellant was indeed the biological father.

12. In relation to the resumed matter the appellant's solicitors  wrote  to
    the Tribunals in July 2019 submitting that the  appellant  had  ongoing
    proceedings in the Family Court concerning contact  with  his  daughter
    and that an  application   had  been  made  to  the  courts  for  those
    proceedings and any  orders  by  the  court  to  be  disclosed  to  the
    Tribunal.  It was noted that the appellant would obviously wish to rely
    on those matters in any resumed hearing and that the matter  should  be
    adjourned to September 2019.  It was made clear to  the  Tribunal  that
    there were ongoing contact proceedings to which  the  appellant  was  a
    party but that the Tribunal needed the permission of the  Family  Court
    under  the  family  Procedure  Rules  in  order  for  disclosure.   The
    appellant's representatives pointed to RS immigration and family  court
    proceedings India [2012] UKUT 00218.   The  matter  was  set  down  for
    hearing not before 1st October 2019.

13. On 26th November 2019, the respondent confirmed that  as  the  decision
    under appeal was made on 15th July 2014 the new  provision  of  Section
    85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  not
    applicable to the appeal and therefore the issue of consent in relation
    to a new matter, that being the child did not arise.  In the event this
    was conceded by the Secretary of State.

14. The first order of the Family Court in relation to  the  appellant  and
    his child G, was dated 10th December  2019  and  confirmed  that  there
    should be indirect contact by way of the father sending letters  and/or
    cards each fortnight  to  his  daughter  and  that  the  mother  should
    encourage the daughter to send pictures and cards  to  the  father  and
    provide quarterly updates on her welfare and development to the father.
     Permission was granted  to  disclose  the  order  to  the  immigration
    Tribunal.  A further order was made on 23rd April 2020  by  the  Family
    Court, noting that a final hearing  listed  for  22nd  April  2020  was
    adjourned, that the order  of  31st  May  2019  for  a  female  genital
    mutilation order in relation to the  child  for  the  duration  of  her
    minority was maintained and that there should be  indirect  contact  by
    way  of  the  father  sending  letters  and/or  cards,  together   with
    appropriate photographs of himself once a week to his  daughter  (inter
    alia).

15. The case was relisted for a final hearing before the same family  judge
    on 10th July 2020.  It was noted that the father remained a litigant in
    person.  Once again  permission  was  granted  for  disclosure  to  the
    immigration Tribunal.

16. The matter was adjourned within  the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  for  case
    management direction hearings and  following  the  COVID  pandemic.   A
    further case management hearing made directions and on 13th May 2021 an
    updated composite appeal bundle was provided for  the  resumed  hearing
    before me which included pages  1  to  303  and  contained  an  updated
    witness statement of the appellant which  he  signed  at  court  and  a
    "child arrangements and prohibited steps Section 8 Children  Act  1989"
    order dated 10th July 2020 and a "child arrangements" order dated  21st
    October 2020.

17. The Family  Court  order  of  10th  July  2020  granted  the  appellant
    supervised contact once every two weeks for a period of two  hours  and
    continued the indirect contact by way of letters and/or cards, together
    with appropriate photographs of himself and his family once a  week  to
    his daughter.

18. The child's birth certificate was ordered to  be  amended  to  add  the
    appellant as her biological father and for the daughter's  homework  to
    be sent weekly to the appellant.  Pictures of the appellant's  daughter
    celebrating her subsequent birthdays were to be sent to  the  appellant
    and for the mother to advise the appellant at least four  weeks  before
    she intended to take the daughter out of the United Kingdom.   On  21st
    October 2020 a contact order was made that,  subject  to  the  COVID-19
    Regulations permitting the continued opening of child contact  centres,
    the mother must make sure that the child spends time or  otherwise  has
    supervised contact with the father once per month for the period of two
    hours.  It  would  appear  that  this  was  amended  during  the  COVID
    restrictions with a proviso that the father would have to evidence  his
    commitment for  a  period  of  approximately  twelve  months  before  a
    progression could be considered.  Again the mother was to send  updates
    on the child's welfare and development, to include appropriate pictures
    to the father once a month and the father was permitted to send letters
    and/or cards, together with appropriate photographs of himself  once  a
    week.  The mother was to encourage the child to send pictures and cards
    to her father.

19. At the hearing before me the appellant signed and adopted  his  witness
    statement dated 25th May 2020 and  confirmed  by  questioning  from  Mr
    Fripp that his family paid  �1,200  each  month  by  way  of  financial
    support.  It was his father, mother and brother who paid, and he stated
    that as a qualified pharmacist if he were able to  work,  he  would  be
    able to pay himself.  He was excited at the prospect of  having  direct
    contact with his daughter whom he had not seen since she was  4  months
    old, and he felt very emotional about the prospect.  He  last  saw  his
    daughter in May 2016  on  his  birthday  and  he  was  excited  at  the
    possibility of the COVID restrictions being lifted  so  he  could  have
    contact.  He thought it was important that he could help her  know  her
    background and answer her questions as to why she looked like  she  did
    as she was white English and black African and that he would be able to
    contribute to putting  the  family's  values  into  her  education  and
    upbringing.

20. Under cross-examination he  stated  that  he  formerly  tried  to  make
    contact in 2018 but prior to that time her mother and the appellant had
    split and she was difficult.  He had attempted to text her.  He  stated
    that prior to the hearing before Judge Grant he had  tried  to  contact
    the mother informally.   Because of his status he was confused, and  he
    thought he was not entitled to help and had stopped using a lawyer.  He
    first started sending money in 2019 which was after the  decision  from
    Judge Grant but prior to the error of law decision.  He  only  had  the
    information he had in relation to the financial  payments  and  he  had
    been provided with no statement from the mother.

21. He confirmed that it was correct that his  parents  had  declared  that
    they did not have enough money to support him if he removed to  Nigeria
    but at present his father as a nursing associate was doing extra shifts
    and so was his mother and the brother was making a contribution.

22. Enquiry was made of the FGM order, and the appellant  stated  that  the
    mother had declared that he would take the child to Nigeria and conduct
    FGM, but he stated that his family found  the  practice  abhorrent  and
    would in no way  would  consider  it  and  further  in  any  event  the
    appellant could not  remove  the  child  from  the  jurisdiction.   The
    appellant stated he had been at the Family Court at  that  point  as  a
    litigant in person and this was an argument  that  was  raised  by  the
    mother without justification.

23. When asked why he suddenly decided to make a financial contribution  he
    responded that mentally he  had  become  an  adult  and  he  wished  to
    contribute to the things that she wanted, such as pets and he wanted to
    be a father she was proud of.  He had no contact with  his  brother  in
    Nigeria who had been deported.

24. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant had arrived in the UK when he was
    15 years and 3 months old and had spent his formative years in  Nigeria
    and did not accept that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration there.  The appellant claimed he had no  relationship
    with his brother, but his parents were funding his brother in  Nigeria.
    It  was  not  accepted  that  there  would   be   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences to his removal because the appellant was both  intelligent
    and educated.  He had qualified as a pharmacist, and it may  be  argued
    that  his  potential  contribution  to  society  was  important  in  UE
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975 terms but  that  had  to  be  very
    substantial and did not come near the relevant threshold.  With regards
    his family life with his parents he had lived in the same dwelling  and
    there was some financial dependency  but  as  stated  in  AAO  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840 financial dependency on  its  own
    was insufficient to engage Article 8 and Mr Tufan did not  accept  that
    Article 8 family life was engaged.

25. It was accepted that the appellant was the father of the  child  G  but
    the last time he saw her was when she was 4 months old and the evidence
    in the bundle was that there had been some financial  transactions  but
    no more than that  and  the  timing  of  the  contributions  should  be
    considered; they did not commence until 2019 and postdated  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.  I  was  referred  to  the  authorities  of  RS
    immigration family court procedures [2012] UKUT 00018  and  AB  Jamaica
    [2019] EWCA Civ 661 [2019]; each case turned on its own facts.  It  was
    clear that the appellant had been attempting to make contact  now,  but
    the real issue was whether he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship as  per  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.   Mr  Tufan
    submitted that the rationale of MS Ivory Coast [2007] EWCA Civ 133  was
    relevant and the proceedings in the Family Court  were  not  finalised,
    and the Tribunal could allow the appeal to a limited extent or at least
    give a direction thereto.  Mr Tufan did not accept that there had  been
    a parental relationship and referred me to RS.

26. Mr Fripp relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant's relationship and his contact  ended  at  approximately  the
    same  time.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been
    uninterested and uncaring.  The fact that it took  two  years  to  take
    formal proceedings was highly understandable and  was  an  identifiable
    phenomenon that going through the court process worsened  relationships
    and here the relationship had been hardened.  There was no  restrictive
    order from the Family Court and the appellant had been awarded a  large
    amount of indirect contact.  He was a non-custodial parent, but he took
    the role seriously and responsibly.  The fact that it took  two  and  a
    half years to go to law did  not  go  to  the  factual  position  under
    Section 117B(6).  The position as at today was what was relevant.   The
    view of the Family Court was that there should  be  direct  contact  as
    soon as restrictions were removed.  AB  Jamaica  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661
    rejected the suggestion that there needed to be  direct  parental  care
    and nor did there need to be parental responsibility.  This was a  case
    some way up the spectrum in relation to  Section  117B(6)  and  on  the
    current  facts  it  should  be  accepted  that  there  was  a  parental
    relationship for the purposes of Section 117B(6).  The cultural aspects
    and heritage were important.

27. In relation to private life the appellant had  entered  lawfully  as  a
    child and had overstayed at the behest of his  parents  while  still  a
    minor.  He had now lived in the United Kingdom for seventeen years  and
    substantially acclimatised having excelled in his secondary  education.
    He had been educated to professional level and had a qualification as a
    pharmacist.  He had evidently been unable to work but had been involved
    in  the  church  and  was  supporting  family  members   and   actively
    volunteering.  He has a family life with his child,  and  it  was  also
    submitted that he had a family life with his parents bearing in mind he
    had not founded a separate independent household.  That was  consistent
    with the Strasbourg Court ruling of AA Nigeria, the reference to  which
    was found  at  paragraph  18  of  his  skeleton  argument.   Given  the
    appellant's lengthy presence and good character, having left  full-time
    education in June 2011, it would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant.  And the appeal should be allowed.



Analysis

28. The fundamental issue in this appeal is whether the appellant can  meet
    the immigration rules and whether the respondent's decision  represents
    a disproportionate breach of Article 8  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  The position of the Secretary of State is set out in  Appendix
    FM to the Immigration Rules in relation to family  life  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1) in relation to private life.

29. Under the Immigration Rules the requirements for leave to remain  as  a
    family member are set out at Appendix FM and these  include  provisions
    for those seeking leave to remain as the  parent  of  a  child  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It should be noted  that  the  requirements  under  R-
    LTRPT.1.1 include that the applicant must have made a valid application
    for limited or indefinite leave to remain as a parent  or  partner  (R-
    LTRPT1.1(b)).  The applicant's refusal decision was made back  in  2014
    and prior to any child being  born.   His  application  was  considered
    however under Appendix FM (both partner and parent limbs), but  it  was
    noted that he did not claim that he was in a relationship at that  time
    nor had a child.  Appendix FM 'suitability provisions' were considered.
    As I indicated above the Secretary of State conceded that the  question
    of the new matter did not arise because the appeal was being considered
    under the 'old appeal' regime  and  the  decision  made  prior  to  the
    introduction of Section  85(5)  of  the  2002  Act.  I  consider  those
    immigration rules below.

30. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act,  however,
    sets out as follows;
         "117AApplication of this Part
         (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
             life under Article 8, and

             (b)as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
             and

             (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).

         117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a)a private life, or

             (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom".


31. As stated in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53  (paragraph  17)  subsection
    117B(6) is on its face free-standing, the only qualification being that
    the person relying on it is not  liable  to  deportation.   Albeit  the
    question of the reasonableness of  the  child  being  with  the  parent
    outside the UK would still need to be addressed, it  was  accepted  and
    conceded by Mr Tufan that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child in this case  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  thus  Section
    117B(6)(b) is satisfied.  Should those two limbs (Section  117B(6)  (a)
    and (b) be satisfied statute which prevails over the Immigration  Rules
    dictates that the appeal should be allowed.  The  question  is  whether
    the appellant has a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child".

32. The Court of Appeal in AB Jamaica  held at paragraphs  86  to  98  that
    there did not have to be an element  of  direct  parental  care  for  a
    subsisting and genuine  relationship  and  Singh  LJ  accepted  it  was
    possible to have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
    child particularly in  cases  where  contact  had  only  recently  been
    resumed on a limited basis.

33. In particular at paragraphs 89 and 90 of AB Jamaica Singh LJ  held  [my
    underlining]:

         "89. Like UTJ Plimmer I also have found helpful the judgment of UTJ
         Grubb in R (RK) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
         UKUT 00031 (IAC). Although  the  facts  of  that  case  were  quite
         different, as they concerned a grandmother and whether  she  needed
         to have "parental responsibility" for a child, what UTJ Grubb  said
         at paras. 42-43 contains an analysis of the  concept  of  "parental
         relationship" with which I would respectfully agree:

             "42.     Whether a person is in a 'parental relationship' with
                  a  child  must,  necessarily,  depend  on  the  individual
                  circumstances. Those circumstances will include what  role
                  they actually play in caring for and making  decisions  in
                  relation to the  child.  That  is  likely  to  be  a  most
                  significant factor. However, it will also include  whether
                  that  relationship   arises   because   of   their   legal
                  obligations as a parent or in lieu of  a  parent  under  a
                  court order or other legal obligation. I accept that it is
                  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to   have   'parental
                  responsibility' in law for there to be a relevant  factor.
                  What is important is that  the  individual  can  establish
                  that they have taken on the role that a  'parent'  usually
                  plays in the life of their child.

             43.  I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that,  in  effect,
                  an individual must 'step into the shoes of  a  parent'  in
                  order to establish a 'parental relationship'. If the  role
                  they play, whether as a relative or friend of the  family,
                  is as a caring relative or friend but not so as to take on
                  the role of a parent then it cannot be said that they have
                  a 'parental relationship' with the child.  It  is  perhaps
                  obvious to state that 'carers' are not per se 'parents'. A
                  child may have carers who do not step into  the  shoes  of
                  their parents  but  look  after  the  child  for  specific
                  periods  of  time  (for  example  where  the  parents  are
                  travelling abroad for a holiday or  family  visit).  Those
                  carers  may  be  professionally  employed;  they  may   be
                  relatives; or they may be friends. In all those cases,  it
                  may  properly  be  said  that  there  is  an  element   of
                  dependency between  the  child  and  his  or  her  carers.
                  However, that alone would not, in my judgment,  give  rise
                  to a 'parental relationship.'"

         90.   Returning  to  the  case  of  SR  (Pakistan)  I  would   also
         respectfully agree with what was said by UTJ Plimmer at para. 39:

             "There are likely to be many cases in which both parents  play
             an important role in their child's  life  and  therefore  both
             have subsisting parental relationships with  the  child,  even
             though the child resides with one parent and  not  the  other.
             There are also cases where the nature and  extent  of  contact
             and any break in  contact  is  such  that  although  there  is
             contact, a subsisting parental relationship cannot be said  to
             have been formed. Each case turns on its own facts."




34. Additionally in AB (Jamaica),  King  LJ  from  paragraphs  107  to  111
    emphasised the  importance  of  the  right  of  the  child  to  have  a
    relationship with a parent and ensuing the principles when stating  the
    following

         "107.    The considerable importance which the Family Court  places
         on the right of a child to have a relationship with his parents was
         restated by Sir James Munby P in Re Q (Implacable Contact  Dispute)
         [2015] EWCA Civ 991; [2016] 2 FLR 287 by reference  to  an  earlier
         decision of his in 2011:

             "[19]    The first are the principles which I sought to distil
                  in Re C (A Child) (Suspension of Contact) [2011] EWCA Civ
                  521, [2011] 2 FLR 912, para 47, as follows:

                      .     Contact  between  parent   and   child   is   a
                           fundamental element of family life and is  almost
                           always in the interests of the child.

                      .    Contact  between  parent  and  child  is  to  be
                           terminated  only  in  exceptional  circumstances,
                           where there are cogent reasons for doing  so  and
                           when there is no alternative. Contact  is  to  be
                           terminated only if it will be detrimental to  the
                           child's welfare.

                      .    There is a positive obligation on the State, and
                           therefore on  the  judge,  to  take  measures  to
                           maintain and  to  reconstitute  the  relationship
                           between parent and child, in short,  to  maintain
                           or restore contact. The judge has a positive duty
                           to attempt to promote  contact.  The  judge  must
                           grapple  with  all  the  available   alternatives
                           before abandoning hope of achieving some contact.
                           He must be careful not to  come  to  a  premature
                           decision, for contact is to be stopped only as  a
                           last resort and only once  it  has  become  clear
                           that the child will not benefit  from  continuing
                           the attempt.

                      .    The court should take  both  a  medium-term  and
                           long-term view and not accord excessive weight to
                           what appear likely to be short-term or  transient
                           problems.

                      .     The  key  question,  which  requires  "stricter
                           scrutiny", is whether the  judge  has  taken  all
                           necessary steps  to  facilitate  contact  as  can
                           reasonably be demanded in  the  circumstances  of
                           the particular case.

                      .    All that said, at the end of the day the welfare
                           of the child is paramount; "the child's  interest
                           must   have    precedence    over    any    other
                           consideration."

         108.     The recognition of the importance to a  child  of  contact
         with a parent with whom he is not living is also reflected  in  the
         terms of section 117B(6)(a).

         109.     In order to demonstrate a genuine and substantial parental
         relationship, it is common ground that it is not necessary for  the
         absent parent to have parental responsibility and, in my judgement,
         it is hard to see how it can be said otherwise than that  a  parent
         has the necessary "genuine and substantial  parental  relationship"
         where that parent is seeing his or her  child  in  an  unsupervised
         setting on  a  regular  basis,  whether  or  not  he  has  parental
         responsibility and whether or not  by  virtue  of  a  court  order.
         Equally, the existence of a court order permitting  direct  contact
         in favour of the absent parent is not conclusive  evidence  of  the
         necessary parental relationship. It  may  be  that  a  court  would
         conclude  that  there  is  no  "genuine  and  substantial  parental
         relationship" where, for example, a parent has  the  benefit  of  a
         court order but does not,  or  only  unreliably  and  infrequently,
         takes up his or her contact.

    110. So far as indirect contact is concerned, it  should  be  borne  in
         mind that the Family Court typically strives  to  promote  regular,
         unsupervised, face to face contact between a child and his  or  her
         parent. If a court limits that contact to  indirect  contact  only,
         that is because the court, in a decision making  process  in  which
         the child's welfare is paramount (Children Act 1989, section 1) has
         decided  that  such  a  significant  limitation  on  the   parental
         relationship is in the best interests of the child in question  and
         the reasons for such a decision having been reached  by  the  judge
         will be highly relevant to the tribunal's consideration of  section
         117B(6)(a).

    111.     Having said that, whilst perhaps more  likely,  it  is  by  no
         means inevitable that a tribunal will conclude that a parent has no
         "genuine  and  substantial  parental  relationship"  absent  direct
         contact. It may be that there has been a long gap  in  contact  and
         that indirect contact marks a gentle  re-introduction,  or  that  a
         parent has to show (and is showing) commitment to indirect  contact
         before direct contact can be introduced.  Where  however  a  Family
         Court has made a final order limiting contact to indirect  contact,
         particularly when there is no provision for progression  to  direct
         contact, the tribunal should look closely at the reasons which  led
         to the court making such a restrictive order'".

35. Mr Tufan also referred me to the case of RS and the immigration  family
    court process [2012] UKUT 00018 and the following principles set out in
    the headnote.

         '1. Where a claimant appeals against a decision to deport or remove
         and there are outstanding family proceedings relating to a child of
         the claimant, the judge  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
         should first consider:

         i) Is the outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely  to
         be material to the immigration decision?

         ii) Are there compelling public interest  reasons  to  exclude  the
         claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of the
         family proceedings or the best interest of the child?

         iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by  an  appellant
         in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe  that  the
         family proceedings have  been  instituted  to  delay  or  frustrate
         removal and not to promote the child's welfare?

         2. In assessing the above questions, the judge will  normally  want
         to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in  and
         contact with the child, the timing of contact proceedings  and  the
         commitment with which they have been progressed, when a decision is
         likely to be reached, what materials (if any) are already available
         or can be made available to identify pointers to where the  child's
         welfare lies?

         3. Having considered these matters the judge  will  then  have  to
         decide:

         i) Does the claimant have at least an Article  8  right  to  remain
         until the conclusion of the family proceedings?

         ii) If so, should the appeal be allowed to a limited extent  and  a
         discretionary leave be directed as per the decision  on  MS  (Ivory
         Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133?

         iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short period of an
         adjournment to be granted to enable the core decision to be made in
         the family proceedings?

         iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a  view
         on the present state of knowledge of whether the appellant would be
         allowed to remain in the event  that  the  outcome  of  the  family
         proceedings is the maintenance of family contact between him or her
         and a child resident here?'

36. With these principles in mind and the various questions raised in RS to
    be addressed it is clear that  the  'contemplated  family  proceedings'
    which are both underway and ongoing are  material  to  the  immigration
    decision, not least because of  the  application  of  Section  117B(6).
    There are no compelling public interest reasons to exclude the claimant
    from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the  outcome  of  the  family
    proceedings or the best interests of the child.  The decision taken  in
    2014 by the Secretary of State confirmed that the appellant  would  not
    be excluded on suitability grounds.

37. The third question which was to be answered was whether there  was  any
    reason to believe that the family proceedings had  been  instituted  to
    delay or frustrate removal and not to promote the child's welfare.

38. In assessing that third question in RS the judge would normally want to
    consider

      1) the degree of the claimant's previous interest in and contact  with
         a child;

      2) the timing of contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with  which
         they have been progressed;

      3) when a decision is likely to be reached;

      4) what materials (if any)  are  already  available  or  can  be  made
         available to identify the pointers to  where  the  child's  welfare
         lies.

39. I also had regard to the Home Office guidance in 'Family Policy  Family
    life  (as  a  partner  or  parent),  private   life   and   exceptional
    circumstances' dated 28 January 2021 and referred to by Mr  Tufan.   In
    particular the relevant paragraphs at pages 50-51 set out as follows:

    'The contact can be  indirect  although  it  is  likely,  although  not
    inevitable, that a  relationship  will  not  be  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8 if there is no or infrequent contact. Where  the  contact  is
    not direct, the reasons for that must be adequately considered. ...

    ...Where there are 2  parents,  unless  evidence  is  provided  to  the
    contrary, it should be assumed that one or both could provide  parental
    responsibility for the child.

    In each case a finding on whether there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship capable of engaging  Article  8  is  highly  fact
    specific. You should consider whether the applicant is:

         . the child's parent


         . taking an active  role  in  the  child's  upbringing  and  making
         decisions that directly affect them


         . the child's primary or secondary carer


         . willing and able to look after the child


         . living with the child


         . seeing the child on a regular basis


         . making an active contribution to the child's life


    Consideration should also be given to whether there any relevant  court
    orders governing access to the child and if there is there any evidence
    provided within the application as to the views  of  the  child,  other
    family members or social workers or other relevant professionals.


    Factors which might prompt closer scrutiny include:


         . the person has little or no contact with the child or contact  is
         irregular


         . any contact is only recent or is infrequent or sporadic


         . support is financial in nature; but there is little or no contact
         or emotional support


         . the child is largely independent of the person ...'


40. The question of whether there is a subsisting and parental relationship
    is  fact-sensitive  in  each  case.  I  am  not  persuaded   that   the
    relationship is being used to frustrate  the  appellant's  removal.   I
    accept the appellant's evidence as being candid and consistent with the
    evidence he gave to First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant in 2017.   At  that
    point the appellant stated that  he  had  a  child  and  explained  the
    difficulty which he had encountered when trying to secure contact.  The
    appellant explained in his evidence that he  had  broken  up  with  the
    mother of the child prior to her birth but had  retained  contact  with
    the child until she was approximately 4 months old and since that  time
    had lost contact.  He explained at court that he had attempted to  make
    informal overtures to the mother to try and secure  contact,  but  this
    had not been possible.  I accept that the provisions  of  the  Children
    Act 1989 encourage contact in relation to  children  to  be  undertaken
    preferably without formal court orders and  further  there  is  a  very
    limited legal aid in that respect.  The child was born in 2016 and  the
    appellant explains that for the first few years of the child's life  he
    attempted to secure contact informally.  It is also important  to  note
    that until the appellant was able  to  secure  the  results  of  a  DNA
    profiling test on 19th December 2018, he  would  not  have  been  in  a
    position to maintain that he was indeed the father  of  his  child  and
    enforce rights thereto.  That report confirms that his  probability  of
    paternity is 99.99%.

41. Following that DNA test , I accept  that  the  court  proceedings  were
    initiated fairly rapidly; indeed there was a female genital  mutilation
    protection order dated 31st May 2019.  The appellant was adamant in the
    proceedings before me that he found such practice reprehensible, and he
    thought  that  this  had  been  raised  in  court  without  foundation.
    Whatever the  nature  of  this  claim  it  is  likely  to  have  caused
    considerable difficulty between  the  parties  and  might  explain  the
    approach to contact.  Nonetheless I  accept  that  the  timing  of  the
    contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with  which  they  have  been
    progressed underlines the appellant's  commitment  to  maintaining  and
    interest in maintaining contact with his child.  This in turn  supports
    his  contention  that  he  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with his daughter who is a British citizen.  As  described
    above the family court has confirmed  that  there  should  be  indirect
    contact through the  sending  of  letters  and  cards  and  photographs
    between the appellant and his child and from his child to  the  parent,
    but also latterly on 21st October 2020 there was an  order  for  direct
    supervised contact with the father once a month for  a  period  of  two
    hours.  The Court of Appeal has indicated that it is possible to have a
    genuine parental relationship with  indirect  contact.   In  this  case
    there has been indirect contact  but  also  the  imminent  prospect  of
    direct, albeit supervised contact.

42. In terms of section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009  and the best interests of the child, I  take  guidance  from  the
    court that in the recital it was recorded that the mother indicated she
    would promote an increase of the supervised contact between  the  child
    and the father in due course when she was satisfied that the child  had
    a sufficiently stable attachment with the father in accordance with her
    wishes and feelings.

43. I also note that the court recorded that it would be necessary for  the
    father to show that he is committed to  maintaining  direct  supervised
    contact with the child.  He needs to  evidence  his  commitment  for  a
    period of approximately twelve months before any  further  progression.
    I take from this that not only does the  court  consider  that  contact
    with the child was beneficial to the child's best interests (and indeed
    this is the presumption  of  the  Children  Act)  but  further  that  a
    direction that the appeal be  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  and  a
    discretionary leave be directed as per the decision in MS  Ivory  Coast
    is not appropriate.  In my  view  a  core  decision  to  order  contact
    (albeit  supervised  direct  contact)  has  already  been  made.    The
    underlying import of the Family Court proceedings was that there needed
    to be stability and durability in the contact over a period of time and
    that the father needed to show commitment for a period of approximately
    twelve months before a  progression  could  be  considered.  I  am  not
    persuaded on the facts that I should direct a period of shortened leave
    tied to the family proceedings.

44. I also note from the court documents that the appellant is  a  litigant
    in person, and he has displayed some tenacity  and  commitment  in  his
    attempts to  secure  child  arrangements  through  the  court  process.
    Although  a  previous  court  order  indicated  that  he  had  parental
    responsibility, the  court  order  of  October  2020  stated  that  any
    application to be granted parental  responsibility  was  likely  to  be
    premature at this stage and once again it  was  necessary  for  him  to
    demonstrate commitment to maintaining  direct  supervised  contact  for
    approximately twelve  months.   The  court  order  of  10th  July  2020
    confirmed that the child's birth certificate should be amended  to  add
    the appellant as her biological father.

45. Overall the extent of the indirect  contact  through  photographs,  the
    letters and  cards  and  the  sending  of  homework  weekly  by  e-mail
    underlines and supplements the direct contact that has been ordered and
    soon to be pursued by the appellant.  The indirect contact evidences an
    emotional content, is regular in nature and the amount  of  contact  is
    ordered by the court not because the appellant has avoided contact

46. I thus accept that on  the  evidence  presented  to  me  both  in  oral
    testimony and written evidence, through the court  orders  and  witness
    statement of the appellant that  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and his daughter and that it  is  in
    her best interests to maintain contact with the appellant. . I  do  not
    find that contact has been initiated to frustrate removal.

47. I therefore consider that the appeal should be  allowed  under  Section
    117B(6).  Further I consider that the appeal, which  was  framed  under
    the previous appeal regime  would  be  allowed  under  the  immigration
    rules.  The issue of the child was not categorised as  a new matter for
    the reasons given above and  this  interpretation  was  agreed  by  the
    Secretary of State.

48. The appellant can meet the requirements for limited leave to remain  as
    a parent under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  R-LTRPT  with
    reference to EX.1.  The child is a British citizen under the age of  18
    years and living in the UK and the mother is a British citizen  settled
    in the UK and not the partner of the applicant. The appellant has shown
    he has a court order for direct access and intends to continue to  take
    an active role in the child's upbringing. The appellant is in breach of
    immigration law owing to his  illegal  status,  but  EX.1  applies  (in
    similar terms to Section 117B(6).

49. There is therefore no need to proceed  to  consider  the  matter  under
    paragraphs GEN.3.1. and GEN.3.3. of Appendix FM  (relevant  to  partner
    and parent applications) and any unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  on
    removal.

50. I have also considered further to the five stage steps in Razgar v SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 whether the appellant has a family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his parents.

51. The appellant is now 32 years old and was brought to the United Kingdom
    at the age of 15 at the behest of his parents.  He confirmed to me that
    he left full-time education in 2012 having qualified  as  a  pharmacist
    and lives with his parents and continues to  be  financially  dependent
    upon them.  Indeed he provides financial assistance to  his  child  via
    his parents.  As set out in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  there  is  no
    presumption of family life between an adult  child  and  his  surviving
    parents or other siblings unless  something  more  exists  than  normal
    emotional ties.  Once again this depends on the circumstances  of  each
    particular case.  One of the key issues in AA and  the  United  Kingdom
    [2011] ECHR 1345 was whether a young adult  had  founded  a  family  of
    their own.  It was noted that at paragraph 47

         "The  court  reiterated  the  need  for  additional   elements   of
         dependence in order to establish family life  between  parents  and
         adult children and found that the 34 year  old  applicant  in  that
         case did not have 'family  life'  with  his  mother  and  siblings,
         notwithstanding the fact that he was living with them and that they
         suffered a variety of different health problems.  It is noteworthy,
         however, that both applicants had a child or children of their  own
         following relationships of some duration".

52. This appellant is single and has lived with his parents  since  leaving
    formal education in 2012.  I was invited to distinguish this case  from
    that described in AA because in that case the  applicant  had  a  child
    following a relationship of some duration which was not the case  here.
    Following SSHD and HK Turkey [2010] EWCA Civ 583 although the appellant
    has reached his majority he has continued to live at home  and  clearly
    been and remained dependent on his family.  It is open to the Secretary
    of State to argue that the appellant  could  have  removed  himself  to
    Nigeria but that is not the reality of the situation.  The  reality  is
    that although I have found there is a subsisting parental  relationship
    with a child which might be said to militate against  the  relationship
    with the appellant's own parents, they do in fact  financially  support
    the child of the appellant.  This was evidenced by copies of  financial
    transfers to the child's mother without more, and it does  appear  that
    the mother has latterly become more cooperative  in  terms  of  contact
    with the child.  As the authorities  state,  including  Uddin  and  the
    Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ 338 family life with a  parent  does
    not suddenly cease at the age of  18.  The  appellant  was  absent  the
    family home as a student but has now been living with his  parents  for
    many years because he has been unable to work. It was  not  said  there
    was any long  term  relationship  with  another  adult  with  whom  the
    appellant had children.

53. I am therefore prepared to accept that the appellant does have a family
    life with  his  parents.   They  have  supported  him  emotionally  and
    financially  throughout  this  process.   His  removal  would   be   an
    interference with that relationship but on the fact on it the appellant
    has no right to be in the UK and the decision is in accordance with the
    law and necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms of  others.
    The decision by the respondent was taken in 2014 and prior to the birth
    of the child.  The question is whether the decision is proportionate. I
    must consider whether refusal of  the  application  could  breach  ECHR
    Article 8 because it could result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    for the applicant, or a relevant child.  In conducting  my  assessment,
    and I must have regard to all of the information and evidence  provided
    by the appellant.  I also have regard to the parents in line with Beoku-
    Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 9.  The appellant has succeeded under  Section
    117B(6) and even if the ties to his parents are insufficient in Article
    8 terms to outweigh the balance in favour of removal and he  could  re-
    establish himself with his professional qualifications in  Nigeria,  he
    has a relationship with his child, who cannot be removed. I  take  into
    account, as a primary consideration, the best interests of  the  child.
    Although the child has had little contact with the appellant to date, I
    consider that the court has found in favour of contact, the appellant's
    ability to pursue contact proceedings will be  hampered  should  he  be
    removed.  The court has also expressed the view that contact should  be
    reliable and consistent.  That would be interrupted.  Although to  date
    there has been little contact the  green  shoots  of  the  relationship
    would wither to the detriment of the child and  overall,  I  find  that
    separation   from   his   family   including   the   child   would   be
    disproportionate and result in in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

54. For completeness with reference to  paragraph  276ADE  the  appellant's
    application was considered by the Secretary of  State  on  this  basis.
    The appellant has not secured  the  twenty  years  required  under  the
    Immigration Rules. As per Kamara and the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813,  I  consider  whether  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration in Nigeria  on
    a broad evaluative judgment.  He does  retain  family  in  Nigeria  and
    indeed his parents are supporting his brother abroad although he has no
    contact with that brother.  No doubt  the  parents  would  support  the
    appellant until he could find employment as a pharmacist. That said his
    immediate family are here. The appellant has secured an  education  and
    qualifications in this  country  and  he  has  a  daughter  here.   The
    appellant has been present in the UK since 2004 and been living in  the
    UK for seventeen years and I accept that he has not returned to Nigeria
    because the likelihood of him being readmitted to the United Kingdom is
    most unlikely.    I am persuaded that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to his return to Nigeria  on  private  life  grounds  because
    essentially  the  private  life  and  family  life  considerations  are
    intertwined.  Cumulatively,  together  with  the  infringement  of  his
    ability to be able to pursue court  proceedings  from  abroad  and  the
    hindrance to the development of his relationship with his child  (which
    must form part of his private life), I find that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in abroad.

55. Turning to consideration  of  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  under
    Article 8, with regard the Section 117B considerations, where relevant,
    the appellant has remained in the UK illegally, his status  has  always
    been precarious, albeit his family brought him to the UK.  He can speak
    English and is not, at present, financially independent.  That said for
    the  reasons  given  above  I  find  overall  his  removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  He was brought as a child  to  this  country  and  I
    accept that the appellant has a family life both with his child and his
    parents and sibling in the United Kingdom; his second  brother  in  the
    United Kingdom has now been granted leave to remain. I have found  that
    the appellant can satisfy the immigration  rules  which  sets  out  the
    position of the Secretary of State  and  public  interest  in  removal.
    Further, his appeal would be allowed under section 117B(6) of the  2002
    Act. In the light of the considerations I consider that  on  Article  8
    (family and private life) grounds  it  would  be  disproportionate  and
    unjustifiably harsh to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom and
    I allow the appeal.

Order

I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules
I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
because there is a minor involved and proceedings before the Family Court.






Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 22nd June 2021.


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
