

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30377/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th April and 23rd May 2014               |On 03rd June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           KAYODE ABIDEMI OLORODE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath (on 14th April 2014) and Ms C Everett (on
                  23rd May 2014),     Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


For the Respondent: Mr R Arkhurst, counsel, instructed by ROCK solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) sought and was  granted  permission
      to  appeal  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Petherbridge
      promulgated on 21st February 2014 allowing the respondent's (hereafter
      the claimant) appeal against a decision to  remove  him  from  the  UK
      pursuant to s10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. Permission to  appeal
      was granted on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed
      to identify  compelling  circumstances;  that  the  appellant  had  no
      expectation of being permitted to remain in the UK and the time  spent
      in the UK did not, in the circumstances, lead to the finding that  the
      claimant should succeed.


      Background

   2. The claimant's wife arrived in the  UK  in  May  2003  as  a  visitor.
      According to the application made on 19th February 2010  she  has  not
      left the UK since. The claimant travelled  to  the  UK  as  a  visitor
      during 2003 and in 2004 entered the UK as a student on  a  visa  which
      was subsequently varied to expire on 28th February 2007. Their  eldest
      child, Michael, who was born on 15th May 1997 arrived in November 2004
      aged 7. The middle child Rachael date of birth 8th August 1999 arrived
      in the UK in July/August 2004 aged 5 and the youngest child Esther was
      born in the UK on 24th September  2004.  An  application  for  further
      leave to remain as a student/student dependants  was  refused  and  an
      appeal dismissed on 16th January 2008.


   3. No attempt to further regularise their stay was made until, by  letter
      dated 19th February 2010  the  claimant  and  his  wife  and  children
      applied for leave to remain by way of the exercise  of  discretion  by
      the  SSHD.  Reference  in  the  letter  was  made  to  their  personal
      circumstances, length of residence, the anticipated implementation  of
      s55 Borders Citizen and Immigration Act 2009 and the establishment  by
      the family of private and family life ties as "defined" under  Article
      8 ECHR. That application was refused by Notices of Decision dated 15th
      January 2011 for  each  of  them  (with  no  right  of  appeal)  under
      paragraph 322(1) of HC395 (as amended) on  the  basis  that  leave  to
      remain was being sought for a purpose not covered by  the  Immigration
      Rules. A letter accompanying the Decisions refers to the  applications
      having been considered  on  the  basis  of  Article  8  and  that  the
      decisions were considered by the SSHD  to  be  proportionate.  Further
      reference is also made to the applications having been  considered  on
      an exceptional basis outside the Immigration Rules.

   4.  By  letter  dated  24th  January   2011   the   claimant   sought   a
      reconsideration of the decisions made, again requesting  the  exercise
      of discretion to grant indefinite leave to remain. Following a  change
      in solicitors a further request for reconsideration was made by letter
      dated 1st  July  2011  raising  the  same  matters.  The  request  for
      reconsideration was acknowledged by the SSHD by letter dated 18th July
      2011.  A chasing letter was sent on 17th April 2012.

   5. By letter dated 30 July 2012 the claimant's solicitors drew  attention
      to the lack of progress of the review request and  also  to  the  Rule
      changes  on   9th   July   2012.   This   letter   submitted   further
      representations in  the  light  of  those  Rule  changes  although  an
      application form in the required form was not submitted and nor was  a
      fee paid. The letter submits that the claimant and his family meet the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE and should thus  be  given  leave  to
      remain in line with their application. It is also submitted  that  the
      family have established private and family life ties and that  removal
      would be disproportionate.

   6. On 14th February 2013 a "Pre-Action letter before claim" was  sent  to
      the UKBA Judicial Review Unit requiring a decision and referring to  a
      "human rights application" having been made and that  the  submissions
      made  in  July  2012  "...after  the  new  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
      Immigration Rules  came  into  existence....clearly  fall  within  the
      remits of this new paragraph...".

   7. An application for judicial review was then filed on 18th March  2013,
      such application being settled by way of a consent order on  15th  May
      2013 that the SSHD would reconsider her decision.

   8. On 9th August 2013 the SSHD took and served decisions  to  remove  the
      claimant and his family in accordance with s10 Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 1999. The reasons for the decision were set out in an accompanying
      letter dated 7th August 2013. The SSHD waived the requirement  for  an
      application form and fee,  stating  "Your  application  has  not  been
      considered by the Secretary of State personally, but  by  an  official
      acting on her behalf". The letter went on to set out a summary of  the
      family immigration history and considered the facts before  her  under
      the partner route of Appendix FM, the parent route of Appendix FM, the
      child route of Appendix FM, under EX.1.,  under  private  life  as  it
      "falls under paragraph 276ADE" and states "Careful  consideration  has
      been given to all these circumstances individually and  together,  but
      for the reasons  given  above  it  is  not  accepted  that  there  are
      exceptional  circumstances  in  your  case   considered   sufficiently
      compelling to justify allowing you to remain in the UK".

   9. The claimant was the only one of the four who appealed, the  wife  and
      three children were cited by him as his dependants.

  10. All of the children  are  involved  in  school  activities  and  extra
      curricular activities. There is  no  challenge  to  the  evidence  put
      forward that the children are bright and an asset to  the  school  and
      their parents.

  11. It was agreed that Michael - the oldest child- is due to  sit  his  AS
      levels this coming May/June 2014 and thereafter hopes to complete  his
      A level course and enter university. Rachael is due  to  commence  her
      GCSE course in September 2014 but is not sitting any public  exams  in
      the near future. Esther remains  at  primary  school  and  it  is  not
      anticipated that she will enter  secondary  school  for  a  couple  of
      years.

  12. The SSHD considered the application in accordance with the Immigration
      Rules in force at the date of decision and for reasons set  out  in  a
      letter dated 7th August 2013 concluded that the claimant did not  meet
      the requirements of Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE. She also  concluded
      that removal was not disproportionate and a breach of the ECHR.

  13. After the conclusion of the hearing before me the case of  Edgehill  &
      Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 came to my attention. I  issued   a
      direction in the following terms:

             "In the light of Edgehill the parties are directed to file and
             serve written submissions on or before 4pm 25th April 2014  as
             to the relevant Rules under which the decision in  the  appeal
             is to be remade. "


  14.   Having   received   written   submissions   from   the    claimant's
      representatives, the judgment in Haleemuddin v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
      558 was handed down. In the circumstances I recalled the  parties  and
      heard submissions from both representatives on 23rd May 2014.


      Error of law - First-tier Tribunal determination

  15. The claimant submitted to the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  relevant
      Rules under which the appeal was to be determined were  the  Rules  in
      force prior to 9th July 2012 because  the  application  for  leave  to
      remain had been submitted prior to that date. By reference to  Odelola
      [2009] UKHL 25 Judge Petherbridge  disagreed.  Whilst  in  most  cases
      where there has been a Rule change it is indeed  the  case  that   the
      appeal is determined according to the Rules in force at  the  date  of
      decision, that  is  not  so  where  there  are  specific  transitional
      provisions. In so far as Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  (the  "new
      Rules") the transitional provisions state

             However, if an  application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to
             remain or indefinite leave to remain has been  made  before  9
             July 2012 and the application has not been decided, it will be
             decided in accordance with the rules in force on 8 July 2012.


             Appendix FM applies to applications made on or  after  9  July
             2012 as set out in paragraph 91 of this Statement of Changes.


  16. The present appeal is slightly complex. The initiating application  by
      the claimant was made in January 2010  and  refused  on  15th  January
      2011. The claimant applied  in  July  2011  for  the  decision  to  be
      reconsidered; an application was  made  for  consideration  under  the
      Rules in force as from 9th July 2012, the SSHD  agreed  to  reconsider
      and the appealable s10 removal decision was taken.


  17. Edgehill  &  Bhoyroo  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  considered  the
      requirements to be met by a person who had applied for leave to remain
      prior 9th July 2012 Both  appellants  (who  were  both  appealing  s10
      removal decisions taken after a period in  the  UK  of  less  than  14
      years) in that case had argued that the new Rules  did  not  apply  to
      them because their applications had been  submitted  before  9th  July
      2012. Jackson LJ, in reaching  his  judgment  referred  to  the  legal
      principles  governing  the  interpretation  and  application  of   the
      Immigration Rules. He  cites  Odelola  and  Mahad  v  Entry  Clearance
      Officer [2009] UKSC 16 and concludes that

              It is not lawful to reject  an  Article  8  application  made
             before 9th July 2012 in reliance upon the applicant's  failure
             to achieve 20 years residence as specified in  the  new  rules
             [paraphrasing 33] and goes on to say
             "A mere passing reference to the 20 years requirement  in  the
             new rules  will  not  have  the  effect  of  invalidating  the
             Secretary of  State's  decision.  The  decision  only  becomes
             unlawful if the decision maker relies upon rule  276ADE  (iii)
             as a consideration materially affecting the decision."

  18. In Haleemuddin Beatson LJ states


                  [40] I, however, consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  Judge did err in  his  approach  to  Article  8.  This  is
                  because he did not  consider  Mr  Haleemudeen's  case  for
                  remaining in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
                  private and family life against the Secretary  of  State's
                  policy as contained in Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of  the
                  Immigration Rules. These new provisions in the Immigration
                  Rules are a central part of  the  legislative  and  policy
                  context in which the interests of immigration control  are
                  balanced against the interest and  rights  of  people  who
                  have come to this  country  and  wish  to  settle  in  it.
                  Overall the Secretary of State's  policy  as  to  when  an
                  interference with an Article 8 right will be  regarded  as
                  disproportionate is more particularised in the  new  Rules
                  than  it  had  previously  been.  The  new  Rules  require
                  stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before  leave  will
                  be given under them. The features of the policy  contained
                  in  the  Rules  include  the  requirements  of  20   years
                  residence, that  the  applicant's  partner  be  a  British
                  Citizen in the United Kingdom, settled here or with  leave
                  as a refugee or humanitarian protection,  and  that  where
                  the basis of the  application  rests  on  the  applicant's
                  children that they have been residents for seven years.
                  ....
                  [42] The authorities make it clear that the focus  of  any
                  assessment of whether an interference  with  private  life
                  pursuant to the requirements  of  immigration  control  is
                  proportionate should be whether the Secretary  of  State's
                  decision is in accordance with those provisions.....
                  [43] In Nagre's case ([2013] EWHC  720  (Admin))  Sales  J
                  stated .....that  it  is  necessary  to  find  "particular
                  factors in individual  cases....of  especially  compelling
                  force in favour of a grant of leave to remain" even though
                  those factors are not fully reflected in and dealt with in
                  the  new  Rules  and  "to  consider  whether   there   are
                  compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
                  the new rules to require the grant of such leave"....


  19. There appears to be a dichotomy of opinion  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
      between      these two cases. At the hearing on 14th April I indicated
      that on the basis  of  the  information  before  me  then,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Petherbridge was incorrect in his finding that the  new
      rules applied to the decision in question. After Edgehill  that  would
      appear in fact to have been the position but  after  Haleemuddin  (the
      more recent Court of Appeal decision) it  appears  he  may  have  been
      correct.


  20. However, irrespective of those two views as to which Rules  should  be
      applied,  of  significance  in  [69]  of   the   determination   Judge
      Petherbridge states that the[SSHD]

             "...has very obviously failed to follow  its  own  instruction
             that was issued following the formal withdrawal of its  policy
             DP5/96 on the 09 December 2008.  That  Instruction  said  that
             when considering enforcement action against  parents  who  had
             children who had lengthy residence in the United Kingdom,  the
             general presumption was that enforced  removal  would  not  be
             proceeded with where a child  had  been  born  in  the  United
             Kingdom -  that  is  the  position  with  Esther  born  on  24
             September 2004 - or against  a  child  coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom at an early age who had accumulated 7  years  or  more
             continuous residence and that  applies  to  both  Michael  and
             Rachael who have been in this country since 2004."


  21. A copy of the instruction referred to by Judge Petherbridge is not  in
      the papers, none was produced to me and I have  been  unable  to  find
      such  an  instruction  that  was  in  force  either  at  the  date  of
      application for reconsideration or in force as at 8th July  2012  (the
      day before the new Rules came into force).


  22. The policy as regards administrative removal is set out in Chapter 13,
      section 2 of the Immigration  Directorates'  Instruction  policy.  The
      decision the subject of the appeal was founded upon a decision by  the
      SSHD under which consideration was given under Appendix  FM  and  rule
      276ADE ie the new Rules. The SSHD  did  consider  whether  there  were
      exceptional circumstances allowing the  claimant  to  remain  and  had
      regard to character, compliance with conditions, length of time in the
      UK, representations submitted but concluded

             "...Careful  consideration  has  been  given  to   all   these
             circumstances individually and together, but for  the  reasons
             given above [referring back to the Rules] it is  not  accepted
             that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  in   your   case
             considered sufficiently compelling to justify allowing you  to
             remain  in  the  UK.  Regard  has  been  given  to   all   the
             representations you have submitted, however  for  the  reasons
             given above it is considered that your removal from the UK  is
             appropriate."

  23. The judge has considered the appeal through the prism of the Rules  in
      force at the date of decision but  also  appears  to  have  applied  a
      policy which was not in existence at the date of the decision or prior
      to 9th July 2012 or on the date of the hearing.


  24. The grounds seeking permission to appeal refer to the judge's  finding
      that it would be in the best interests of the children  to  remain  in
      the UK. Although reference  is  made  to  the  best  interest  of  the
      children being a primary concern that needs to be  considered  in  the
      context of the particular family circumstances "as well as the need to
      maintain immigration control". Passing reference is made by the  judge
      to the claimant's disregard of immigration rules but his conclusion at
      [84] places the best interest of the children as being in  effect,  of
      paramount concern, rather than a matter to be given primacy. There  is
      no reference in the conclusions to the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
      public interest.

  25. I am therefore satisfied that although according  to  Haleemuddin  the
      judge applied the correct Rules, there are significant errors  of  law
      in his assessment of the proportionality of the decision such  that  I
      set aside the decision.


    Remaking the decision


  26. The decision the subject of the appeal is a  decision  to  remove  the
      claimant (and his wife and children although they are not the  subject
      of separate appeals and are treated as his dependants) pursuant to s10
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, such decision being taken  subsequent
      to an application made whilst the claimant was an overstayer for leave
      to remain on Article 8 grounds. The grounds of appeal against the  s10
      removal decision are, in essence, that it would be a breach of Article
      8 ECHR to remove him and his family.


  27. Rock solicitors submitted, relying upon Edgehill that

             "...the  rule  that  should  be  applied  to  the  case  under
             consideration  is  Article  8  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
             Immigration  Rules.   This   is   because   the   [claimant's]
             application was made well before the rule change in July 2012.
             In reaching a decision under Article 8,  consideration  should
             also be given  to  Section  55  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  and
             established case law on these points."


         On 23rd May they submitted that the reality was  that  it  did  not
         matter which of Edgehill or Haleemuddin was  correct  once  it  was
         accepted that there should be consideration of  Article  8  outside
         the prism of the Rules, whether those in force prior  to  9th  July
         2012 or after, and that there was a  sufficiently  serious  factual
         matrix which mean that the proportionality of the  decision  should
         be assessed in accordance with established Razgar/Huang principles.




    28.  The SSHD submitted that there were  no  factors  of  a  compelling
         nature  in  favour  of  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   Although
         acknowledging that Michael was due to sit his  exams  very  shortly
         this was a matter that would and could be dealt with by  way  of  a
         short delay in the enforcement of removal. He reiterated  that  the
         children and the parents would be removed as a family unit and they
         would have sufficient and adequate time to adjust to both  life  in
         Nigeria and the educational system.


    29.  Rock solicitor's rely upon the expert report filed in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal which sets out the asserted damage to the children on
         removal and they also quote from an  undated  and  unidentified  UK
         government statement that [paraphrased]  the  ties  established  by
         children who have been in the UK for 7 years or more will  outweigh
         other considerations. This submission is of little assistance given
         the lack of source and date provided and I have  placed  no  weight
         upon it. Reliance is also placed upon LD (Article 8 - best interest
         of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) paragraphs 26 and 27:

              26. Very weighty reasons are needed to  justify  separating  a
              parent from a minor child or a child from a community in which
              he or she had grown up and lived for most of her  life.   Both
              principles are engaged in this case
              27.  The two younger children of the appellant have  lived  in
              the UK continuously for eleven years and  for  most  of  their
              lives.  Previously Home Office policy tended to identify seven
              years of residence of a child as one that would  presumptively
              require regularisation of  immigration  status  of  child  and
              parents in the absence of compelling  countervailing  factors.
              That was really an administrative way of giving effect to  the
              principle  of  the  welfare  of  the  child   as   a   primary
              consideration in such cases and when it  was  considered  that
              those  interests  normally  required  regularisation  of   the
              immigration position of the family as a whole. The policy  may
              have been withdrawn but substantial residence as a child is  a
              strong indication the judicial assessment  of  what  the  best
              interests of the child requires.  The  UN  Convention  on  the
              Rights of the Child 1989 Art 3 makes such interests a  primary
              consideration.

  30. The headnote of LD reads as follows:


             1.    Consistent  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to
             promote the economic and social policy of the UK is a relevant
             factor in carrying out the balancing  exercise  under  Article
             8(2) but the weight attached to it depends on the  context  of
             the case, whether there was ever any claim under the rules for
             indefinite leave  to  remain,  and  why  such  claim  was  not
             accepted.


             2.   In the particular circumstances of this case  the  weight
             to be attached  to  enforcement  of  immigration  control  was
             small  in the light of the misdirection as  to  Paragraph  320
             (7A), and the fact that the paragraph  applies  to  all  cases
             whether there is family life deserving respect or not.


             3.   The interests of minor children and their welfare  are  a
             primary consideration. A failure to treat them  as  such  will
             violate Article 8(2).


             4.   Weighty reasons would be required to justify separating a
             parent from a lawfully settled minor child  or  child  from  a
             community in which he or she had grown up and lived  for  most
             of his or her life. The general situation in the relevant home
             country is also relevant, especially if it is known  that  the
             conditions there are  dire  (as  they  are,  for  example,  in
             Zimbabwe at present).


             5.   In this particular case, no  useful  purpose  would  have
             been served if the appellant is required to depart the  UK  in
             order to make an entry clearance from abroad.  All the  issues
             are to be determined in this appeal rather than in the  course
             of an investigation abroad where there would in any  event  be
             an interference.

  31. The claimant also relies upon Tinizaray [2011] EWHC 1850 (Admin)  that
      "...Section 55....imposes a strong positive duty on  UKBA  caseworkers
      to procure such evidence as is necessary for them to assess a  child's
      best interests."  The submission did not claim  that  information  was
      missing from the papers before me such as to  enable  me  to  reach  a
      decision; nor was such a claim made at the hearing on 14th April 2014.
      For some unexplained reason the submissions fail to draw attention, in
      relation to the present case, to the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
      in AN (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1189 which stated as follows:


            22. In SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550,  Laws LJ warned
                against treating HHJ Thornton's observations
                in Tinizaray as enunciating anything in the nature of
                general principle (see para. 55); and Mann J with the
                concurrence of Black LJ, observed at para. 62 that the
                circumstances in which a tribunal should require further
                inquiries to be made, or evidence obtained, in order to
                satisfy itself as to the best interests of the child would
                be "extremely rare", saying
         "In the vast majority  of  cases  the  Tribunal  will  expect  the
                  relevant interests  of  the  child  to  be  drawn  to  the
                  attention  of  the  decision-maker   by   the   individual
                  concerned."?In R (Toufighy) v Secretary of State  for  the
                  Home Department [2012] EWHC 3004 (Admin)  Beatson  J  also
                  emphasised that the approach in Tinizaray was peculiar to
                  the facts of that case (see paras. 103-4).




       I have placed no weight on their submission relying on Tinizary.


  32. Although reference is made by the claimant to what are asserted to  be
      clearly established principles laid down in Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
      00197 (IAC), showing that it would not be in the best interests of the
      children to be removed, the submissions do not set out the  principles
      or explain how they apply to  this  appeal.  Azimi-Moayed  considered,
      inter alia, Article 8 and s55 UK Borders and Citizenship Act 2009. The
      headnote (and paragraph 13) of Azimi-Moayed, which was heard  on  26th
      March 2013 and involved a decision to remove taken and served prior to
      July 2012 subsequent to an unsuccessful asylum claim, reads, in so far
      as is relevant to this appeal, as follows:

             Decisions affecting children


                 (1)  The case law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the
                 following principles to assist  in  the  determination  of
                 appeals  where  children  are  affected  by  the  appealed
                 decisions:


                         i)      As a starting  point  it  is  in  the  best
                            interests of children to  be  with  both  their
                            parents and if both parents are  being  removed
                            from the United Kingdom then the starting point
                            suggests that so should dependent children  who
                            form part of their household unless  there  are
                            reasons to the contrary.


                         ii)    It is generally in the interests of children
                            to have both stability and continuity of social
                            and educational provision and  the  benefit  of
                            growing up in the cultural norms of the society
                            to which they belong.


                         iii)  Lengthy residence in a country other than the
                            state of origin  can  lead  to  development  of
                            social cultural and educational  ties  that  it
                            would  be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the
                            absence of compelling reason to  the  contrary.
                            What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                            cut  but  past  and   present   policies   have
                            identified seven years as a relevant period.


                         iv)   Apart from the terms  of  published  policies
                            and rules, the Tribunal notes that seven years
                            from age four is likely to be more significant
                            to a child than the first seven years of  life.
                            Very  young  children  are  focused  on   their
                            parents  rather  than  their  peers   and   are
                            adaptable.


                         v)     Short  periods  of  residence,  particularly
                         ones without leave or the reasonable expectation of
                         leave to enter or remain, while claims are promptly
                         considered, are unlikely to give  rise  to  private
                         life  deserving  of  respect  in  the  absence   of
                         exceptional factors. In any  event,  protection  of
                         the economic well-being of society amply  justifies
                         removal in such cases.


  33. The Upper Tribunal considered the approach to Article 8 in the context
      of the Immigration Rules in Gulshan  (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct
      approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), the headnote of which  reads,  in  so
      far as is relevant, as follows:

             On the current state of the authorities:


             (a) ...
             (b)    after applying the requirements of the Rules,  only  if
                there may be arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
                remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8  purposes
                to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there   are   compelling
                circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them: R (on
                the application of) Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home
                Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);
             (c)    the term "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions  such
                as Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are  impossible  to
                surmount: MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT
                393 (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]  UKUT  45
                (IAC);  they  concern  the   practical   possibilities   of
                relocation.  In  the   absence   of   such   insurmountable
                obstacles, it is necessary to show other  non-standard  and
                particular features  demonstrating  that  removal  will  be
                unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.


             The Secretary of State addressed the Article 8 family  aspects
             of the respondent's position through the Rules, in  particular
             EX1, and the private life aspects  through  paragraph  276ADE.
             The judge should have done likewise, also paying attention  to
             the Guidance.  Thus  the  judge  should  have  considered  the
             Secretary of State's conclusion under EX.1 that there were  no
             insurmountable obstacles preventing the  continuation  of  the
             family life outside the UK. Only if there were  arguably  good
             grounds for granting leave to remain outside the rules was  it
             necessary for him for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider
             whether there were compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
             recognised under the Rules.


  34. The changes to the Immigration Rules in July 2012  are  described  (in
      the accompanying memorandum)  as  establishing  the  framework  within
      which a decision is to be taken and that they [19]


             "..... are intended to fill the policy vacuum by setting out
             the Secretary of State's position on proportionality and to
             meet the democratic deficit by seeking Parliament's agreement
             to her policy."


      They do not purport to be  the  complete  and  only  route  by  which
      decisions on proportionality under Article 8 are to be taken or  that
      the matters set out in the Rules are the only  matters  that  can  be
      taken into account. They do however set out the  SSHD's  view  as  to
      where and how public interest  should  be  weighed  in  the  balance.
      Jurisprudence since July 2012 has developed the view that  given  the
      public interest as relayed in the Rules and the legitimate weight  to
      be attached to such public interest there has to be  something  of  a
      compelling nature to enable other considerations to be  assessed.  In
      reality this is probably little different to  the  previous  position
      namely that weight is to be attached to the  SSHD's  view  of  public
      interest in  reaching  a  decision  on  the  proportionality  of  the
      decision but the articulation of that view and weight  to  be  placed
      upon it  is now set out with more clarity and enables more consistent
      decision making.


  35. It was not argued before me that the claimant  and  his  family  could
      have met the criteria under the Rules prior to 9th July 2012: they had
      not accrued either 10 years lawful  residence  or  14  years  unlawful
      residence. Nor could they meet the Rules post 9th July 2012


  36. Thus the first issue to be determined is  whether  there  are  matters
      sufficiently compelling to enable consideration outside the Rules,  if
      the Rules in force at the date of decision are  those  as  amended  by
      HC194. If the consideration of the appeal is under the Rules in  force
      prior to HC194 then such an assessment does not have to be undertaken.
      In my view, the current educational status of the eldest  child  is  a
      matter which  is  sufficiently  compelling  to  justify  consideration
      outside the Rules. Thus irrespective of whether consideration is under
      HC194 or not, specific consideration should be given  to  all  of  the
      circumstances taking account of the significant weight to be  attached
      to the immigration history of the family and the  public  interest  in
      their removal, as identified by the SSHD.

  37. It is the intention of the SSHD that the family is to be removed as  a
      unit; the  family  have  not  disputed  this  and  thus  there  is  no
      interference in their family life. The issue is the proportionality of
      the  interference  in  their  private  life  given  their   particular
      circumstances,  balanced  against  the  considerable  and  significant
      weight to be attached to the maintenance of immigration control.

  38. The claimant's wife arrived in the UK as a visitor and has  overstayed
      since then. The claimant arrived initially as a visitor, left and then
      returned as a student, remaining with  leave  (as  a  student  and  in
      accordance with s3C Immigration Act 1991) until 16th January 2008. The
      two oldest children arrived in the UK in 2004  and  the  youngest  was
      born in the UK. No adequate explanation has been given for the failure
      of the family to leave the UK when the reason for them  being  here  -
      the claimant's studies - ceased to  exist.  No  attempt  was  made  to
      regularise the family's stay for another  two  years;  no  explanation
      being provided for such delay. There were and are no identified health
      problems that could have caused a delay in departure. By the  date  of
      the first decision to refuse leave to remain on an  exceptional  basis
      (15th January 2011) none of the children had resided in the UK  for  a
      period in excess of seven years. Despite receiving that decision,  the
      claimant and his family again failed to leave the UK  voluntarily  and
      instead  of  submitting  a  further  application  and  paying  a  fee,
      requested reconsideration. There is no  requirement  by  the  SSHD  to
      reconsider such decisions but in accordance with  her  policy  on  the
      making of  removal  decisions  she  eventually  (after  the  issue  of
      judicial review proceedings)  made  and  served  s10  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999 removal decisions. By the time such decisions had been
      made and served, the claimant's children had all been  in  the  UK  in
      excess of 7 years although of course the relevant date for calculating
      time is the  date  of  application,  not  the  date  of  decision  for
      applications covered by HC194. Prior to HC 194, time ceases to  accrue
      after service of liability to removal or  s10  removal  decisions;  it
      does not appear that such notices were served upon  the  claimant  and
      his family but there is not, in the Rules prior  to  HC194,  provision
      for the length of residence for the children to be taken into  account
      under the Rules.


  39. Azimi- Moayed of course refers to the relevance of 7 years and this is
      clearly a matter to be taken into account in this appeal  although  of
      course such a period has been accrued  through  the  failure  of  this
      family to leave as required despite having come to  the  UK  on  short
      term temporary permits with no expectation of remaining permanently.

  40. The psychologist makes reference  to  the  difficulties  the  children
      would face on removal to Nigeria, the concerns of the parents at being
      unable to  provide  an  adequate  education  for  them,  the  loss  of
      friendship groups but also makes  reference  to  the  very  supportive
      parenting they give the children.

  41. Although the children are in no way to blame for the failure of  their
      parents to comply with immigration control, to  remain  without  leave
      and to in effect extend their stay without merit because of  a  desire
      to remain in the UK, the difficulties that are likely to ensue for the
      children are at the making of the parents. Had  they  left  when  they
      were supposed to the children would not have put down such roots  (the
      youngest would not even  have  started  school).  The  high  level  of
      support the children are likely to get from their parents on return to
      their country of origin is a factor that impacts positively  on  their
      welfare. A particularly significant factor, which is recognised by the
      SSHD in  her  policy  (Chapter  45.2.3  Enforcement  Instructions  and
      Guidance) is that

                  "Where any of the children in the family are studying  for
                  GCSEs or A levels (or their equivalents),  removal  should
                  not normally be planned to take place in the three  months
                  before they are due to sit and final exams."

  42. Although the children have been in the UK for a period  in  excess  of
      seven years, albeit without leave to remain, the critical  stage  that
      Michael has reached  in  his  education  would,  I  am  satisfied,  be
      disproportionate, particularly given the SSHD's policy.  Although  the
      SSHD in submissions said that removal would  be  delayed  that  is  of
      course not the issue. At this date, which is the relevant date for  me
      to determine the proportionality of removal, removal of Michael  would
      be disproportionate. It is of course open to the SSHD  to  decide  how
      long a period of time she wishes to give leave to remain for.
  43. There remains then  the  issue  of  the  parents  and  the  other  two
      children. To separate the family at this time would interfere with the
      right to family life. There can be  no  reasonable  justification  for
      such interference, particularly given  the  effect  it  would  in  all
      probability have on Michael and his exams.


  44. I therefore find that to remove the claimant and the family  from  the
      UK at this time is not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  being
      pursed by the SSHD.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




                                    Date 2nd June 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
