
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30576/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd June 2014                                |On 6th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between
                                   MRS S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Afzal of International Immigration Advice
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Mrs S K, date of birth 24th July 1983 is  a  citizen  of
    Namibia.  The Appellant is married.  Her husband is also a  citizen  of
    Namibia as are her two children.  The children are aged 5 and nearly  2
    years of age.  Both the children were born in the United Kingdom.   The
    Appellant's husband and children are to be treated as  dependants  upon
    this appeal.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    the fact that this determination impacts upon the interests of children
    I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. By  a  determination  promulgated  on  25th  November  2013  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
    decisions of the Respondent to refuse to grant leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and a decision to remove the Appellant from  the  United
    Kingdom thereafter.  The Appellant appealed against those decisions  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  By  a  decision  taken  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley on 24th March 2014 leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted in the following terms:-

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge may have erred by  failing  to  take
         account of the evidence he heard of the  Appellant's  husband.   On
         that challenge only I grant permission."

 4. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  in  two  parts.   The
    original Grounds of Appeal identify in paragraphs 2  and  3  the  issue
    that the judge noted the testimony of the Appellant's husband but  made
    no reference to it thereafter.  The renewed application identifies that
    a two page statement was submitted  by  the  husband.   He  was  cross-
    examined but the judge makes no comment on the husband's evidence.

 5. If one looks at paragraph 11  of  the  determination  the  judge  quite
    clearly sets out the evidence of the husband.  The husband entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2004 as a working holidaymaker and his  visa  expired
    in 2006.  Since that time he has had no legal status.  Thereafter other
    than the husband's relationship to the Appellant there is  no  material
    detail either with regard to other family members or with regard to any
    private life that the husband has  developed  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There  is  no  suggestion  of  integration  within  the  community   or
    commitments within the community.  The  issue  relates  purely  to  his
    relationship to the Appellant and to  his  children.   Since  2006  the
    husband has had no legal right to be in the United Kingdom and  he  has
    done nothing to seek to regularise his  status.   There  was  reference
    within the husband's statements and his evidence to the  fact  that  he
    had relatives in Namibia and that they lived some  distance  away  from
    the home area of the Appellant.  The husband's evidence  does  no  more
    than establish that he is part of a family unit with the Appellant  and
    the children. That was accepted by Judge Lloyd-Smith.

 6. The position with regard to the Appellant appears to be that  she  last
    had leave in or about November 2009.  The Appellant entered the  UK  in
    2004 as a working holiday maker and had at various stages had her leave
    extended as a student. There is a period in October  to  December  2007
    when the Appellant had no leave. She was then granted further leave  as
    a student  but that leave expired in 2009.  Since that  time  she  also
    has had no right to be in the United Kingdom.

 7. The judge's findings are contained from paragraph 14  onwards.   Whilst
    it is correct to say that there is no reference to  the  evidence  from
    the husband there is nothing of substance and materiality that adds  to
    the Appellant's case in what the husband has said. The husband and  the
    Appellant are living in the United Kingdom neither one of them have any
    leave.  They have two children.  The judge notes the medical  condition
    of the parties.  The judge has given proper consideration  to  all  the
    evidence.  The judge then goes on to consider fully  the  circumstances
    of the Appellant in the United Kingdom and her  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. Before me it was suggested that the judge has failed to make  reference
    to Section 55 of the 2009 Act,  that  is  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  With respect if one examines paragraph 18 there is  a  clear
    reference to the judge assessing the best interests  of  the  children.
    The judge has also in paragraph 14 set out the medical condition of one
    of the children.

 9. There is no requirement that the judge makes a reference to a  specific
    statutory provision as being the duty so to do.  Provided the judge has
    in practice assessed the best interests of the children and  the  judge
    has carried out the duty that she is obliged to do  under  the  statute
    that is sufficient in law.  There is no need to refer to each and every
    specific statutory provision which affects an appeal.

10. The issue therefore is whether or not the judge has  properly  assessed
    the family circumstances of the Appellant and her husband and children.
     The issue thereafter would be whether or not there was anything of any
    substance and materiality in the evidence of the husband that the judge
    has failed to take account of.  The husband's evidence  appears  to  be
    that he is in the United Kingdom with the Appellant enjoying  a  family
    life.  The judge noted that the family would  be  removed  as  a  unit.
    That is consistent with the case law [Azimi-Moayed 2013 UKUT 197 (IAC)]
    and is clearly an assessment not only of the rights  of  the  Appellant
    and her husband but also the best interests of the children.

11. Looking at the matter on the  basis  of  the  determination  the  judge
    clearly took account not only of the evidence  of  the  husband  as  is
    evident from paragraph 11 and the references thereafter to  the  family
    life that  the  family  enjoyed  within  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    circumstances they would face if returned to Namibia, but also the best
    interests of the children.  That is clear and  evident  from  paragraph
    18.

12. Accordingly I do not find that there  is  any  material  error  of  law
    within the determination as it appears at the moment.

13. Even if the judge has failed  to  take  account  the  evidence  of  the
    husband it has to be noted that neither the Appellant nor  her  husband
    nor any of the children would meet the requirements of  the  Rules.   I
    draw attention to the case of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640,  Nagre  [2013]
    EWHC 720, and the case of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.   They  make
    plain that where a person does not meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    there  has  to  be  something  exceptional  or  something  within   the
    circumstances which warrants consideration of an Appellant  outside  of
    the Rules on Article 8 grounds.

14. It is not contended that the Appellants meets any of  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  It is accepted that  they  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or even the exceptions within  Appendix  FM
    with regard to children  under  EX.1.   The  Appellants  therefore  not
    meeting  those  requirements  and  not  meeting  the  requirements   of
    paragraph 276ADE the Appellants have to prove that there  is  something
    exceptional within the facts which would warrant consideration  outside
    of the Rules.

15. The only circumstances which are in any way exceptional are alleged  to
    be the fact that the two children were born in the United  Kingdom  and
    the medical condition of the one of the children.  However the children
    were born at a time when ostensibly there was no right in either parent
    to be in the United Kingdom.  It may be that the Appellant for a  short
    period of time had leave after the birth of the first  child  but  that
    leave soon expired and the Appellant and her  family  remained  in  the
    United  Kingdom  without  leave.   It  would  have  been  open  to  the
    Appellants at that stage to return to their home country but they chose
    not to do so.  Judge Lloyd-Smith has considered the  medical  condition
    of the child and I agree with her  assessment.  The  condition  of  the
    child does not approach an Article 3 claim taking into account the case
     of N (FC) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31

16. In the circumstances there is nothing exceptional in the  fact  that  a
    child was born in the United Kingdom where the  parents  are  remaining
    here unlawfully.  There is no other factor either which engages any  of
    the case law to show exceptionality  or  any  circumstances  warranting
    consideration outside of the Rules.

17. Accordingly even if there were an arguable  error  of  law  within  the
    determination, which I find not to be the case, there is nothing on the
    facts of this case which would  warrant  consideration  of  the  appeal
    outside of the Immigration Rules.

18.  Therefore I uphold the decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Direction regarding anonymity- rule 45 (4)(i) holds the Asylum and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                              dated


