
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30787/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22nd October 2014               |On 28th November 2014              |
|Prepared 22nd October 2014         |                                   |


                                   Before

                          the hon. mr justice davis
                       upper tribunal judge I a lewis


                                   Between

                               fazilat shahzad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Ahluwalia, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 18th July 2014 Deputy Judge of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Lewis determined that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    which had dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department to refuse her further  leave
    to remain in this country contained an error of  law  and  the  Learned
    Deputy Judge ordered that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should be re-made by this  Tribunal.   This  is  our  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. The background is usefully and helpfully set out  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Lewis in relation to the  error  of  law.   The  appellant  is  a
    national of Pakistan, born on 27th January 1986.  She arrived  in  this
    country on 5th April 2011.  She had a  valid  student  visa  which  had
    commenced in March 2011 and ran until 26th February 2013.  Her husband,
    Mr Shahzad Ahmed, born in 1980 arrived at the same time with  the  same
    entry clearance.  On 15th June of the same year the appellant  had  her
    son, Ali Shahzad.  As will become apparent she was  pregnant  when  she
    arrived, albeit not  anywhere  near  full  term.   Ali  was  born  very
    prematurely at 25 weeks' gestation.  There must be some clear doubt  as
    to whether he would have survived at all  but  he  did  but  with  very
    significant medical complications and also, as subsequently transpired,
    concerns over developmental delay.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal whose decision we are re-making had before it a
    substantial body of evidence by  way  of  medical  reports  documenting
    Ali's medical history since birth and we have those same reports.   The
    decision which we are reviewing arose from the appellant's  application
    for further leave to remain which she made on  8th  February  2013,  so
    within time, and it included her husband and son as dependants.  In the
    relevant section of her application form she set out the basis  of  her
    application which concentrated upon the medical condition of Ali.   She
    said: "there is no such facility to care for the child  if  removed  to
    his country".  She said further, "if he is  returned  to  Pakistan  his
    quality and quantity of life would suffer".

 4. The appellant's application to vary her leave to remain by extending it
    was refused by a letter dated 8th July 2013 and a notice of immigration
    decision was dated the same date  and  served  in  consequence  thereby
    rendering the appellant and her dependants, including  Ali  of  course,
    liable to be returned to Pakistan and that is the decision that was the
    subject of appeal.

 5. The decision letter sets out in considerable detail all the reasons why
    the appellant and indeed her dependants did not come within any part of
    Appendix FM and there is no doubt that the letter was entirely accurate
    in excluding the appellant and her dependants.

 6. The letter went on to consider the issue of the child and purported  to
    consider the interests of the child.  We quote:

         "It is noted that your child was aged 20 months at the date of your
         application.  Your child will be returning with  you  to  Pakistan.
         You and your child are citizens of Pakistan and  will  be  able  to
         enjoy the full rights of being citizens of that country.  You  have
         lived the majority of your life in Pakistan and  as  such  will  be
         able to support your child by introducing  him  to  a  new  culture
         while helping him to adjust to his  new  environment.   Furthermore
         your child is considered young enough to adapt to life abroad.   It
         is also reasonable to consider that having lived  the  majority  of
         your life in Pakistan you will have extended family or networks  of
         friends who you will be able to rely on for support  to  help  with
         integration on your return.  Therefore, it would be reasonable  for
         your child to return to Pakistan with you to  continue  his  family
         life and as a family unit you will be able to  provide  each  other
         with the same level of support to ensure that your  child  will  be
         able to adapt to his new environment.  Whilst your child  has  been
         living in the United Kingdom, it is considered that at such a young
         age the  nature  of  any  family  and  private  life  he  may  have
         established will still be focused very firmly in  the  home.   Your
         child has not yet started school and his  family  will  remain  her
         focal point (the child was in fact a boy) and any upheaval that  he
         may experience in the short term will be outweighed by the  support
         he receives from you and other family members t enable him to adapt
         to his transition in Pakistan.  Although it is considered that your
         child may not  receive  the  same  quality  of  education  that  he
         receives in the United Kingdom, the education that he will  receive
         in Pakistan is available and considered of  a  standard  that  will
         prepare him with his basic educational needs."

 7. Since this case turns wholly on the medical condition of Ali it is,  if
    we may respectfully say so, little less  than  extraordinary  that  the
    decision letter does  not  make  a  single  reference  to  his  medical
    condition.  Were this  decision  being  judicially  reviewed  it  could
    doubtless impugned on public law grounds.  However,  that  is  not  the
    exercise in which we are engaged but it is the case that  the  decision
    itself does not seek to address the medical position of this  child  at
    all.

 8. We summarise the medical condition of the child as it appears to us  as
    it doubtless appeared to the Tribunal below and to some extent at least
    was in the knowledge of the Home Secretary of State.   There are  seven
    heads of medical condition or disability identified by the appellant.

    (i)  Long QT syndrome - that is a condition to which  we  shall  return
         because it really is the centrepiece of the case.

    (ii) Global  developmental  delay,  including  delayed  and  disordered
         speech and language development leading to significant difficulties
         with social interaction and  communication  and  delayed  self-help
         skills.

    (iii)    Hearing difficulties.

    (iv) Visual difficulties.

    (v)  Behavioural difficulties including aggressive behaviour and  self-
         harming.

    (vi) Abnormal brain MRI scan with evidence of cerebral atrophy.

    (vii)     Respiratory  tract  infections  which  may  require  hospital
         admission for treatment.

 9. We set out all seven points at which  there  are  concerns  over  Ali's
    health in order to set out the background.  Points  (ii)  to  (vii)  in
    that list are no more than relevant  background,  neither  individually
    nor cumulatively would they provide a basis for any viable challenge on
    human rights  grounds  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.   The
    facilities in this country to cope with those conditions or any one  of
    them may well be better in the United Kingdom than in Pakistan  but  as
    the Secretary of State quite  rightly  observes,  whilst  treatment  in
    Pakistan may not be as good as  in  this  country  in  some  particular
    respects, that does not justify the Secretary of State  doing  anything
    other than following the normal process.

10. It is the first condition that gives rise to the  significant  argument
    in this case.  Long QT syndrome is, we are told and we have  no  reason
    to doubt this, a rare inherited heart condition.  It apparently  delays
    repolarisation of the heart following  a  heartbeat  which  means  that
    there is a risk of irregular heartbeat  and  irregular  heartbeats  (or
    arrhythmia)  may  well  lead  to  palpitations  or  fainting  but  more
    seriously to sudden death due to ventricular fibrillation.

11. The Learned Deputy Judge when giving directions upon his  finding  that
    there had been an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal ordered  that
    the following should be lodged with the court:

         .    Up-to-date medical evidence in respect of Ali

         .    Details of the nature of emergency  treatment  that  would  be
             required and its nature and extent, and

         .     any  further  evidence  as  to  the  availability   or   non-
             availability of any comparable treatments in Pakistan.

12. In consequence of that direction we have been provided first  with  the
    evidence of Dr  Kaski  who  is  the  clinical  lead  at  the  Inherited
    Cardiovascular Disease Unit at the Great  Ormond  Street  Hospital  for
    Children.   He has been involved in the treatment of Ali.  He  confirms
    that there has been a confirmed diagnosis of long QT syndrome  that  is
    being treated with drugs but despite that drug treatment Ali  continues
    to have episodes of loss of consciousness which  could  be  related  to
    potentially fatal ventricular arrhythmias.  He  reports  that  Ali  has
    what is called an implantable loop recorder in  situ,  the  purpose  of
    that being to try and elucidate why it is that he  loses  consciousness
    in the way that he does.  Dr Kaski reports that  the  battery  life  of
    such a recorder is somewhere in the region of three to three and a half
    years.  He would expect the device to remain fitted for at  least  that
    period of time.  If in that time ventricular arrhythmias are identified
    then he would consider the implantation of a defibrillator.  If nothing
    is  detected  over  the  next  three  years  the  implantation   of   a
    defibrillator is less likely but Dr Kaski indicates that at  this  time
    the precise nature  of  what  is  going  to  happen  simply  cannot  be
    predicted.  It may be seen that, notwithstanding the  diagnosis,  there
    is a sophisticated process of continuing investigation in an attempt to
    understand how for Ali the underlying condition causes the  potentially
    life threatening fainting episodes.  This is being done with a view  to
    establishing the appropriate remedial treatment.

13. Dr Kaski very properly does not pretend to be able  to  report  on  the
    facilities for such investigation and treatment  in  Pakistan  but  his
    evidence does go on to deal with the issue of what  kind  of  emergency
    treatment might be needed in Ali's case.  He identifies three points.

14. First, should Ali experience an episode of fainting  then  he  must  be
    transferred by ambulance as an emergency  to  his  local  Accident  and
    Emergency Department.  En route  there  should  be  cardiac  monitoring
    because it may be that Ali would  require  resuscitation  en  route  by
    paramedics.

15. Second, essential medically trained staff must be present in the  event
    of  further  fainting  episodes.   That  is  because  further  fainting
    episodes  represent  "a  distinct  possibility"  of  potentially  fatal
    ventricular arrhythmias.  It follows that once in hospital Ali must  be
    under  close  medical  supervision  in  order  to  enable   appropriate
    treatment to be initiated when necessary.

16. Third, because there  is  a  strong  possibility  that  these  fainting
    episodes are being caused by what Dr Kaski terms malignant  ventricular
    arrhythmias which may well  result  in  sudden  cardiac  death,  it  is
    vitally important for those fainting episodes to be monitored.

17. The evidence produced by the appellant  as  to  what  is  available  in
    Pakistan comes from a Professor Masood Sadiq who is  the  Head  of  the
    Department of Paediatric  Cardiology  at  the  Children's  Hospital  in
    Lahore.  Although we have no detailed  evidence  on  the  topic,  since
    Lahore is one of the major cities if not the major city in Pakistan and
    Professor Sadiq is  the  head  of  the  relevant  department,  we  must
    sensibly assume that his evidence is accurate and reliable in  relation
    to the matters to which he speaks.  He identifies that he is  aware  of
    the condition of long QT syndrome.  He understands that a loop recorder
    has been inserted and that is in order to see if an implantable cardiac
    defibrillator is necessary.  Professor Sadiq goes on to say this:

        "I would like to confirm that in Pakistan there  is  no  paediatric
        electrophysiology service anywhere in the country and  facility  of
        implantation of an implantable cardiac defibrillator at this age is
        not available".

18. Reference has been made to the nature of electrophysiology.  The  clear
    evidence is that neither proper monitoring of the loop recorder,  still
    less implantation of a defibrillator, would  be  possible  anywhere  in
    Pakistan.

19. Evidence has been  provided  by  the  respondent  to  the  appeal,  the
    Secretary of State.  She has provided us with the COIS Report of August
    2013 first  quoting  the  United  States  State  Department's  Consular
    Information Sheet on Pakistan.  In relation to emergency  medical  care
    the brief passage quoted is as follows, "adequate  basic  non-emergency
    medical care is available in major Pakistani cities".  Upon enquiry the
    Secretary of State's representative indicated that she had no  evidence
    of access to emergency care of the type referred  to  by  Dr  Kaski  as
    being available in  Pakistan.   The  Secretary  of  State  further,  by
    reference to the same report, quoted the International Organisation for
    Migration's fact sheet for Pakistan in terms of  more  general  medical
    care:

         "The National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases was  established
         to meet the increasing demand for  the  diagnosis,  management  and
         prevention of cardiovascular diseases as well as to keep up-to-date
         with the rapid technological advances in the field through research
         and development.... Healthcare services  across  the  country  have
         visibly increased.  Basic health units, rural  health  centres  and
         civil dispensaries have been created in the remote rural  areas  to
         meet the health needs of the  local  communities.   In  the  cities
         there are both state and private hospitals with modern technologies
         to meet a variety of health needs."

20. The Secretary of State in her written submission submitted  that  given
    that evidence it was open to the appellant to  use  the  facilities  to
    have Ali's condition investigated with a view to diagnosis and possible
    future treatment.  We are quite satisfied that  this  general  evidence
    does not begin to address the direct evidence of Professor Sadiq and we
    cannot accept that the proposition put  forward  by  the  Secretary  of
    State has any evidential foundation.

21. The other matter raised by the Secretary of State was that it would  be
    open to the appellant to make an entry clearance application for Ali to
    return to the United Kingdom as a private  patient.   That  is  on  the
    assumption Ali had been removed  from  this  country  and  returned  to
    Pakistan and it was argued  that  the  option  was  also  open  to  the
    appellant in the  event  that  any  future  diagnosis  should  identify
    treatment that is  not  available  in  Pakistan.   Since  the  evidence
    demonstrates to us  as  clearly  as  it  could  do  that  the  relevant
    treatment is not available in Pakistan  it  really  is  a  case  of  us
    considering whether it is a sensible proposition that the appellant and
    her dependant should be removed merely in order for them then  to  make
    an entry clearance application for Ali to return to this country  as  a
    private patient.  That  would  require  the  use  of  Rule  51  of  the
    Immigration Rules which set out certain requirements.  The requirements
    include necessity to show that any proposed course of treatment  is  of
    finite duration  (which  in  this  case  it  is  not)  and  to  produce
    satisfactory evidence of the  estimated  cost  of  the  treatment,  the
    likely duration of the visit required to undertake  the  treatment  and
    sufficient funds being available in the United Kingdom  to  meet  those
    costs.  Although we do not have direct evidence on the  topic  we  have
    sufficient information to enable us to  identify  that  none  of  those
    conditions could be met.  This is the sort of case where  it  would  be
    quite impossible for the appellant to make a sensible  entry  clearance
    application of the type suggested under Rule 51 so that option  in  our
    judgment is simply not open.  So that is the factual background.

22. The appellant argues that this is a case in which by reference  to  her
    child the Secretary of State should have recognised that removal of her
    and her dependants would be a disproportionate  interference  with  her
    Article 8 rights.  We have been referred to a number of authorities and
    I hope we will be excused if we refer only to those which seem to us to
    be most significant and on point for this decision.

23. First JA (Ivory Coast) and Secretary of State  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1353.
    That was a case in which the relevant appellant, that  is  JA,  was  an
    African woman who had entered the United Kingdom lawfully.   Having  so
    entered the United Kingdom she was then diagnosed for the first time as
    HIV positive.  She was treated by  the  National  Health  Service  with
    antiretroviral drugs which stabilised her condition  and  had  kept  it
    stable thereafter.  The case made its way to the Court  of  Appeal  and
    identified that the issue that the Tribunal  below  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal in its turn had to consider was  whether  removal  of  JA  would
    represent a disproportionate interference with her rights under Article
    8 of the Convention, namely her right to respect for private and family
    life.  It was recognised this was not  a  case  in  relation  to  which
    Article 3 applied but that Article  8  could  and  without  turning  in
    detail to the reasoning of the court (because it is  not  necessary  in
    view of the  later  decision  we  are  going  to  consider)  the  court
    identified that Article 8 rights were potentially  engaged  in  such  a
    case.

24. The subsequent decision which enables us to deal with the  matter  more
    fully is SQ (Pakistan) against  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber [2013] EWCA Civ 1251.  The facts in  SQ  were  a  little
    different to those in JA (and to this case) because the  individual  in
    that case arrived in this country already suffering from  the  relevant
    serious medical condition.  The similarity was that the person who  had
    arrived with that serious medical  condition  was  a  child,  albeit  a
    rather older one than the child in this case.  The Court of Appeal were
    invited to rule that to return the child to Pakistan as  the  Secretary
    of State sought to do (a) would be to subject him to inhuman  treatment
    or (b) a point that is relevant to us, would unlawfully interfere  with
    his right to respect for private life.  The facts in  that  case  meant
    that if he were to be returned he would probably die in his late  teens
    or early 20s whereas in the United Kingdom he would have a much  better
    and longer life.

25. Dealing with the Article claim  Lord  Justice  Maurice  Kay  said  this
    beginning at paragraph 20:

         "The FTT dealt with the Article 8 claim somewhat cursorily  in  the
         final four sentences of the passage  which  I  have  set  out  ....
         Having correctly observed that the appellants had only been in this
         country 'for a brief period' and that the treatment received by  MQ
         was 'a good part of  his  private  life'  here,  the  judge  simply
         concluded that  he  did  not  find  'the  private  lives  of  these
         appellants would be infringed upon their removal to  Pakistan'.  He
         then referred to ZH (Tanzania) and the best  interests  of  MQ  but
         found that his 'cultural,  linguistic  and  family  ties  are  best
         maintained in his country of origin', noting  that  'there  are  no
         countervailing factors that militate against the removal of  MQ  in
         the context of Article 8 and  section  55'.  It  is  impossible  to
         escape the conclusion that the Judge never considered MQ's  medical
         conditions and treatment in the context  of  his  best  interests."
         (We interpose that has some relevance in this case given the  terms
         of the decision letter).

26.  Lord  Justice  Maurice  Kay  continued  by  reviewing  the  well-known
    jurisprudence emanating from ZH (Tanzania) and  then  at  paragraph  26
    said this:-

         "What this case demonstrates is that in  some  cases,  particularly
         but not only in relation to children, Article 8  may  raise  issues
         separate from Article 3. In JA (Ivory Coast) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department (supra), an adult succeeded under Article 8
         but not Article 3 in a health case. Lord Justice Sedley  emphasised
         that each of the two Articles has to be approached and  applied  in
         its own terms. The leading authorities of D  and  N  (we  interpose
         authorities in relation to Article 3)  were  distinguished  on  the
         basis that, in both of them, the appellants' presence and treatment
         in this country were owed entirely to unlawful entry.  JA's  appeal
         was  allowed  and  her  case  remitted  because  of  the  potential
         significance of the fact  that,  following  her  lawful  entry  and
         subsequent  diagnosis  of  HIV+,  she  had  been  granted   further
         exceptional leave to remain for  treatment.  Although  no  separate
         Article 8 issue arose in D or N, it plainly did in JA."

27. The Learned Deputy  Judge  when  identifying  the  error  of  law  also
    identified the case of Bertha Joe-Okonkwo v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2013] UKUT 401, a decision of this Tribunal, which has
    the distinction of having as one of the panel members Mr Justice  Blake
    the then  President  of  this  Chamber.   In  that  case  the  relevant
    appellants had come to this country as  students  with  leave.   Having
    come into the  country  the  appellant,  an  adult,  was  diagnosed  as
    suffering from kidney  disease.   The  disease  progressed  and  became
    severe.  She had a kidney transplant but even with that  was  going  to
    need specialised medical care at  tertiary  level.   The  Secretary  of
    State's decision was to remove her.  In that case  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was hamstrung by the fact that the arguments placed  before  the  Lower
    Tribunal did not begin to address Article 8 at all so  what  the  Upper
    Tribunal said in that case was, strictly speaking, obiter dicta but  is
    plainly highly persuasive partly in view of what was said in JA and  SQ
    and partly in view of the judge who  was  saying  it.   We  quote  from
    paragraph 38:

         "Lord Justice Sedley's remarks in JA  were  precisely  directed  at
         Article 8 and could have found the argument that where life  saving
         medical treatment is provided during a period of  lawful  stay  and
         such treatment cannot as a  matter  of  financial  practicality  be
         replicated in the state of return  the  removal  might  well  be  a
         disproportionate interference with the physical and moral integrity
         aspects of the right to private life."

    It follows from that brief review of the authorities  that  in  medical
    cases the medical condition of the relevant applicant or in this case a
    dependant may be of  very  great  significance  indeed.   Moreover  the
    authorities demonstrate that whilst it is not a principle restricted to
    children it may be of particular significance in the case of  children.
    That has particular resonance in this instance.

28. In the course of the  hearing  we  invited  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative  to  address  what  appeared  to  us  to  be  the   very
    deleterious effects that very possibly, if not probably,  would  result
    were this child to be returned to Pakistan.  The  submissions  made  by
    the Secretary of State were first of all that the costs to  the  public
    purse of this exercise, that is continuing to treat this child  in  the
    United Kingdom, would be very great indeed.  It is  not  disputed  that
    that is the case.  We have no detailed evidence as to the precise  cost
    but Mr Ahluwalia who appears for the appellant is  able  to  give  some
    sensible estimate that it would be in  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of
    pounds.  We plainly do not ignore that factor but we do not accept  the
    submission that was made which is that the cost  of  the  treatment  is
    crucial to the proportionality exercise.  It is  important  and  it  is
    significant that it is not crucial; it is but part of it.

29. The Secretary of State also invited a distinction to be  drawn  between
    the case of JA and Okonkwo because in this case the  appellant  arrived
    in  this  country  already  pregnant.   With  great  respect   to   the
    representations of the Secretary of State it seems to us that  that  is
    of limited or no relevance.  When the appellant arrived in this country
    she was pregnant but she might reasonably have assumed that  she  would
    give birth to  a  healthy  child.   A  healthy  child  could  perfectly
    sensibly return to Pakistan.  The appellant would have  had  absolutely
    no  argument  about  being  required  to  return  to  Pakistan  at  the
    conclusion of her leave unless there were some other reasons for her to
    have an extension simply because she had a child born here.   It  is  a
    matter of profound regret to all concerned that  this  child  has  been
    born so very seriously ill and continues to be very seriously  ill  and
    genuinely disabled.  That is an unusual and extraordinary event and  is
    not one which in any way can be put at the door of the  appellant.   In
    any event the  distinction  drawn  by  the  Secretary  of  State  would
    presumably apply also to the appellant in SQ.  The Court of Appeal  did
    not see the fact that the individual had arrived in this  country  with
    the illness was determinative of the case.

30. Finally the Secretary of State argues that there is  no  obligation  or
    was no obligation on her to await a diagnosis.   As  has  already  been
    made apparent from our rehearsal of the facts the child in this case is
    the  subject  of  ongoing  diagnostic  and   investigative   treatment.
    Although what he is suffering from may be apparent, the outcome of  the
    medical investigation far from apparent.  The Learned Deputy Judge when
    giving directions identified that this Tribunal might  be  assisted  by
    reference to those cases in which the Tribunal and the Court of  Appeal
    had had to consider the position of those who were subject  to  removal
    being also party to family proceedings.  We can do no better than  cite
    the introductory head note from MH (Morocco) [2010] UKUT 439:

         "1.  In MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133 it was accepted that a
             decision to remove an applicant in the process  of  seeking  a
             contact order may violate Article 8 of the Convention  on  the
             basis that  removal  of  an  applicant  during  contact  order
             proceedings would be unlawful because it prejudged the outcome
             of the contact proceedings and, more importantly,  denied  the
             applicant  all   possibility   of   any   further   meaningful
             involvement in the proceedings...........

              Where an application for contact is  successful  a  parent  or
             party may make application for further leave to remain in  the
             UK. If unsuccessful, then it will  be  for  the  Secretary  of
             State to consider what steps  to  take  in  relation  to  that
             individual."

31. By analogy here is a case in which on the  evidence  there  is  ongoing
    diagnostic  and  investigative  treatment  which  if  interrupted  will
    entirely lose its useful effect: if it is not interrupted it may result
    in some at least reasonable resolution of the child's  medical  issues.
    Therefore, we do not  accept  that  there  was  no  obligation  on  the
    Secretary of State to await a diagnosis; it  was  something  which  she
    sensibly should and could have given some credence to.

32. Finally by reference to Section  117A  and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as inserted by the Immigration Act 2014
    we must when considering the public interest question in respect of any
    human rights claim consider the matters set out in  Section  117B.   We
    must consider the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  and
    that that is in the public interest.  In the context of  this  case  of
    course we do.  Here the appellant  arrived  lawfully  and  it  is  only
    because of what happened after her arrival, entirely without  fault  on
    her part, that the issue of her and her dependant's  Article  8  rights
    arise.  This is not a case in which invoking Article 8 in any way  will
    undermine effective immigration controls.  Of the other public interest
    considerations it is  in  our  view  only  necessary  and  relevant  to
    consider sub-Section (3), namely the financial  independence  of  those
    who enter the United Kingdom, those persons not being a burden  on  the
    taxpayer.  As we have already noted the costs of the treatment  of  the
    child in this case will be very very substantial and we  do  of  course
    give due weight to those costs.  They are not, for the reasons  already
    indicated, crucial or determinative in relation to the public  interest
    exercise.

33. Dealing with the issues that must be dealt with in any Article  8  case
    there is no dispute that the removal of the appellant and therefore her
    dependant child will be an interference with his private life.   As  we
    have established by the authorities, medical treatment is private  life
    or can be.

34. Second, that interference plainly will have consequences of the kind of
    gravity which may engage the operation of Article 8.  We anticipate  we
    have already rehearsed sufficiently the factual background to this case
    and  the  consequences  involved  in  removal  such  that  no   further
    discussion of that question is necessary.  The  interference  with  the
    appellant's and her dependant's private life was plainly in  accordance
    with the law in the sense it was in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is certainly  arguable  that  it  was  unlawful  because  no
    adequate consideration was given to the best interests of the child  in
    relation to his medical condition.  It seems better to  us  to  combine
    that consideration with the issue of proportionality to which  we  come
    in  a  moment.   The  interference  was  necessary  in  the  sense   of
    maintaining  immigration  controls  but,  bearing  in  mind  the   best
    interests of the child and bearing in mind  the  enormous  consequences
    upon the child if he is returned to  Pakistan,  we  conclude  that  the
    interference with his Article 8 rights were not  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved i.e. removing him from this
    country.  In those circumstances we  rule  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was an interference with his Article  8  rights  and
    therefore was unlawful.



                           Signed   Date: 27th November 2014
                           The Honourable Mr Justice Davis
                            (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

