
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On: 8 May 2014
                                             Decision Promulgated:

 On:  9 May 2014

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                           Mohammed Hossain Ahmed
                            Musammat Sabina Begum
                            Musammat Faija Begum
                               Md Faiyaz Ahmed



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Islam of The First Law Partnership
For the Respondent: Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh. They are husband  and  wife  and
two of their children.

This is an appeal by the appellants against  the  determination  promulgated
on 19 March 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  Paul  which  refused  the
appellants' appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  3  July  2013  to
refuse leave to remain as family members and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The facts of the case are that the appellants came  to  the  UK  with  entry
clearance as visitors on 16 November 2011. On 15 May 2012 they  applied  for
an  extension  of  leave  in  order  to  spend  more  time  with  the  first
appellant's father who was very ill. Sadly, his father died on  31  December
2012. The family pursued the application in order to be able to  remain  and
care for the first appellant's mother.

There is no dispute that the substantive Immigration Rules cannot be met.

 The sole ground of appeal here is that  Judge  Paul  erred  in  failing  to
allow the appeal  under  Article  8.  It  was  argued  that  he  incorrectly
assessed  whether  the  appellants  had  a  family  life  with   the   first
appellant's mother and that her medical needs could be met by  other  family
members. It was also maintained that the First-tier Tribunal also failed  to
assess the best interests of the children.

To my mind, the grounds were wholly without  merit.  The  first  appellant's
parents came to the UK around 15 years ago. They  lived  independently  from
the first appellant and his family for many years. They lived  in  the  same
country  as  two  other  children  rather  than  the  first  appellant.  The
appellants have only been in the UK since November 2011,  at  most  half  of
the lives of the children. It was clearly open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
to find that it had not been shown that the appellants  had  a  family  life
for the purposes of Article 8 with the first appellant's mother.  The  clear
import of the findings at [28] to [31] is that the appellants had not  shown
a family life with the first appellant's mother, there being  no  more  than
the usual emotional ties.

The  grounds  state  that  the  usual  test  for  family  life   should   be
distinguished  where  a  child  is  involved,  here  the  third  and  fourth
appellants. That argument is misconceived. The third and  fourth  appellants
can be assumed to have their primary family life with their parents and  not
with a grandmother with whom they have spent less  than  half  their  lives.
There was no evidence showing more than  the  usual  emotional  ties  to  be
expected between a grandmother and her grandchildren.

Judge Paul's findings did  not  include  overt  consideration  of  the  best
interests of the children which is regrettable. It  remains  the  case  that
their best interests were manifestly to be with their parents wherever  they
were, the children having spent at least half of their life if not  more  in
Bangladesh in any event.  This was simply not  a  factor  which  could  have
made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

Judge Paul was equally  entitled  to  find  that  any  needs  of  the  first
appellant's mother, on which it was conceded before  me  there  was  limited
evidence, could be met by other  family  members.  Two  other  children  had
cared for the grandmother. One of them, a  son,  still  lived  in  the  same
home. As family life had not been  shown,  the  grandmother's  rights  could
arise only in the context of a private life claim and it  was  simply  wrong
to assert that where others could care for her and she had lived apart  from
the appellants for so long that this was a matter that  could  lead  to  the
Article 8 appeal being allowed.

 There was  nothing  here  which  could  allow  a  second  stage  Article  8
assessment to succeed. There were no arguably good  grounds  for  proceeding
to a second  stage  Article  8  assessment.  There  were  no  compelling  or
exceptional circumstances that could have  founded  such  a  claim;  Gulshan
(Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00460 (IAC)  applied.
Rather, the reliance on the illness of the mother after  the  death  of  the
father  appeared  to  me  to  be  an  opportunistic  attempt  to  circumvent
immigration control.

 The grounds also argue that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  assess  the
first appellant's claim that he would face violence on return  as  a  result
of political differences.

I had no hesitation in finding that claim  and  the  material  submitted  in
support of it had no merit whatsoever.

The events that the first appellant seeks to  rely  on  occurred  before  he
came to the UK. No mention was made of a protection  claim,  however,  until
the first appellant's witness statement dated 24 February 2014,  just  three
days before the First-tier Tribunal hearing. It was not a ground  of  appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal. It was not  raised  in  response  to  the  s.120
notice. Permission to vary the grounds of  appeal  was  not  sought  at  any
time.

It was maintained before me that the protection claim could  not  have  been
raised earlier as the first appellant  did  not  know  any  earlier  of  the
change of circumstances that had led to increase risk. There was  absolutely
nothing to show when he did find out that he might be  at  risk  that  could
possibly substantiate such an assertion.

The  documents  provided  are  very  poorly  translated,  to  the  point  of
unintelligibility. The translations are not certified. No originals or  even
copies of the original documents were provided.

As a result, the protection claim put forward before Judge Paul  was  devoid
of any merit whatsoever, even had it been  raised  as  a  formal  ground  of
appeal at any time, which it was not.  The  manner  in  which  it  has  been
approached by the first appellant and his legal advisers appeared to  me  to
be at best entirely inappropriate and at worst  cynical  and  opportunistic.
No material error arose.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law such that it should be set aside. The decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 8 May 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




