
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/30556/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26th January 2018                       | On 14th March 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mr nadimahmed hasan arab
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E B Grant, promulgated on 25th May 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 21st March  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on  29th  May
    1970.  He clearly gives a decision of the Respondent Secretary of State
    dated 28th August 2015 refusing his application to remain in the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  The basis of the  rejection  is  that  he  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service  (ETS)  to  a  Sponsor  in
    order for them to provide him with a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS).  However, ETS has a record of the  Appellant's  speaking
    test.  Using voice verification software, ETS was able to  detect  that
    the Appellant  had  used  a  proxy  and  was  not  satisfied  that  his
    certificate was not fraudulently obtained.  Accordingly, the  tendering
    of a false document meant that his  application  stood  to  be  refused
    under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge Grant on 21st  March  2017,  the  Appellant
    attended in person to give evidence.  He claimed that he  obtained  his
    TOEIC certificate by genuinely taking the test himself and he  did  not
    use a proxy test taker.  He gave his evidence in English throughout the
    hearing.  Indeed, the Appellant has subsequently set an IELTS exam  and
    secured a level B2  grade  (see  paragraph  9  of  the  determination).
    Accordingly, the Appellant maintained that he was a genuine student and
    that the TOEIC certificate provided was a result of a genuine test.  He
    went on to say that the Home Office could have  informed  him  of  this
    before refusing his application and given him  a  fair  opportunity  to
    submit an alternative English language test certificate (see  paragraph
    10 of the determination).

 4. The judge went on to consider the Appellant's  personal  circumstances,
    observing that he was a 46 year old man, who had been studying  in  the
    UK since 14th September 2009.  He had a wife and two teenage  daughters
    living in India.  Despite the refusal of his application in August 2015
    he has been living in the UK and claims he was not working.  The  judge
    did not believe that he was not  working  because  he  had  obtained  a
    certificate of fitness for work from his GP "despite his  protestations
    to the contrary" (paragraph 17).

 5. The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  main  allegation  and  the
    application of paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules and held  that
    the Respondent Secretary of State had discharged her burden  of  proof,
    showing that the Appellant did not submit the TOEIC  test  in  2012  as
    claimed.  This was because  the  Respondent  had  adduced  evidence  in
    support of the appeal confirmation of the invalidation supplied by  the
    testing company, which could be  filed  at  pages  E1  and  E2  of  the
    Respondent's bundle.  This couple with the affidavit evidence lodged in
    support of the Respondent's position had led the judge to conclude that
    the Respondent had discharged the  burden  of  proof  required  of  her
    (paragraph 18).  The fact remained that the Appellant had no valid  CAS
    certificate and could not succeed in any event.

 6. With respect to his Article 8 rights, and the issue as  to  whether  he
    should be granted 60 days in order to find another  licenced  institute
    and to continue with his studies, the Appellant  had  relied  upon  the
    well-known case of CDS (Brazil) but the judge found that this  reliance
    was misconceived.  This is because the requirement to issue  a  student
    for the period of 60 days in order to find another college only applies
    where a college licence has been revoked  during  the  currency  of  an
    existing student visa.  This was not the case here (paragraph 21).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application  state  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    materially erred in law in failing to apply the correct burden of proof
    because the Respondent was simply relying upon  the  exclusion  of  his
    grounds under paragraph 322(1A).  He submitted that he  had  taken  the
    test at an approved English language test centre  which  was  specified
    under Appendix O of the Immigration Rules.

 9. He stated that the certificate actually  indicated  that  he  had  been
    present for the test that he undertook.  He had taken his passport size
    photograph which was visible from the test score that was submitted  to
    the Home Office.  Therefore the evidence of his  giving  him  the  test
    himself should be taken at face value.  The allegation that he had used
    a proxy test taker was simply an allegation.  It was not backed  up  by
    any proof.

10. On 7th November 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge arguably did not consider the fact  that  the  Appellant
    provided evidence that he had in fact taken the test.  If the Appellant
    had provided an innocent  explanation  then  his  explanation  must  be
    considered before it can said that the Respondent  has  discharged  the
    legal burden of proof.

11. In this case it appeared that the judge had only considered  the  first
    stage of the test, namely, the evidential stage, as referred to in SM &
    Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229, and not the  second  stage  of  the  Appellant
    providing an innocent explanation.  Moreover, the  Respondent  had  not
    raised the issue of whether or not the Appellant had  been  working  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 26th February 2018, the Appellant  was  not
    in attendance, and nor was any explanation given for his absence.  Nor,
    indeed, was there a legal representation present on his behalf.

13. In her submissions before me, Ms Everett, in her usual helpful  manner,
    stated that she did not think that she could  argue  around  the  basis
    upon which grant of permission to appeal had been made.  If the ETS has
    confirmed that the test certificate was invalid (by way of the  details
    provided on the look-up tool), coupled with generic statements provided
    by Rebecca Collings and  Peter  Millington,  they  had  discharged  the
    evidential burden of  proof.   It  was,  however,  thereafter  for  the
    Appellant to provide an innocent explanation.  It appeared that he  had
    done so.  The judge, however, had only looked at the situation  at  the
    initial first evidential stage.

14. She submitted that "the issue is whether he had offered a rebuttal, but
    he was not present here today at the hearing".

15. In fairness to the Appellant, however, Ms Everett  submitted  that  the
    consequences of ascribing dishonesty to the Appellant was  serious  for
    him.  That being so, regardless of whether the Appellant  had  attended
    today or not, the judge should have made a finding on this matter.  The
    consequences for the Appellant were serious.   However,  the  Appellant
    could  not  have  succeeded  today  (as  is  clear  from  his   witness
    statement).

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where, as the Appellant states in his  grounds
    of application, he had actually gone to the  officially  approved  test
    centre in person, presented his  passport  sized  photograph,  together
    with his passport, taken a test which  confirms  his  identity  on  the
    certificate provided to him, and the  only  basis  for  the  Respondent
    challenging  that  assertion  is  the  ETS  records  and  the   generic
    statements provided by Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington.

17. Such a scenario was considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  &  Qadir
    [2016] UKUT 00229.  It was determined that  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State satisfies the evidential stage, it is necessary then to  consider
    the Appellant's innocent explanation.  This is an  Appellant  who  gave
    evidence at the hearing in English himself. He had subsequently sat  an
    IELTS exam and secured a level B2 (see  the  judge's  determination  at
    paragraph 9).

18. In the circumstances for paragraph 322(2) to apply, there had to  be  a
    finding as to whether he had been dishonest in this  respect.   He  may
    have been working in the UK, but this was not a matter  highlighted  in
    the refusal letter.  He may not have succeeded in any event because  he
    had no valid CAS certificate (see paragraph 19 of  the  determination).
    Even so, the consequences of a finding that he had been dishonest  were
    extremely serious for him.  The failure of the judge  to  consider  the
    appeal on the basis of the guidance given in SM  &  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT
    00229 led the Tribunal into making an error of law.

Remaking the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than
    Judge E B Grant, on the basis that the nature or extent  of  any  fact-
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to
    be remade is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2, it was appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  under
Practice Statement 7.2(b).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2018





