
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30554/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 December 2014               |On 13 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                          ms folasade sakirat raji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United  Kingdom  under  Regulation  19  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hopkins ("the judge") in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30 September 2014.  The appeal  was  determined  on  the
    basis of the documentary evidence, in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
    indication in her notice of appeal that she did not require a hearing.

2.   The removal decision was made in the light of the Secretary of  State's
    finding that the EEA family member  she  relied  upon,  her  Portuguese
    spouse, was not a "qualified person", falling within  Regulation  6  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  In her  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant contended  that  her  spouse  was  a  qualified
    person, as a jobseeker.  Moreover, the Secretary of State had failed to
    consider Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

3.   The judge found that there was a paucity of evidence  before  him.   He
    took into account documents submitted in support of the contention that
    the appellant's spouse was a qualified  person,  as  a  jobseeker.   He
    applied Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations, and  in  particular  sub-
    paragraph (iv) and also  considered  whether  the  spouse  fell  within
    Regulation 6(ii) as a person who was no longer working but who did  not
    cease to  be  treated  as  a  worker  for  the  purposes  of  the  2006
    Regulations.   He  found  that  the  spouse  had  been  in  receipt  of
    jobseeker's allowance in the  past,  although  there  was  no  evidence
    showing when he entered the United  Kingdom  to  seek  employment  and,
    indeed, no evidence that he had ever  been  in  employment.   His  bank
    statement showed that he received jobseeker's allowance from  at  least
    February 2014 and continued to receive that benefit, until August 2014,
    when he began to receive employment support  allowance  ("ESA").   This
    was generally paid to those with an  illness  or  disability  affecting
    their ability to work but there was no evidence regarding the extent to
    which the spouse's ability to work had  been  affected.   Overall,  the
    judge concluded that the appellant had not shown that her  spouse  fell
    to be treated as a worker or as a jobseeker and that the  evidence  did
    not show that  he  was  a  qualified  person.   It  followed  that  the
    appellant's right to reside had ceased.

4.   The judge made an Article 8 assessment, noting  again  the  paucity  of
    evidence and assessed the appellant's claim  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to act in accordance with natural justice.  The judge  concluded
    that neither ground of appeal was made out in this context.

5.   An application was made for  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant's
    solicitors contended that the judge erred in seeking to "go behind" the
    decision of the Department of Works and Pensions that  the  appellant's
    spouse was entitled to jobseeker's allowance and ought to be classified
    as a jobseeker.  It was also contended that the  sponsor's  receipt  of
    ESA due to illness did not show that he had ceased to be treated  as  a
    worker, in the light  of  Regulation  6(ii)(a).   The  judge  erred  in
    failing to  properly  consider  the  witness  statements  made  by  the
    appellant and her husband, particularly at paragraph 11 of the former's
    statement and paragraph 3  of  the  latter's.   Both  referred  to  the
    husband's illness.

6.   Permission to appeal was  granted  on  13  November  2014.   The  judge
    granting permission found that although the  judge's  factual  findings
    may have been justified, the judge did not apply the up-to-date version
    of Regulation 6, as amended with effect from 1 January  2014.   It  was
    arguable that the parties were entitled to a decision  made  under  the
    version of the 2006 Regulations currently in  force,  even  though  the
    appellant's prospects of success might be no better.

Submissions on error of law

7.   Mr Aborisade said that the judge erred in law by ignoring  paragraph  3
    of  the  appellant's  husband's  witness  statement.   The  explanation
    appeared there that he had not collected jobseeker's allowance for  one
    month because he was ill.  He was temporarily unable  to  work  through
    illness.   His  bank  statement  showed  that  he  was  collecting  the
    allowance from February  2014  and  his  property  was  visited  by  an
    Immigration Officer in July 2014 and so he had been in receipt  of  the
    benefit for less than  six  months  at  that  point.   Although  direct
    evidence of illness may have been absent, some evidence accompanied the
    application for permission to appeal, as the judge had made an  adverse
    finding in this context.  The judge did not believe the sponsor and  so
    more evidence  was  required  to  complement  what  had  been  provided
    earlier.  The judge failed to take into account the  witness  statement
    made by the husband and also overlooked paragraph 11 of the appellant's
    witness statement, contained in the appellant's bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  All of this showed that there was an error of  law  and
    inadequate fact-finding.  The decision should be set aside and remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Mr Avery said that the decision contained no  material  error  of  law.
    The judge had made findings on key issues, which were sound  and  well-
    reasoned.  The case was put to the judge that the  sponsor  might  fall
    within Regulation 6 as a jobseeker or as a worker who  was  temporarily
    unable to work as the result of illness.  The case was also put on  the
    basis that the sponsor received ESA.  The witness statements related to
    only one break, in July 2014 and that related to jobseeker's  allowance
    and not ESA.

9.   The real difficulty for the  appellant  was  the  absence  of  reliable
    evidence regarding all aspects of  the  claim  that  her  husband  fell
    within Regulation 6 and was a qualified person.  In the grounds, it was
    asserted that the judge should have relied on the  DWP  assessment  but
    this was not sustainable.  The judge  was  required  to  make  his  own
    assessment in the light of the evidence, which might include the  DWP's
    own assessment.  At  paragraph  22  of  the  determination,  the  judge
    mentioned Regulation 6 without specifying which part of it  he  had  in
    mind but the  following  paragraphs  contained  cogent  findings  which
    showed that he had properly engaged with the case.  Even if it were the
    case that an up-to-date version of Regulation 6 was not  applied,  this
    would make no material difference.

10.  Mr Aborisade said in  a  brief  response  that  the  determination  had
    produced unfairness and the decision should be set aside  and  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, to be remade there.

Conclusion on error of law

11.  Mr Aborisade kindly handed up a copy of Regulation 6 but  this  was  in
    the unamended  form  which  did  not  take  into  account  the  changes
    introduced with effect from 1 January 2014 by virtue of the Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)   (Amendment)   (No.2)   Regulations   2013.
    Regulation 6 was substantially amended, particularly in relation  to  a
    person seeking to show that he or  she  is  a  qualified  person  as  a
    jobseeker, with the substitution of a wholly  new  sub-paragraph  (iv).
    Regulation 6(ii)(a), regarding a person not ceasing to be treated as  a
    worker if he or she is temporarily unable to work as the result  of  an
    illness or accident is unamended but sub-paragraph (ii)(b)  is  amended
    and a new sub-sub-paragraph (ba) inserted.

12.  I deal first with Mr Aborisade's contention that the  judge  overlooked
    or failed to properly take into account paragraph  3  of  the  spouse's
    witness statement  and  paragraph  11  of  the  appellant's  statement,
    regarding the former's inability to collect  jobseeker's  allowance  in
    July 2014, by reason of illness.  In fact, the determination, which  is
    well-reasoned, shows that the judge had this aspect of the case clearly
    in mind.  He refers expressly to the claim that  the  benefit  was  not
    received in July 2014 in paragraph 7 and to the two witness  statements
    before him in paragraph 10 of the determination.  At paragraph  12,  he
    refers again to the period in which the benefit was  not  received,  in
    July 2014.  No error of law has been shown here.

13.  So far as the assessment by the DWP is concerned, I accept  Mr  Avery's
    submission that the judge was required to make his own  assessment  and
    that he was not, in fact, seeking to "go behind" the DWP's treatment of
    the appellant's spouse as a person entitled  to  jobseeker's  allowance
    and, subsequently, to ESA.  The judge's task was  to  assess  the  case
    that the appellant was the family member of a qualified person, meaning
    here someone falling within Regulation 6 of the 2002 Regulations.   The
    judge properly concluded that the  case  advanced  on  the  appellant's
    behalf was simply not made out.  His findings of fact in  this  context
    were open to him on the evidence.  He was entitled to find  that  there
    was uncertainty regarding  when,  precisely,  the  appellant's  husband
    entered the United Kingdom seeking work and he  was  entitled  to  find
    that there was no evidence before him showing that the husband had ever
    been in employment in the United  Kingdom.   Indeed,  that  finding  is
    fully consistent with the husband's  witness  statement,  in  which  he
    himself refers to his presence in the United Kingdom as a jobseeker (in
    paragraph 3).  A similar claim appears in the appellant's own statement
    and neither witness  statement  contains  anything  to  show  that  the
    husband has ever worked here.

14.  Does the failure to apply the amended version of Regulation  6  make  a
    material difference?  I  conclude  that  it  does  not.   As  Mr  Avery
    submitted, there were two possible routes available to the appellant to
    show that her husband was a qualified person falling within  Regulation
    6, notwithstanding his apparent inability to work through illness.  The
    first was as a jobseeker, under  Regulation  6(1)(a).   The  difficulty
    here is that the amended sub-paragraph (iv) requires a  person  seeking
    to show that he or she is a jobseeker to satisfy conditions  A  and  B.
    Condition A is that the person entered the United Kingdom in  order  to
    seek employment; or is present  here  seeking  employment,  immediately
    after enjoying a right to reside pursuant to paragraph (1)(b)  to  (e).
    The judge's clear findings of fact show that the  husband  cannot  meet
    the alternative condition but let us  assume  that  he  did  enter  the
    United Kingdom to seek employment.  He must also show that condition  B
    is met.  This requires "evidence that he is seeking employment and  has
    a genuine chance of being engaged."  The  documentary  evidence  before
    the judge, including the two witness statements, falls very  far  short
    of showing this.  The husband moved from jobseekers allowance to ESA in
    about August 2014 but there is nothing to show that he is continuing to
    seek employment and has a genuine  chance  of  being  engaged.   Again,
    neither witness statement comes remotely close to demonstrating that he
    has any real prospects of securing employment.

15.  The alternative route was under Regulation 6(1)(b)  and  (2)(a),  as  a
    person no longer working and temporarily unable to work as  the  result
    of an illness or accident.  The difficulty here is  that  the  evidence
    was manifestly insufficient to show that the husband was "a person  who
    is no longer working".  At paragraph 24, the judge found that there was
    no evidence that the sponsor had ever been a worker for the purposes of
    the 2006 Regulations and nothing to show that the description of him in
    his marriage certificate as a retail assistant related to employment in
    the United Kingdom, let alone that it was current at the  time  of  the
    marriage.  There was also no evidence before the  Tribunal  as  to  the
    nature of any illness or accident preventing employment and nothing  to
    show whether any illness or accident was temporary or  permanent.   The
    adverse findings were, again, clearly open to the judge.

16.  In summary, the judge did not overlook the  witness  statements  before
    him and the decision shows that he had in mind all the salient features
    of the case.  His findings of fact were open  to  him  on  the  limited
    evidence available.  Although he erred in failing to apply the  amended
    Regulation 6, no material error of law resulted.   The  application  of
    Regulation 6 in its amended form would have led to the same  conclusion
    and outcome.

17.  The application for permission to appeal contained no challenge to  the
    judge's findings in relation to the "breach of natural justice"  ground
    of appeal or to his Article 8 assessment and no submissions  were  made
    on the appellant's behalf on these matters.

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

DECISION

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  error
    of law, shall stand.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

No application for anonymity has been made in these proceedings and  I  make
no order on this occasion.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
