
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Sent to all parties             |
|On October 28, 2016             |On November 16, 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AHSAN [R]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent    Ms Faryl, counsel, instructed by MA Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    3. The appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.  On  April  4,  2011  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
       with a visa valid until September 30, 2011. On March  29,  2012  his
       leave was curtailed until May 28, 2012 but he was then granted leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until October 31,  2014.  On
       December 2, 2013 the appellant married a British citizen, [MS],  and
       on June 26, 2014 their daughter was born.

    4. On October 10, 2014 he submitted an application to remain on  family
       and private life grounds but his  application  was  refused  with  a
       right of appeal on August 21, 2015.

    5. The appellant appealed that decision  on  September  7,  2015  under
       Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       and  his  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Henderson (hereinafter referred to as "the  Judge"  on  January  27,
       2016. In a decision promulgated on February 10, 2016 she allowed his
       appeal under the Immigration Rules and human rights grounds.

    6. The respondent appealed the Judge's decision on  February  24,  2016
       and permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Grant on July 21, 2016. She found that it was arguable  the
       Judge had erred by failing to give adequate findings for finding the
       respondent had not met the burden of proof required. Permission  was
       further given on the article 8 decision on the  basis  the  decision
       was flawed

    7. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  occasion  I
       heard submissions from both representatives.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr McVeety adopted the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
       Judge had approached the case incorrectly. She approached the  facts
       on the basis the respondent had not demonstrated a case when  it  is
       clear from the decision of SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department (FTS-Evidence-Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC)
       that the respondent had met its burden and  the  Judge  should  then
       have considered whether the appellant demonstrated he had not used a
       proxy to take his test. The Judge erred because  she  only  examined
       the respondent's evidence as against considering the appellant's own
       evidence. If there as an error on the first ground then  that  error
       would infect the Judge's article 8 approach.

    9. Ms Faryl  submitted  the  grounds  of  appeal  amounted  to  a  mere
       disagreement.  The  Judge  carefully  considered  the   respondent's
       evidence and then stated at paragraph [25] of her decision  why  she
       preferred the appellant's account.  She  argued  that  although  the
       Judge did not detail the appellant's claim it could be inferred  she
       preferred it.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10. In granting permission to appeal Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Grant identified arguable errors of law.

   11. In paragraph [20] the Judge erroneously  stated  the  appellant  had
       failed his first test. The  Judge  then  proceeded  to  outline  the
       respondent's evidence and stated she was aware of  the  decision  of
       Gazi (R on the application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS-Judicial Review) IJR
       [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC).

   12. The courts in both Gazi and Qadir accepted the respondent  had  just
       met the burden on her. That being the  case  the  appellant  had  to
       discharge the burden of proof and demonstrate he did not use a proxy
       to take his test.

   13. The Judge considered this issue between paragraphs [10] and [36] but
       it is clear that all  the  judge  did  in  those  paragraphs  is  to
       consider the respondent's evidence and effectively  she  re-examined
       the evidence that the courts in Gazi and Qadir had  done.  This  was
       not what she was required to do. The only reference to the appellant
       is in four lines in paragraph [36]. No examination  of  his  account
       has been undertaken.

   14. In the circumstances I find there is an error  in  law.  This  error
       affected both decisions and I set aside both decisions.

   15. Both representatives agreed that the case should be remitted to  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   17. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   18. The matter should not be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal M Davies. Ideally, this  matter  should  be  listed  before
       myself in the First-tier but I leave that to the listing  department
       to decide if that is necessary.

   19. I direct that the appellant (and his wife, if deemed necessary, must
       file and serve on the Tribunal and respondent  a  statement  setting
       out why he says he did not use a proxy to take  his  tests.  He/they
       should provide as much information as  possible  and  this  evidence
       along with any policy information should be  served  not  less  than
       fourteen days before the next hearing date.


Signed:                         Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
