
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2015                           |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           oluyemi adeyemi adeleke
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwinycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Oluyemi Adeyemi Adeleke, was born on 30  November  1982
    and is a citizen of Nigeria.  In December 2013, the  appellant  applied
    for a residence card.  That application  was  refused  on  24  February
    2014.  The appellant made two further applications including that which
    resulted in the refusal by the respondent of 18 July 2014 which is  the
    subject of this appeal.  I shall hereafter refer to  the  appellant  as
    the respondent and the respondent as the appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Quigley) in a determination promulgated  on  4
    November 2014, allowed the appeal under the Regulations  on  the  basis
    that he was satisfied that the appellant and his EEA  national  sponsor
    had been in a durable relationship for at least two years.  The grounds
    assert that he was wrong to do so because he exercised discretion which
    is the prerogative of the Secretary of State.  Having  found  that  the
    appellant  and  the  EEA  national  sponsor   had   been   in   durable
    relationship, the judge should have allowed  the  appeal  only  to  the
    extent that the decision be remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    further consideration.

 3. I proceeded  with  the  hearing  in  the  appellant's  absence.   I  am
    satisfied that he had received the notice of hearing  sent  out  on  21
    January 2015 to his last known address.  In any event, I find that  the
    grounds of the Secretary of State have been made out and I  agree  that
    the judge should not have  simply  allowed  this  appeal  outright  but
    should instead have remitted it to the Secretary of State so  that  she
    might consider the judge's finding at [21] that the appellant  and  EEA
    national sponsor had been in a durable relationship for  at  least  two
    years.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 5 November  2014
is set aside.  I remake the decision.  The appeal against  the  respondent's
decision of 18 July 2014 is allowed to the limited extent  that  the  matter
is remitted to the Secretary of State to  reconsider  the  decision  in  the
light of the First-tier  Tribunal's  preserved  finding  at  [21]  that  the
appellant and the EEA national  sponsor  have  been  engaged  in  a  durable
relationship for at least two years.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 30 March 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

