
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30591/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 13 March 2015                              |On 17 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                JASVIR SINGH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 18 April 1985. He  entered
      the UK on 15 November 2010 with entry clearance as a Tier 4  (General)
      Student Migrant. He was granted further leave  in  the  same  category
      until 9 May 2015 but, on 6 June 2013, his leave was curtailed so as to
      expire on 17 March 2014. On 17 March 2014 he submitted an  application
      for further leave but his application was  refused  on  14  July  2014
      because the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS"), which  had
      been assigned by 13 March 2014 to enable the appellant  to  study  had
      been withdrawn by the sponsor. The  appellant  appealed  and,  in  his
      grounds, complained about the college. He said he did not know why the
      CAS had been withdrawn. His course fees had not been refunded to  him.
      He wanted to complete his studies. He requested  that  his  appeal  be
      decided on the papers without an oral hearing.


   2. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard the appeal on 27 October 2014
      in  the  Newport  hearing  centre.  She  dismissed  the  appeal  under
      paragraphs 245ZX(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules,  HC395,  because
      the CAS had been withdrawn by the date of decision. It was not open to
      her to find a breach of the common law duty of fairness. The  decision
      was proportionate for article 8 purposes.


   3. Unfortunately, in her decision, the judge made a number of errors: (1)
      she wrongly recorded the appellant as being Nigerian, (2) she  wrongly
      recorded his date of birth, (3)  she  wrongly  recorded  the  date  of
      decision,  and  (4)  she  wrongly  recorded  that  the  appellant  had
      requested an oral  hearing.  The  appellant  sought  and  was  granted
      permission to appeal on the basis that  the  appellant  could  not  be
      satisfied the judge had given adequate scrutiny to the  facts  of  his
      case.


   4. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response arguing  the  errors  were
      "typographical" and there were no errors in the judge's findings.


   5. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing before me. I checked he
      had been given adequate notice of the  hearing  before  proceeding  to
      hear the appeal in his  absence.  He  has  not  filed  submissions  or
      further evidence.


   6. Mr Walker did not adopt the reasoning of  the  rule  24  response  and
      submitted the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside
      and re-made.


   7. I agree that the judge's decision contains  very  serious  errors,  as
      described, which are more than "typographical". In some circumstances,
      I would not hesitate to find that a decision  containing  such  errors
      was vitiated by legal error. It is vitally important that the  parties
      can feel confident that the judge gave a fair hearing  to  the  appeal
      and was aware of the facts underlying it. It is of particular  concern
      that the judge records that this was an oral hearing  whereas  it  was
      not: the appellant had requested a decision on the papers.


   8. However, the judge correctly recorded  the  appellant's  name  in  the
      heading. Her reference to the  CAS  number  is  also  correct.  It  is
      therefore clear to me that she had the right case in mind when dealing
      with the substantive merits. I therefore regard the errors to  be  the
      result of carelessness in the preparation of the decision rather  than
      disclosing a real concern that the judge was not applying her mind  to
      the actual case before her.


   9. I also note that, when  considering  the  substantive  merits  of  the
      appeal, the judge gave cogent reasons for dismissing the appeal  under
      the rules, on fairness grounds  and  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
      grounds seeking permission to appeal do not  address  the  substantive
      issues under appeal. It is entirely clear to  me  that  the  decisions
      reached by the judge on each ground of appeal was correctly  made  and
      that the facts do not give  rise  to  the  possibility  of  any  other
      outcome. In the circumstances, there is no utility  in  setting  aside
      the decision only to re-make it in identical terms, as I would  surely
      have done.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and  its
    decision dismissing the appeal is confirmed.

     No anonymity direction made.

                               Signed                 Date 13 March 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
