
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30213/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Francis Kumi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Litchfield, instructed by FB Legal Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hunter who allowed the appeal by  Mr  Kumi  against
    the decision refusing to issue a residence card for  reasons  given  in
    his determination dated 30 April 2014.

 2. We shall refer to Mr Kumi as the claimant.  He made application  for  a
    residence card on 2 November 2012 as a family member of an EU  national
    exercising treaty  rights,  Esther  Frimpong,  a  Dutch  national.   As
    evidence of their relationship, he produced documentation in support of
    the parties' customary  marriage  pursuant  to  rites  which  had  been
    performed on 13 April 2012 in Accra.  Neither party was present for the
    marriage; they were instead represented by their fathers.

 3. The Secretary of State rejected the application  because  she  was  not
    satisfied that the  marriage  was  conducted  in  accordance  with  the
    Ghanaian Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  Judge
    Hunter who heard the appeal on 28 February 2014 concluded  at  [24]  of
    his determination:

         "The Ghanaian authorities in this case have issued a form  entitled
         Register  of  Customary  Marriages,  following  the   documentation
         submitted by the relevant family members.  I take the view that  as
         the relevant authority in Ghana has accepted the  validity  of  the
         marriage it is not for the Tribunal  to  go  behind  that  evidence
         unless there are particularly  cogent  reasons  for  doing  so.   I
         therefore accept on the basis that the marriage  register  produced
         by the appellant that he  entered  into  a  valid  marriage  to  Ms
         Frimpong under the customary law in Ghana."

 4. In reaching this conclusion the judge took into account of a  reference
    in the grounds of appeal to an amendment to the 1985 law in 1991 (which
    was not provided at the hearing) and also the decision of the  Tribunal
    in NA (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT
    00009.

 5. The grounds of appeal challenge that decision on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law by failing to take into  account  the
    findings in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  24
    (IAC) which had been promulgated prior to the delayed  promulgation  of
    Judge Hunter's determination on 30 April 2014.  It is argued  that  the
    judge should have been aware of and considered the findings in  Kareem.
    It is also argued that the judge had failed to consider  if  the  proxy
    marriage conducted by the claimant was valid in Dutch law.

 6. Ms Litchfield submitted that there had been no material error by  Judge
    Hunter as even if he had applied Kareem he would have found  that  that
    marriage would have been lawful under the Dutch Civil Code in the light
    of the findings reached by the Tribunal in  that  case.   Ms  Isherwood
    disagreed with this interpretation of Kareem.

 7. Our conclusions are as follows.  Kareem  was  concerned  with  a  proxy
    marriage between a Nigerian and a Dutch national neither  of  whom  had
    attended their marriage  on  26  November  2011  in  Lagos  State.   In
    directing itself as to the correct approach  to  the  definition  of  a
    spouse in EU law the Tribunal concluded at [11]:

         "We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is  in
         a marital relationship is governed by  the  national  laws  of  the
         Member States.  In other words, whether a person is  married  is  a
         matter that falls within the competence of  the  individual  Member
         States."

 8. Further at [17]:

         "Spouses' rights of free movement and residence are derived from  a
         marriage having been contracted and depend on it.  In light of  the
         connection between the rights of free movement  and  residence  and
         the nationality laws of the Member States, we conclude that,  in  a
         situation where the marital relationship is disputed, the  question
         of whether there is a marital relationship is  to  be  examined  in
         accordance with the laws of the Member State from which  the  Union
         citizen obtains nationality and from which therefore  that  citizen
         derives free movement rights."

 9. The Tribunal went on to observe that it did not know whether, according
    to Dutch law, the marriage would be regarded as having been  celebrated
    in Nigeria or the United Kingdom.  It made it clear that there  was  no
    basis on which it could impose  the  approach  adopted  in  the  United
    Kingdom to this question.

10. The Tribunal turned to extracts from the Dutch Civil Code that had been
    placed before it and observed  there  was  no  indication  whether  the
    version was up-to-date.  Furthermore the Tribunal  observed  that  they
    had been given no assistance how the  code  should  be  interpreted  or
    whether the appellant's marriage ceremony would be regarded as a lawful
    marriage under that code.  Specifically at [29] the Tribunal stated:

         "The passages we cite are silent on whether a  proxy  or  customary
         marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands or whether  such  a
         marriage would be incompatible with  Dutch  public  order.   We  do
         recognise,  however,  that  Article  1:66   permits   marriage   by
         representation in certain circumstances, which would  suggest  that
         marriage in the absence of one of the parties would not be contrary
         to Dutch public order.  However, as we have indicated, we have  not
         received evidence on these complex issues and have  been  given  no
         help on how Dutch law might apply."

11. It is abundantly clear from these extracts from Kareem that  it  cannot
    be relied on as support for Ms Litchfield's submissions.  The  positive
    conclusion reached in Kareem was that the marriage was not valid  under
    Nigerian law and although the  Tribunal  contemplated  the  possibility
    that if valid, the marriage might not be contrary to Dutch public  law,
    it reached no conclusion on this aspect in the absence  of  proper  and
    adequate evidence on the point.  Furthermore, we do not  regard  it  as
    appropriate to treat the description of  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    Kareem about what Dutch law is as binding or a definitive statement  of
    the law of the Netherlands in  relation  to  foreign  marriages.   That
    issue was left unresolved by the Tribunal.

12. Accordingly we are persuaded that the judge erred by  failing  to  take
    into account the approach set out in Kareem.  Had he done so, he  would
    have realised that the claimant could not be entitled  to  a  residence
    card as a family member solely because the marriage had  complied  with
    the requirements of Ghanaian law.

13. We told the parties that we would set aside the determination and  that
    we would  proceed  to  remake  the  decision.  Ms  Litchfield  candidly
    acknowledged her difficulties in that she did not have expert  evidence
    to address the issue of whether the marriage was valid under Dutch law.
     On taking instructions she decided to withdraw the appeal against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  We gave our leave.

14. Accordingly the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hunter  is  set
    aside for material error and we  therefore  allow  the  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   We  do  not  remake  the
    decision as the appeal has been withdrawn.






Signed                                           Date 29 July 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


