
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30080/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |On 30 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                            aGNES cHAIDON Filimon
                                     AKA
                           AGNES CHAIDON PHILLIPS
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed of Aman Solicitor Advocates (Luton)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission, in her maiden name, against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.  Her appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes in a determination dated 19 March 2014.

Factual matrix

 2. The following facts and  matters  are  established  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Malawi,  born
    there in 1968, but moved with her parents to Zimbabwe in 1969, when she
    was one year old.  The appellant has no family members now  in  Malawi.
    She has a residence permit entitling her  to  live  in  Zimbabwe.   The
    appellant's mother  died  in  1977.   After  her  mother's  death,  the
    appellant's father moved back to his home village and  remarried.   The
    appellant's sister remained in Zimbabwe.  There may be other  siblings:
    that is unclear.  She has three children, a son in South Africa and two
    daughters who live in Botswana. The appellant is still in contact  with
    all her family members.

 3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on a visit visa  in  2004,  to
    see friends. She overstayed.  She never had any lawful status after the
    expiry of her visitors' visa, but she met Mr Phillips and  they  became
    engaged in 2006 but at that time they needed a Certificate of  Approval
    before they could marry.  They commenced living together in his council
    flat. Mr Phillips had a serious congenital disability which meant  that
    he was never likely to live to be old, and in fact  it  seems  that  he
    survived rather longer than expected.  He was not able to work and  was
    supported on benefits, particularly disability benefits.  The appellant
    did not work:  looking after Mr Phillips was a full-time occupation and
    she had no lawful status entitling her to do so.  There were before the
    First-tier Tribunal four fairly short letters from friends of her  late
    husband, Jason Phillips,  indicating  that  the  parties  had  a  happy
    marriage and that the appellant helped him with  his  illness  and  his
    dietary requirements and acted as his carer until his death.

 4. The couple applied on 13 October 2009 under the discredited Certificate
    of Approval to marry scheme.  It is accepted now that the scheme was  a
    breach of Article  12  ECHR.   However,  any  such  breach  ended  when
    approval was granted on 19 August 2010:  the couple  married  at  Alton
    Registry Office on 8 October 2010.

 5. On 25 October 2010, the appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse but the respondent refused her application on  6  January  2011,
    with no right of appeal.  Before her husband's  death  on  25  November
    2010. The applicant then submitted an application for leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds.  On 22 December
    2010, her application was refused, again with no right  of  appeal,  on
    the basis that while the appellant might have established a private and
    family life in the United Kingdom, in particular with her late husband,
    she had done so while her status was precarious and had made no  effort
    to regularise her immigration status until 25 November 2010,  by  which
    time she had been in the United Kingdom unlawfully for just  under  six
    years.  The Secretary of State considered that to require the appellant
    to return to  her  country  of  origin,  Malawi,  would  be  a  limited
    interference with her private and family life and that skills  obtained
    in the United Kingdom could be used to support herself there.   Removal
    would be proportionate.

 6. The appellant launched  proceedings  for  a  judicial  review  of  that
    decision and it was during those proceedings that her husband died.  On
    19 May 2011, following a consent  agreement,  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted the appellant a period of  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds.  Her letter to the appellant's solicitors stated that:

         "You state that your client should be granted leave  to  remain  or
         indefinite leave on the basis of compassionate  grounds.   However,
         your client does not qualify for indefinite leave to remain in  the
         United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  Rules.    Your   client's
         circumstances have been reconsidered and the Secretary of State has
         used his discretion and granted your client  six  months  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on  the
         basis of compassionate grounds.

         The   Secretary   of   State   sympathises   with   your   client's
         circumstances, however, I must remind your client  that  after  the
         expiry of this leave she  has  no  basis  of  stay  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  She is required to leave the United Kingdom  immediately,
         it is noted that she  still  has  family  life  in  Malawi  as  her
         children reside there."

 7. After her husband's  death,  the  appellant's  financial  and  personal
    situation was dire.  She was unable to pay the rent or council  tax  on
    her late husband's flat without his  benefits  income  and  was  facing
    eviction.  She was unable to afford to  pay  the  undertakers  for  the
    cremation service, to enable her to  collect  and  bury  her  husband's
    ashes.  The appellant returned to Zimbabwe in September 2011  and  went
    to stay with her sister, well within the period of compassionate  leave
    granted to her.

 8. On 24 July 2012, the appellant re-entered the United Kingdom, sponsored
    by her former mother-in-law.  It seems that she had satisfied an  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Zimbabwe that she wished to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom only to pay for the cremation, collect, and bury her  husband's
    ashes  and  that  she  would  return  at  the  end   of   six   months.
    Unfortunately, and for the second time in the story of this appeal, the
    appellant did not do as she had  said.  Her  six-month  visitors'  visa
    expired on 24 January  2013.  The  appellant  was  accommodated  by  an
    unspecified friend, not her mother-in-law.    She  has  no  dependants,
    here or anywhere else.  In May 2013, her sister in Zimbabwe died.

 9. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  her
    deceased husband's partner, in order to be close to her late  husband's
    grave. Her husband had planned to send her to Theology College and  she
    stated that she wished to fulfil that plan.  In  the  alternative,  she
    argued under Article 8 ECHR that her  removal  to  Zimbabwe  or  Malawi
    would be disproportionate and in particular  that,  by  reason  of  the
    respondent's unlawful requirement for the appellant and her husband  to
    apply for a Certificate of Approval to Marry, there was in her case  an
    historic wrong of the type considered in Ghising & Ors (Ghurkhas/BOCs :
    historic wrong; weight) (Nepal) [2013] UKUT  567  (IAC).    It  is  the
    appellant's case that if the respondent had granted the Certificate  of
    Approval earlier, the couple would have married in 2006 and by the time
    of her husband's death, she would  have  been  entitled  to  indefinite
    leave to remain on that basis.

First-tier Tribunal determination

10. The First-tier Tribunal held that since the appellant never  had  leave
    to remain as a spouse, she could not bring herself within the  deceased
    spouse or partner provisions of the Immigration  Rules.   In  addition,
    she was not in the position of having no ties to Zimbabwe, her  country
    of former habitual residence.  The Tribunal dismissed the appeal  under
    the Rules and on human rights grounds, but allowed it  to  the  limited
    extent that the respondent's decision to remove  the  appellant  as  an
    overstayer under s.10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  was
    unlawful:  when she made her application, her visit visa  had  not  yet
    expired and  there  was  as  yet  no  lawful  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant.

11. The consideration of Article 8 ECHR begins at  paragraph  [31]  of  the
    determination.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  that  Article
    8(1) was not engaged at all, for the reasons set out at paragraph  [35]
    of the determination:

         "35. It is clear from the case of Ghising, that even if there is an
             historic wrong that first the Appellant  needs  to  show  that
             Article 8(1) is engaged.  In this case there is  very  limited
             evidence before me to demonstrate the nature or extent of  the
             Appellant's private life  in  the  UK.   She  stated  in  oral
             evidence that she is living with a friend, although no further
             details have been provided in relation to this.   She  is  not
             residing with her deceased husband's mother or any members  of
             his family.  There is no evidence before me of  any  community
             or church ties, and the  Appellant  stated  that  she  is  not
             presently studying.  Whilst I accept that the Appellant has no
             doubt made friends and acquaintances in the time that she  has
             resided in the  UK,  the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  her  to
             demonstrate, on the balance of probabilities, that she  has  a
             private life in the UK capable of being interfered with.   She
             has not discharged that burden and therefore Article  8(1)  is
             not engaged.  As the Appellant has not demonstrated  that  the
             Respondent's decision will interfere with her Article 8 rights
             I need not go on to consider the remaining questions  as  laid
             out in Razgar."

Appellant's case

12. In his skeleton argument for the appellant, Mr Saeed sought to persuade
    me that the Article 8 decision ought to be approached on the basis that
    the appellant would have married her husband in 2006, received two lots
    of discretionary leave to remain, and been able to apply for indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom in 2012.  Of course by that  time
    her late husband would have been dead for about eighteen months, and in
    addition there is no evidence before me as to the  financial  or  other
    circumstances which would have applied in 2006, 2009 or in  2012,  save
    that by then, after her husband's death, the appellant had returned  to
    Zimbabwe because the leave granted to her on a discretionary  basis  by
    the respondent did not allow her either to work or claim  benefits  and
    she was in severe financial difficulties and facing eviction  from  her
    husband's premises which had never been in her name.  Mr Saeed seeks to
    persuade me that the failure to allow the parties to marry between 2006
    and 2010 is a historic injustice of the type discussed in  Ghising  and
    others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)
    and he relies on the judicial head note which is as follows:-

         "(1) In finding that the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  historic
             wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as
             less than that to be accorded the historic wrong  suffered  by
             British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in  Gurung  and
             others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in  either  Gurkha
             or BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong is  to  reverse
             or otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies in Article
             8 proportionality assessments.

         (2)   When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private life
             and  the  decision  made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
             interference with it, the burden lies with the  Respondent  to
             show that a decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
             Appellants will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility  of
             adducing evidence that lies within their remit and about which
             the Respondent may be unaware).  ...

         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/ entry clearance officer consist solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha  (and  BOC)
             cases will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their
             family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows
             they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,
             but for the injustice that prevented the latter from  settling
             here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
             above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
             policy, which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight
             in the balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.   Thus,  a  bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side of the balance."

13.  To  the  extent  that  the  Ghising  analysis  is  relevant  in  these
    proceedings, I note that this appellant does  have  a  bad  immigration
    history in that she had no  leave  to  remain  after  her  initial  six
    months' visitor's leave which expired in December 2004.  It is  further
    relevant that she accepted the six months' compassionate leave  offered
    to her after the death of her husband,  withdrew  her  judicial  review
    challenge to the decision to refuse her indefinite leave to  remain  on
    the basis of the marriage, and left the  United  Kingdom  in  September
    2011 within the period granted by the Secretary of  State  for  her  to
    settle her and her husband's affairs in the  United  Kingdom.   I  also
    note that the appellant when returning to the United Kingdom  satisfied
    an Entry Clearance Officer that she proposed to  do  so  only  for  the
    purpose of burying her husband's ashes and was not intending to settle.
     At some point she changed her  view  about  that,  but  it  is  not  a
    satisfactory immigration history on any view.

14. Mr Saeed also relied on the analysis of the breadth of Article 8 in the
    European Court of Human Rights judgment, Niemietz v Germany 1371/88  of
    16 December 1992, in which the court said:-

         "29. The Court does  not  consider  it  possible  or  necessary  to
             attempt an exhaustive definition of  the  notion  of  'private
             life'.  However, it would be  too  restrictive  to  limit  the
             notion to an 'inner circle' in which the individual  may  live
             his own personal life as he chooses and to  exclude  therefrom
             entirely the outside world not encompassed within that circle.
              Respect for private life must  also  comprise  to  a  certain
             degree the right to establish and develop  relationships  with
             other human beings."

    The rest of the decision concerns whether that  definition  extends  to
    professionals exercising their professional responsibilities and is not
    strictly relevant in these proceedings.   The  passage  I  have  quoted
    appears to me to  be  well-established,  both  internationally  and  in
    domestic law.  It is certainly possible for private life in the form of
    friendships to be sufficient to found an Article 8 claim.

15. Mr Saeed also relied on Kadir Ascioglu [2012] EWCA Civ 1183, a case  on
    the Turkish Ankara Agreement, but on closer examination that  case  has
    very little to offer on the facts of this  case  and  I  note  that  at
    paragraph 97 thereof Lord Justice  Rix,  giving  the  decision  of  the
    court, reminds himself that each case must be turn on its own facts and
    be determined in its own context.

Discussion

16. I remind myself that the decision under appeal is that of 2 July  2013,
    refusing the appellant's application for leave to remain based  on  her
    arrival in the United Kingdom on 24 July  2012  on  a  six-month  visit
    visa.  I have already indicated that the 'historic injustice'  argument
    cannot succeed:  any breach of Article 12 ECHR was  remedied  when  the
    parties were allowed to marry and the applicant left the United Kingdom
    in 2011, returning in 2012.

17. On this occasion she has been in the United Kingdom only  for  a  short
    time, as her husband's widow, initially for the purpose of burying  his
    ashes. The appellant has not challenged the  dismissal  of  her  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and there is no challenge to  the  decision
    under s.10 that the removal decision was not in accordance with law.  I
    am therefore seised only of the human rights  element  of  the  appeal.
    While there is no family life, since the appellant's husband has  died,
    I consider that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  finding  that
    Article 8(1) was not engaged at all by such limited private life as the
    appellant has developed in the United Kingdom.    I therefore set aside
    the Article 8 element of the determination and now  proceed  to  remake
    it.

18. The question of the  appellant's  private  and  family  life  with  her
    deceased husband, or the course which she would like to study,  but  is
    not currently studying, do not relate at all  to  her  present  private
    life:  one is her previous private and family life and the other is her
    desired future private life.  The evidence of the  appellant's  present
    private life in the United Kingdom now that  her  husband  is  dead  is
    sparse.   Her  mother-in-law  was  prepared  to  invite  her  for   the
    interment, but not to accommodate  her.   She  is  accommodated  by  an
    unspecified friend and  she  produced  four  letters  of  support  from
    persons, one of whom attended the First-tier Tribunal hearing  but  was
    not cross-examined, all of whom recorded how well she had  treated  her
    husband and how happily married they were.  Whilst I  accept  that  the
    appellant does have some private life still in the United  Kingdom,  it
    is not such that interference with it would be disproportionate.    The
    private life claim cannot succeed and I dismiss it.

19.  No anonymity direction has been sought and  I  do  not  consider  that
    there is any necessity to make such a direction.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

I maintain the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal
under the Immigration Rules and to allow  the  appeal  against  the  removal
directions to the extent  that  the  respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
appellant is not in accordance with the law.


Signed[pic]            Date:  26 June 2014
             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

