
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/30716/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMED KALEEM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Appiah of Vine Court Chambers (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1     The Appellant appeals against the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid dated 31st March 2015 in which he dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 9 July  2014  refusing  the
    Appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom in making a decision to
    remove him administratively under s.10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2     The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born  on  22  July  1968.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 3 December 2006 in  possession  of  entry
    clearance for multiple entry as a visitor valid from 25 October 2005 to
    25 October 2010. (Clearly, entry would have been for only 6 months at a
    time). The Appellant's wife and three children also entered as visitors
    on 8 February 2007. They departed at some  point,  presumed  to  be  in
    either 2007 or 2008, whilst the Appellant and his  son  'AK',  born  14
    November 2002, remained in the UK. They have remained here ever  since,
    being supported by relatives and friends. AK has attended school in the
    UK.

3     On 12 March  2014  the  Appellant  made  an  application  through  his
    representatives for leave to remain on form FLTR(FP) ("Application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of your family life as a partner
    or parent or on the basis of your private  life  in  the  UK")  on  the
    basis,  set  out  in  representations  of  that  date  ([D8]   of   the
    Respondent's bundle) of 7 years residence of  a  child.  (AK  had  been
    present in the UK for 7 years by 8 February 2014.) The application  was
    accompanied by various documents including a letter and a  report  from
    AK's school. The representations argued that it would not be reasonable
    or in his best interests for AK to leave  the  UK,  with  reference  to
    Immigration Rules para 276ADE and Section EX 1 in Appendix FM.

4     This application  was  refused  with  no  right  of  appeal.  However,
    following a pre-action protocol letter for judicial review dated 7  May
    2014 [D3-D7], the Respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the  application.
    Following further  representations  dated  13  June  2014  [D1-D2]  the
    Respondent issued to the Appellant on 9 July 2014:

    (i)    an IS151A notice to a  person  liable  to  removal,  giving  the
         Appellant notice that he was an overstayer;

    (ii)   an IS151B notice of immigration decision under  s.82  NIAA  2002
         giving notice that the Appellant had made  a  human  rights  claim;
         that that claim had been refused; giving notice of  a  decision  to
         remove him under s.10 1999 Act, and that he had an in country right
         of appeal against that decision;

    (iii)  a reasons for refusal letter addressed to the Appellant with  AK
         named as his dependent, which stated:

         (a)      in relation to  the  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  under
             Appendix FM - leave to remain as a parent under E-LTRPT - that
             it was accepted that AK had resided in the UK continuously for
             7 year prior  to  the  application;  the  Appellant  had  sole
             responsibility for his son; he was taking an  active  role  in
             AK's upbringing, and therefore that  the  E-LTRPT.2.3  to  2.4
             were satisfied, but finding that under Section Ex1,  it  would
             not be unreasonable to expect AK to leave the UK, for  reasons
             set out t paras 17-21 of the refusal letter;

         (b)      in relation to the Appellant's  private  life  under  para
             276ADE of the immigration rules, neither the Appellant or  his
             son qualified for leave to remain under that  paragraph  (para
             27) on the basis that the Appellant  had  retained  ties  with
             Pakistan (para 25), and that although AK had resided in the UK
             for 7 years prior to the application, it was not  unreasonable
             for him to leave the UK (para 26);

         (c)      in relation to leave to remain outside  the  rules,  there
             were no exceptional circumstances warranting such  a  decision
             (para 29-31).

5     The Appellant gave notice of appeal to the FtT on form IAFT-1.

6     I have set out  the  way  in  which  the  Respondent  dealt  with  the
    application in some detail above, to provide a proper understanding  as
    to the issues that were before the Judge,  and  which  required  proper
    determination by him.

7     There is a  further  procedural  matter  that  I  should  mention.  It
    appears that a notice of appeal may also have been filed in respect  of
    AK. The Appellant's grounds of appeal name AK as  a  second  appellant,
    and the Judge named AK on the face of his decision as second appellant.



8     However, when the Appellant later applied for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, Judge of the First tier Tribunal Brunnen,  granting
    permission, explains in his decision that when  notice  of  appeal  was
    filed for AK, the Duty Judge requested that  a  copy  of  the  relevant
    immigration decision taken in respect of AK be filed with the Tribunal.
    A copy of an IS151A in respect of AK (which I have not seen)  was  sent
    to the Tribunal, but this was held (correctly) not to amount to a valid
    immigration decision, and a note was issued  stating  that  no  further
    action would be taken in respect of the attempted appeal by  AK.  Judge
    Brunnen opined, and again, I agree, that Judge Majid had been in  error
    in considering and dismissing an appeal in AK's name,  there  being  no
    appeal before the Judge.

9     The final point to note about these events  is  that  before  me,  the
    parties produced a copy of an IS151B s.10 1999 Act removal decision for
    AK  dated  14  October  2014,  and  a  letter  from   the   Appellant's
    representatives dated 22 October 2014,  addressed  to  the  First  tier
    Tribunal, Leicester, pointing out that the Respondent had now clarified
    AK's position by issuing the IS151B notice of decision of  14  October,
    however, "as suggested by the Home Office, since the son is a dependent
    in his father Muhammad Kaleem's application there is no need to lodge a
    separate appeal for the son." Hence, although  the  Appellant  and  his
    representatives could have filed a notice of  appeal  for  AK  at  that
    point, they elected not to.

10    In immigration and asylum  appeals,  there  is  sometimes  a  lack  of
    clarity as to whether minor children are treated as appellants in their
    own right, or dependents of the principal appellant. There is  in  fact
    no  provision  of  The   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  making  provision  for
    dependents of appeals. Parties should be  astute  to  ensure  that  all
    persons who need to be appellants are appellants.

11    However I find, as will become apparent  below,  that  whether  AK  is
    treated as a dependent of the Appellant's appeal,  or  whether  he  had
    been an appellant in his own right, would make little difference to the
    outcome of the appeal, as the same ultimate factual  and  legal  issue,
    whether AK's removal is 'reasonable', is central to the Appellant's own
    appeal.

    The Judge's decision

12    At the hearing on 27 March 2015, the Judge heard  oral  evidence  from
    the Appellant. In deciding the  appeal,  he  purported  to  bear  every
    provision of the immigration rules in mind meticulously [3]; he did not
    find it necessary to give reasons  for  every  finding  of  fact  made,
    relying on the dictum in ex parte Gondolia [1991] Imm AR 519 at [6] and
    [9]; held that the Appellant did not merit the protection of  the  ECHR
    [10]; observed that one cannot overlook the fact that the  immigrations
    controls 'cannot' be relaxed [10]; the Appellant seemed to be  'playing
    the system' [13]; it was significant  that  the  Appellant  placed  his
    child in school knowing that they were then  illegal  immigrants  [13];
    British parliament has  a  say  in  assessing  the  best  interests  of
    children, otherwise  one  may  find  giving  the  benefit  of  ECHR  to
    migrants, and immigration control will no more be in the hands  of  the
    British authorities [14]; it was to be noted that the Appellant's  wife
    did not take AK back to Pakistan with her [15]; it would not be correct
    to allow people like the Appellant to use the system to  their  benefit
    if they increase their prosects by violating the Immigration Rules; the
    Appellant was an  overstayer  [16];  he  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    Appellant can benefit from the present applicable immigration law [17].
    The appeal was dismissed.

13    In grounds of appeal dated 31 March 2015,  the  Appellant  avers  that
    the Judge errs in law in:

    (i)     failing  to  consider  relevant  immigration  rules  (including
         Appendix FM) and failing to  make  relevant  findings  of  fact  in
         relation to the Appellant's satisfaction of the rules;

    (ii)   failing to make adequate findings of fact  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's rights under Article 8  ECHR,  and,  in  assessing  the
         same, failing to adopt a structured approach, as  per  the  5  step
         approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27; and  failing  to  have
         regard to s.117B(6) NIAA 2002 in assessing the  proportionality  of
         the Appellant's proposed removal; ie:

             "(6)      In the case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
             deportation, the public interest does not require the person's
             removal where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

    (iii)  conducting an inadequate assessment  of  the  evidence,  stating
         only that he agreed  with  the  Respondent,  and  noting  that  the
         Appellant's child was in school; failing to make relevant  findings
         of fact as per EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 35.

14    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen  on  those  grounds,
    save that it was noted that AK did not have an appeal in his own right.



15    In the hearing before me, I did not require Ms Appiah  to  address  me
    on the substance of her grounds of appeal; only to shed more  light  on
    the history of AK's appeal, as set out at [7]-[9] above. Mr  Avery  for
    the Respondent sought to rely on a Rule 24 reply which sought to  argue
    that the Judge had directed himself in law appropriately and  had  come
    to a decision which was open to him on the facts of the case.

    Discussion

16    I agree with the Appellant's grounds in every respect.

17    Given that AK is not an appellant,  then  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Rules ("... is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
    the UK for at least 7 years ... and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the applicant to leave the UK") is not  directly  applicable  to
    the appeal brought by his father,  the  Appellant.  However,  the  same
    question, ie whether it is  reasonable  for  AK  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, is directly relevant to the determination of  the  Appellant's
    appeal:

    (i)    under the Immigration rules; given that the Respondent  accepted
         that the Appellant met all the  other  requirements  for  leave  to
         remain as a parents under E-LTRPT 2.2 - 2.4, the  only  issue  left
         for determination being whether,  under  E-LTRPT.2.2(d),  paragraph
         EX.1 also applied, which  raises  the  question,  at  EX.1.(a)(ii),
         whether it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         UK;

    (ii)   outside the rules, when assessing, under  s.117B(6)  NIAA  2002,
         whether  the  public  interest  did  not  require  the  Appellant's
         removal, on the grounds that (a) he has a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it would not
         be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

18     However,  the  Judge  misdirects  himself  in  law  in   failing   to
    acknowledge  that  the  Appellant  was  advancing  a  case  under   the
    Immigration Rules  at  all.  The  application,  form,  the  Appellant's
    representations, and the issues identified in the Respondent's decision
    letter all made it clear that the  application  was  to  be  considered
    first under immigration rules. The reader  of  the  decision  can  have
    little confidence that the Judge was directing his mind to the relevant
    issues in the appeal. His assertion at [3]  that  he  had  borne  every
    provision  of  the  immigration  rules  in  mind  meticulously  is  not
    supported by the content of his decision.

19    Further, even in relation to  the  findings  that  were  made  (having
    attempted  to  summarise  those  findings  at  [12]  above),  they  are
    inadequate.  The  Judge  relies  on  the  authority   of   Gondolia[1],
    apparently in support for the paucity of  his  fact  finding.  In  that
    case, a Claimant for judicial review sought to challenge a decision  of
    the former Immigration Appeal Tribunal refusing  permission  to  appeal
    against a decision of an Adjudicator that  the  Claimant's  application
    for  entry  clearance  on  marriage  grounds  should  be  refused.  One
    challenge was on the grounds that the Adjudicator had erred in  failing
    to take into account two facts, said to be material to the  outcome  of
    the appeal. Henry J, dismissing the application  for  judicial  review,
    held:

         "Secondly, it is said,  and  again  correctly,  that  there  is  no
         mention in the adjudicator's determination  and  reasons  that  the
         initiative for the first introduction of the  husband  to  wife  in
         this arranged marriage came from the wife's family and not from the
         husband's.  There  is  no  reference  to  these  matters   in   the
         adjudicator's decision. The first question is: can  it  be  assumed
         from that that the adjudicator had not taken them into account?  In
         my judgment, it clearly cannot because Mr  Weiniger,  who  appeared
         then and who has appeared before me, makes it plain to me that they
         were matters that he relied on before the adjudicator as he  relied
         on them before me. They were there before the adjudicator. They are
         plain points that would not be overlooked or misunderstood.

         The fact they are not referred to is the next  point  that  I  deal
         with. Can it be said that the adjudicator has not given  sufficient
         reasons for his decision? It seems to me that he  has  given  ample
         reason of his finding and the reasons for it. The reasons  for  his
         finding, when finally analyzed, are, first, the lack of credibility
         so far as  the  applicant  and  the  sponsor  and  her  father  are
         concerned allied with the  economic  incentive.  In  reaching  that
         conclusion, he would have had regard to these points  made  and  it
         cannot be assumed against him that he gave no regard to them.

         When faced with that argument, Mr Weiniger for the  applicant  said
         that the vice of it lay in that as the adjudicator had not  himself
         referred to them, so they might not have come to the  attention  of
         the Appeal Tribunal. But when one looks at the procedure rules, one
         sees that the Appeal Tribunal gets the full case papers.

         The points were raised in the notice of  appeal  lodged  with  that
         Tribunal. Therefore, they would have had those points  before  them
         and would have been able to take them into account. In short, there
         is nothing here that shows that there is any error  of  law  either
         relating to the decision of the  adjudicator  or  relating  to  the
         decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  refusing  leave  to
         appeal."

20    It can therefore be seen that Henry J  held  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of that case, there was no error of law in the  way  that
    the judge referred to the evidence, or set out his reasoning.

21    Gondolia is therefore clearly not  an  authority  in  support  of  the
    proposition advanced by the Judge that it "advises junior judges not to
    give reasons for every finding of fact and  waste  paper  in  detailing
    obvious reasons".

22    Rather more recent guidance on the  extent  of  reasons  necessary  to
    support a decision is provided by the President in  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC): Headnote:

         "(1)     It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the
         reasons for a tribunal's decision.

         (2)      If a tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
         incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be  worth  no  weight
         whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and  for
         such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a
         witness was not believed or that a document was afforded no  weight
         is unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

    and at para [7}:

         "Given that an asserted failure to provide any or adequate  reasons
         for decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  important  aspects
         thereof features with some frequency in applications for permission
         to appeal to this Tribunal, it may be  timely  to  reflect  on  the
         doctrinal considerations and principles in play. In an  immigration
         case decided some 30 years ago, R - v - Immigration Appeal Tribunal
         ex parte Khan [1983] QB 790, Lord Lane CJ said (at page 794):

             "The important matter which must be borne in mind by Tribunals
             in the present type  of  circumstances  is  that  it  must  be
             apparent from what they state by way of reasons first  of  all
             that they have considered the point which is at issue  between
             the parties and they should indicate  the  evidence  on  which
             they have come to their conclusions. Where one gets a decision
             of a Tribunal which either fails to set out  the  issue  which
             the Tribunal is determining either directly or  by  inference,
             or fails either directly or by inference to set out the  basis
             on which it has reached its determination on that issue,  then
             that is a matter which will be very closely regarded  by  this
             Court and in normal circumstances would result in the decision
             of the Tribunal being quashed. The reason  is  this.  A  party
             appearing before  a  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  know,  either
             expressly stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is  to
             which the Tribunal is addressing its mind. In  some  cases  it
             may be perfectly obvious without any express reference  to  it
             by the Tribunal; in  other  cases  it  may  not.  Second,  the
             Appellant is entitled to know the basis of fact on  which  the
             conclusion has been reached. Once again in many cases  it  may
             be quite obvious without the necessity  of  expressly  stating
             it, in others it may not."

23    The Judge in the present case has fallen  far  short  of  meeting  his
    duty to take the relevant  evidence  into  account  and  make  adequate
    findings upon it.

24    In particular, in assessing the best  interests  of  AK  ,  which  are
    capable of affecting the assessment (either inside the rules, or  under
    s.117B(6) NIAA 2002) of whether it is reasonable for him to  leave  the
    UK,  the  guidance  in  EV  (Philippines)  indicates   the   range   of
    considerations that should be taken into account:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as

         (a)      their age;

         (b)      the length of time that they have been here;

         (c)      how long they have been in education;

         (c)[2]   what stage their education has reached;

         (d)      to what extent they have become distanced from the country
         to which it is proposed that they return;

         (e)      how renewable their connection with it may be;

         (f)      to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or other
         difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and

         (g)      the extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere
         with their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as
         British citizens."

25    I also find that the Judge has failed,  when  purporting  to  identify
    AK's best interests, to apply the guidance provided by the President in
    JO and  Others  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  517  (IAC):
    Headnote:

         "(1)     The duty imposed by section 55 of the Borders  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009 requires the decision-maker to be properly
         informed of the position of a child affected by the discharge of an
         immigration etc function. Thus equipped, the  decision  maker  must
         conduct a careful  examination  of  all  relevant  information  and
         factors.

         (2)      Being adequately  informed  and  conducting  a  scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material considerations.

         (3)      The question whether the duties imposed by section 55 have
         been duly performed  in  any  given  case  will  invariably  be  an
         intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real  world  of
         litigation,  the  tools  available  to  the   court   or   tribunal
         considering this  question  will  frequently  be  confined  to  the
         application or submission  made  to  Secretary  of  State  and  the
         ultimate letter of decision."

    and see also

         "9.      More detailed prescription  of  the  correct  approach  to
         section 55 and its interaction with Article 8 ECHR has followed. In
         Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1  WLR
         3690, the Supreme Court recently considered the  interplay  between
         the best interests of the child and Article 8 ECHR, rehearsing what
         might be termed a code  devised  by  Lord  Hodge  comprising  seven
         principles:

         (1)      The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;

         (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  a  child
         must be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
         primary consideration; and the child's best  interests  do  not  of
         themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)      Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed
         by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no   other
         consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)      While different judges might approach the question of  the
         best interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)      It is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
         circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests before one
         asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the force of
         other considerations;

         (6)       To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
         examination of all relevant factors when the interests of  a  child
         are involved in an Article 8 assessment; and

         (7)      A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
         is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

26    I find that the  lack  of  adequate  findings  of  fact  and  adequate
    consideration of AK's best interests are such that the decision  should
    be set aside. There is nothing in the  decision  which  is  capable  of
    being preserved.

27    In re-making the  decision,  I  find,  applying  para  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statement of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the  First
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  that  the  extent  of  the  fact
    finding which is necessary to be performed  is  such  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First tier. Although the Appellant's  reasons
    for overstaying his original leave are unclear, and the outcome of  the
    remitted hearing is uncertain for  him,  remittal  is  the  appropriate
    outcome.

28    The First tier should proceed on the basis of the matters accepted  by
    the Respondent, and on the basis that the Appellant  relies  on  ELTRPT
    and Ex 1, and on s.117B(6) NIAA.

    Decision

29    (i)   The making of the decision by the First tier  Tribunal  involved
         the making of a material error of law.

    (ii)   The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside.

    (iii)  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  tier  Tribunal  under
         s.12(2)(b)(i) Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

    (iv)   The appeal shall be heard by a Judge other than Judge Majid.

30    The Tribunal regrets the time taken to produce the present decision.


Signed:     Date: 2.2.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
-----------------------
[1]

[2]This repeated numbering is within the original


