
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/30396/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                             Mr jaswinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant who appeals against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the
    respondent taken on 10 July 2014 refusing to issue him with a residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.



Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  18  January  1984.
    He applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence
    under  European  Community  law  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was
    refused because the respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    marriage to the sponsor was genuine.  The  respondent  considered  that
    the marriage undertaken on 13 December 2013 was one of convenience  for
    the sole purpose of the appellant remaining in the United Kingdom.  The
    respondent was also not satisfied  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  defined  under
    Regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations").

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
    In a decision promulgated on 16 April 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge dismissed the appellant's appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant's marriage was a marriage of convenience.  The judge
    found it unnecessary to consider the question of whether the  appellant
    had established that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal in essence assert that there was  unfairness  on  the
    basis that the judge found that the sponsor was  evasive  in  her  Home
    Office interview. That matter was not put to the sponsor denying her an
    opportunity to offer an explanation.  A number of factual  inaccuracies
    are asserted to have arisen in the judge's  findings,  that  the  judge
    erred in placing weight  on  certain  matters  and  in  making  adverse
    findings on irrelevant matters.  On 25 June  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Shimmin  refused  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal.    The
    appellant renewed his application to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  14
    October 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  Both applications for permission to appeal  were
    submitted out of time.  Although  Judge  Chapman  considered  that  the
    reasons provided are unsatisfactory she extended time so  as  to  admit
    the application for permission to appeal.  The grant of permission sets
    out that the grounds of appeal disclose  arguable  errors  of  law.  In
    particular, it is arguable that the judge failed  to  take  account  of
    material considerations and evidence in making his findings in  respect
    of the credibility of the parties, made material  errors  of  fact  and
    failed to provide proper and adequate reasons for his findings.

Summary of the Submissions

The Appellant's submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal  submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
    finding that the sponsor was evasive in her Home  Office  interview  is
    flawed.  It is submitted that this point should have been put  directly
    to the  sponsor  asking  her  to  explain  why  she  appeared  to  have
    difficulty in answering the questions. It is asserted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's finding of evasiveness goes to the heart  of  the
    appeal and that this finding is central to  the  judge's  determination
    and conclusion that the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.  Mr  Aslam
    submitted that the marriage interview record was adduced for the  first
    time at the appeal hearing.  It is from this interview that  the  judge
    found that the sponsor appeared to be  evasive.   He  referred  to  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter of 10 July 2014 in which the sole  basis  of
    refusal was the same interview.  The respondent lists eight  points  in
    support of an allegation that the appellant and the sponsor do not know
    each other.  At bullet  point  number  6  he  submitted  that  this  is
    concerned only with the appellant so in his submission there  are  only
    seven points.  He referred to paragraph 24 of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision where he submitted that the judge clearly considered that  the
    sponsor had  given  evidence  in  her  interview  through  a  Hungarian
    interpreter.  I indicated to Mr Aslam that my view of the paragraph  he
    referred to was that the judge had made a typing error and had in  fact
    intended to refer to interview not to interpreter.   I  indicated  that
    this appeared to me to be the only sensible reading of the paragraph as
    the judge in that sentence sets out 'as previously remarked'. The  only
    remarks made by the judge in the determination previously  referred  to
    the appellant and the sponsor being content with the  manner  in  which
    the interview had been conducted.  In response he indicated  that  that
    may well be the case. He referred me to the  interview  record  and  to
    several questions for example question 15 where the sponsor  says  "Err
    sorry again please".  This occurs in response to several questions  and
    it is from this that the judge decided that the  sponsor  was  evasive.
    However,  he  submitted,  it  is  clear  that  she   had   difficulties
    understanding the questions.  This could have been as a result  of  the
    accent of the interviewer. In his submission what is described  by  the
    judge as evasiveness could be and looks like a lack of English or  that
    the sponsor's English is not terribly good. He submitted that it is the
    interview record which goes to the heart of  the  case.   The  starting
    point in this appeal is that there is a flawed initial finding  of  the
    judge that the sponsor was evasive that has infected the whole  of  the
    decision.  On the grounds of fairness, it should have been put to  her.



 6. It was submitted that the judge's finding that there is a complete lack
    of communication between the parties is materially flawed.  Further  it
    is asserted that it is untrue that the appellant was not divorced  when
    he met the sponsor. The appellant was divorced on 31 October  2012  and
    his son was born in 2008. He met the sponsor  in  April  2013.   It  is
    asserted that the judge as a result of this mistake finds that there is
    a complete lack of communication between the parties.

 7. The judge's finding that the sponsor's previous  relationship  with  an
    Indian national was not genuine is speculative.  It is  submitted  that
    it is entirely plausible that the sponsor abandoned the possibility  of
    marriage with her previous partner because of  differences.   Mr  Aslam
    submitted that the judge, on the basis of suspicion, found against  the
    sponsor because she had entered into a previous  relationship  in  2011
    with a person who just  happened  to  be  of  Indian  nationality.   He
    submitted that a gap of two years cannot be considered to be very  soon
    after.  The nationality of the previous partner is an irrelevance.

 8. At paragraph 29, with regard to the wedding rings,  he  submitted  this
    was an erroneous finding as  not  wearing  a  wedding  ring  cannot  be
    determinative of whether or not a couple are married.  There  could  be
    cultural reasons as to why they do not wear a wedding ring.

 9. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  errs  in  making
    adverse findings on the  basis  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
    sponsor chose to wear wedding rings at the hearing.  The  judge  failed
    to consider cultural norms in that  wearing  a  ring  may  not  be  the
    cultural norm for either party in any event the failure to wear a  ring
    cannot be determinative on the question of whether or not the  marriage
    is one of convenience.

10. Mr Aslam submitted that the judge should have made findings in relation
    to whether or not the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  submitting
    that there was evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  of  a  change  of
    employment, one payslip from the new employer.  The  original  document
    was handed in to  the  judge  it  has  now  been  posted  back  to  the
    appellant.

11. The respondent filed a  Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  It is asserted that  the  presence  or
    otherwise of an interpreter at the interview is not really  the  issue.
    The witness appears to have indicated  that  she  was  happy  with  the
    conduct of the interview and the judge's comments are just as pertinent
    in that context.  It is asserted that  as  observed  there  were  clear
    issues with the evidence of the appellant  and  the  witness.   It  was
    clearly open to the judge to conclude  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience. Ms Fijiwala indicated that  her  reading  of  the  judge's
    decision in relation to the use of the word 'interpreter'  is  that  it
    was a clerical error.  The judge considers, at paragraph  9,  that  the
    sponsor was happy with the  interview.   It  is  also  clear  from  the
    witness statement and the interview record, at  question  7,  that  the
    sponsor indicated  that  she  was  content  for  the  interview  to  be
    conducted in English.  It is  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant was evasive. She  referred  me  to  a  number  of  particular
    questions in the interview, for example questions 213 to 215, where the
    sponsor was asked when the appellant had proposed marriage to  her  she
    first of all said after May, then the interviewer sought  clarification
    and her response was "I don't know May or June" and then  she  said  "I
    don't know".  She asserted that the grounds were speculative when  they
    referred to 'it might be  that  the  sponsor  did  not  understand  the
    interviewer's accent'.  She had  stated  that  she  was  happy  at  the
    interview not only at the interview  stage  but  also  in  her  witness
    statement as well.  There are significant discrepancies outlined by the
    judge.   The  judge  also  set  out,  at  paragraph  25,  a  number  of
    discrepancies in relation to the appellant's interview.  The judge  was
    entitled to arrive at the conclusion that the impression of the sponsor
    in interview was one of evasiveness on the basis, as the judge sets out
    in paragraph 24, that throughout the interview the  sponsor  failed  to
    answer simple questions. The judge was not required to put this finding
    to the appellant. It is one that was open to the judge.

12. In relation to the factual error regarding the date of the  appellant's
    divorce the judge had noted this correctly in paragraph 12  as  October
    2012.  She submitted that the appellant was inconsistent  in  interview
    about the date of his divorce. At question 37 he says in 2010 or  2011.
    She submitted that this was therefore not a material  error  given  the
    other reasons for disbelieving  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   In
    paragraphs 28 and 29 the judge gave further reasons.

13.  She submitted that it was a relevant factor on the evidence before the
    judge that the sponsor had previously entered into a  relationship  and
    that, very shortly after approval for the  marriage  was  refused,  the
    relationship ended. With regards to the assertion that  the  judge  was
    incorrect to find that the sponsor had entered into a relationship with
    the appellant very soon after the ending of the previous  relationship,
    she submitted that it was a matter for the judge as to what he  regards
    to be soon after.  She submitted that there was no error in  the  judge
    referring to the previous  relationship,  however  the  judge  in  fact
    states that it was a coincidence.

14. With regard to the issue concerning the wedding rings she asserted that
    there was no evidence that there was a cultural reason for not  wearing
    the rings and what in fact was said was it was  because  the  appellant
    and the sponsor could not wear them when they  were  working.   As  the
    judge correctly pointed out  at  the  hearing  the  appellant  was  not
    working there was no reason why he could  not  have  worn  his  wedding
    ring.

Discussion

15. It is asserted that the judge's  finding  that  the  sponsor  had  been
    evasive in interview ought to have been put to the sponsor.  It is also
    asserted that the  judge  incorrectly  assumed  that  the  sponsor  was
    interviewed through an interpreter.  I note that in  paragraph  24  the
    judge sets out "as previously remarked the sponsor  had  indicated  she
    was happy with the interpreter and I am at a loss to understand why  so
    many questions had  to  be  repeated  before  being  rewarded  with  an
    answer."   I  consider  that  the  reference  in  this   paragraph   to
    'interpreter' was intended to be a reference to 'interview'.  The judge
    commenced this sentence with "as previously  remarked".  That  must  be
    taken to refer to paragraph 9 which is under the heading  'evidence  at
    the hearing'.  The appellant had been asked why different  answers  had
    been given to questions.  In answer he had said that his wife  probably
    did not understand English and had therefore got  some  answers  wrong.
    It was pointed out to him that she had said that she was happy with the
    way in which the interview was conducted. He said that they  were  both
    satisfied that the interview was well conducted.  There is no reference
    in the judge's decision prior to paragraph  24  to  the  sponsor  being
    happy  with  an  interpreter.  I  consider  that  this  is   merely   a
    typographical error and the intention was for the judge to  record  the
    remarks that were set out in paragraph 9 regarding being  content  with
    the interview.

16. Turning to the assertion that the  judge  ought  to  have  put  to  the
    sponsor that his impression of the interview was one of evasiveness,  I
    consider  it  was  not  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  do   so.   The
    circumstances were that both at the conclusion of the interview  itself
    the sponsor had indicated that she was content with the manner in which
    the interview was conducted and, at  the  hearing,  the  appellant  (on
    behalf of the sponsor) also gave an indication that  both  he  and  the
    sponsor were satisfied that the interview was well conducted.   Further
    in gaining his overall impression it was not merely the evasiveness  of
    the sponsor that the First-tier Tribunal Judge took into consideration.
    The judge was concerned with the lack of knowledge  that  both  parties
    expressed  with  regard  to  basic  questions  concerning  their   life
    together.  The judge sets  out,  at  paragraph  23,  answers  that  the
    sponsor gave in interview that demonstrated a lack of  knowledge  about
    the appellant:

         "The sponsor did not know when the  appellant  was  divorced,  Q31.
         She did not know the exact name of his son, Q40.  She did not  know
         whether the appellant financially supported his son, Q49.  She  did
         not know why he came to the UK, Q53.  She did not know what type of
         visa her husband had had when he first arrived in the UK, Q59.  She
         did not know how long her husband had been living at his address in
         Watford, Q101."

17. The judge also set out a  number  of  questions  from  the  appellant's
    interview that demonstrated that the appellant also  appeared  to  have
    very little knowledge of his sponsor's situation.  At paragraph 25  the
    judge sets out:

         "With regard to the appellant's interview he did not know when  his
         wife returned from Hungary having made a trip there  in  May  2014,
         Q82.  He did not know why his wife came to the UK originally,  Q90.
         He could recall little of the conversation they had when they first
         met, Q159.  He could not remember when he proposed  to  her,  Q189.
         He did not give her a ring when they  got  engaged,  Q197  (compare
         Q220 of the sponsor's interview where she indicates he did give her
         a ring when they got engaged).  He said initially that  his  wife's
         religion was Sikh correcting that to Christian but was unaware that
         she was a Roman Catholic, Q229."

18. It is clear  that  there  were  numerous  inconsistencies  between  the
    appellant's and the sponsor's account given in interview.  The  finding
    of the judge in these circumstances was one that was open to  him.   It
    was not just the interview that the judge took  into  consideration  he
    also considered that in the evidence given before him  at  the  hearing
    there were several inconsistencies.  At paragraph 26 the judge records:

         "In evidence before me today the appellant said that  he  had  sent
         wedding photos to his parents but did not know if his wife had sent
         photos to her parents in Hungary.  He said his wife  did  not  know
         that he had sent the wedding photos because she was at work at  the
         time.  When she was questioned she said she thought he had sent the
         photos but they had not discussed it.  Both parties indicated  that
         they did not discuss in any detail  their  previous  relationships.
         The sponsor said in her evidence that she  did  not  know  why  her
         husband was not wearing a wedding ring."

19. There were several other inconsistencies set out in the judge's  record
    of the evidence at the hearing.   Not  every  single  one  of  them  is
    included in the judge's findings.  The judge does not have to  set  out
    every single piece of evidence that he  has  taken  into  consideration
    when reaching his findings on credibility.  He has set the evidence out
    in some detail in paragraphs 6 to 18 of the decision.  It is clear that
    the judge has taken  all  of  that  evidence  and  the  inconsistencies
    contained within that evidence into  consideration  when  reaching  his
    conclusion.

20. The judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  appellant
    and the sponsor at first hand and was able to assess their  credibility
    both from the oral evidence given  at  the  hearing  and  the  evidence
    obtained from their witness statements and their interviews.

21. The judge erred when considering that the appellant was not divorced at
    the time that the appellant and the sponsor met which led the judge  to
    consider that he thought it unlikely that it would not be very much  be
    the subject of discussion between  them.   The  judge  considered  that
    there was (in addition to the lack of knowledge and inconsistencies)  a
    complete lack of communication.  Two  factors  were  identified  -  the
    sponsor's previous attempt to marry an Indian citizen and the appellant
    not being divorced at the time they met. I do not consider  that  error
    tainted the overall conclusion  reached  by  the  judge.  The  lack  of
    communication was a  further  factor.  The  judge  found  that  he  was
    satisfied that the inconsistencies and lack of knowledge of each  other
    demonstrated by the parties pointed  to  the  fact  that  theirs  is  a
    marriage of convenience. That finding on the evidence set  out  by  the
    judge was one that was reasonably open to him to find.

22. With regard to the assertion that the judge errs in placing  weight  on
    the Indian nationalities of the appellant and her  previous  partner  I
    consider that any such error is not material.  It  is  clear  from  the
    structure of the decision that, as set out at the end of paragraph  27,
    the  judge  reached  his  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience   taking   into   consideration   the   evidence   of   the
    inconsistencies and the lack of knowledge of each  of  other.   In  the
    following paragraph the judge indicates:

         "I am fortified in that conclusion by the fact that the sponsor has
         previously tried to marry an Indian national ... I also find it too
         much of a coincidence that she then finds another Indian partner so
         soon after being bent on marriage to a citizen of that country."

23. It is clear that this  evidence  did  not  form  part  of  the  judge's
    consideration in reaching his conclusions that the marriage was one  of
    convenience as the judge set out this 'fortified' the  conclusion  that
    had already been reached and therefore this error was not material.

24. It is asserted that in  making  adverse  findings  on  the  basis  that
    neither the appellant nor the sponsor chose to wear wedding rings is in
    error.  I do not consider that it was an error for the judge to fail to
    consider cultural norms because a reason had been  given  by  both  the
    sponsor and the appellant as to why they were not wearing their wedding
    rings on the day of the hearing.  The answers  given  to  the  question
    were not anything to do with cultural norms but concerned the fact that
    they were not allowed to wear their wedding rings at  work.   I  accept
    that the wearing of a wedding ring is not necessarily  evidence  as  to
    whether a marriage is a genuine marriage. This evidence  did  not  form
    part of the evidence taken into consideration by  the  judge  prior  to
    reaching  his  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was   a   marriage   of
    convenience.  As the judge indicates in paragraph 29 he considered that
    in the context of the evidence it was a further indication to him  that
    the parties are not genuinely married.

25. With regards to the contention that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    by not making findings as to whether or not this sponsor was exercising
    treaty rights, having found that  their  marriage  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience there was no requirement for the judge to then continue and
    to make findings on the exercise of treaty rights issue.

26. For the reasons given above there is no material error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

27. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction.  No anonymity direction was made previously having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appellant has not discharged the burden upon him of showing  that  there
is any material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  without
which that decision is not susceptible to being set aside.   The  appeal  is
therefore dismissed.  The decision of the respondent stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 19 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

