
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31962/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 December 2014                         |On 2 January 2015          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MR C S A B
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Walker a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr A B Sesay a solicitor from Duncan Lewis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on
      27 September 1994 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of  State  has  been
      given permission to appeal  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge
      Braybrook ("the FTTJ)" who allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision of 20 August 2013 to refuse to vary  his
      leave to remain in the UK and to remove him by way of directions under
      Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. The claimant came to the UK as a visitor on 23 December 2002.  He  was
      subsequently granted discretionary leave as a dependant of his  mother
      for a period from 12 November 2009 to 13 November 2012. On 2  November
      2012 he made an  application  for  further  discretionary  leave.  The
      application was  refused.  In  her  refusal  the  Secretary  of  State
      recorded that on 19 August 2010 the claimant was convicted of robbery.
      On 4 March 2013 he was convicted of  supplying  controlled  drugs  and
      being concerned in the supply of controlled drugs.  The  Secretary  of
      State was satisfied  that  it  would  be  undesirable  to  permit  the
      claimant  to  remain  in  the  UK  in  the  light  of  his  character,
      convictions and associations. His application was also considered  but
      rejected on Article 8 human rights grounds  under  the  provisions  of
      Appendix FM.


   3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 13 August 2014.
      Both parties were represented.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
      appellant, his partner, his partner's sister and his key worker.


   4. The FTTJ found that the claimant was not living with and did not  have
      a family life with his mother and her children. She considered whether
      the claimant had a family life with his partner. They had a  child,  a
      son born on 19 February  2013  who  was  living  with  the  claimant's
      partner. The  claimant  and  his  partner  were  not  living  together
      although they were seeking further accommodation.  The  FTTJ  accepted
      that the claimant spent "considerable time with his partner  and  son"
      although "overall I considered that the family life was limited".


   5. The FTTJ found that there was little professional evidence as  to  the
      claimant's risk of reoffending. The claimant  was  very  reluctant  to
      accept blame for any part of his offending. He had reoffended  despite
      stating that he had moved away  from  friends  who  were  leading  him
      astray. He had offended whilst his partner was pregnant and there  was
      nothing to suggest  that  she  was  able  to  help  him  overcome  his
      propensity to offend. His  economic  difficulties  continued  and  his
      drugs offences appeared to have been economically  motivated.  He  was
      unable or unwilling to obtain employment. The FTTJ found that, even if
      his immigration  status  was  satisfactorily  resolved,  pressures  to
      reoffend could resurface. There was little evidence  that  apart  from
      family contact he had integrated fully into  the  cultural  social  or
      economic life of the UK or had lived in a wholly law-abiding way.  His
      connections in Jamaica were  limited.  He  was  young  when  he  first
      arrived in the UK and although there was a period during which he  was
      not here legally this had been regularised.


   6. The FTTJ said that she needed to balance the  family  life  which  the
      claimant  had  established  against   the   legitimate   interest   in
      maintaining a firm and fair system  of  immigration  control  and  the
      public  interest  as  set  out  in  sections  117A  and  117B  of  the
      Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014.


   7. The FTTJ directed herself that the best interests  of  the  claimant's
      son had to be taken  into  account  as  a  primary  consideration.  In
      paragraph 31 of the determination she said; "I had  also  to  consider
      legislation relating to the public interest. As to  paragraph  117B  I
      have to have regard to the fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
      immigration control is in the public interest. As to the other factors
      in the paragraph, the appellant spoke English. I accept that given his
      age there  was  no  likelihood  of  the  appellant  being  financially
      independent. However I took into account that he  had  a  partner  and
      child and there is little to indicate that the appellant has attempted
      to obtain employment although Mr G (his key worker) has emphasised the
      need to do so. This was a consideration which under 117B (3) had to be
      taken into account. Paragraph 117B (6) states that in the  case  of  a
      person who is not liable to deportation the public interest  does  not
      require the person's removal where (1) a  person  has  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child  and  (b)  it
      would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  UK.  The
      appellant's son was a  British  Citizen  and  therefore  a  qualifying
      child. I accept it would not be reasonable for the  appellant's  child
      to leave the UK for Jamaica where the appellant would not certainly at
      the outset be able to provide  for  him.  I  also  considered  on  the
      evidence above that whatever the appellant's shortcomings as a  father
      he was in a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship.  On  this
      basis I  conclude  that  the  public  interest  did  not  require  the
      appellant's removal. His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
      allowed."


   8. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. There is one portmanteau and formulaic ground of appeal  which
      argues that the FTTJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  give  reasons  or
      adequate reasons for her reasoning and conclusions in relation to  the
      Article 8 grounds. It is argued  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  a
      complete code and the FTTJ failed to have proper regard to them. There
      was no consideration as to whether there were compelling circumstances
      not  recognised  by  the  Rules  or  exceptional  circumstances.   The
      claimant's presence in the UK was not  conducive  to  the  public  and
      society as a whole. He had an appalling criminal history. It is argued
      that paragraphs 117A to 117D of the Immigration Act 2014  reflect  the
      government's view as to where the balance lies between the  rights  of
      an individual and the public interest. The FTTJ's  assessment  of  the
      Article 8 criteria was incomplete.


   9. The grant of permission to appeal is more succinct  and  goes  further
      than  the  grounds  by  suggesting  that  the  FTTJ's  findings   were
      irrational and that she  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
      decision which was inconsistent with the earlier findings in paragraph
      25.


  10. The appellant did not attend the hearing before me. Mr Sesay  told  me
      that he was expected but did not object to proceeding in  his  absence
      on an error of law hearing. He submitted a  skeleton  argument  and  a
      number of authorities.


  11. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal and emphasised  paragraph  6
      where it is submitted that the FTTJ failed to provide adequate reasons
      why  the  claimant's   circumstances   were   either   compelling   or
      exceptional. Her conclusion in  paragraph  25  that  family  life  was
      limited conflicted with the conclusion in paragraph 31 that there  was
      a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  between  the  claimant
      and his son. He accepted that this was not a  deportation  appeal  and
      that the FTTJ was correct to apply paragraphs 117A and  117B  but  not
      117C. There had been no proper consideration of  the  public  interest
      element. Overall the assessment was unbalanced and  the  law  was  not
      correctly applied to the findings of fact, which were not disputed. If
      the FTTJ had properly applied the law to her findings  she  could  not
      have reached the conclusion to allow the appeal.


  12. Mr Sesay relied on his skeleton argument. He rehearsed a number of the
      findings made by the FTTJ, which are not disputed. He referred to  the
      offer made by the claimant's partner's father to  provide  the  couple
      with accommodation but accepted that this did not appear to have  been
      taken up. He submitted that the FTTJ properly dealt with the  question
      of the public interest in paragraph 31. There was  evidence  that  the
      claimant had turned his life around. Even though it  was  said  to  be
      "limited" the FTTJ had concluded that there was a family life  between
      the claimant, his partner and his son. I was asked to find that  there
      was no error of law and to uphold the determination.


  13. I reserved my determination.


  14. Whilst the grant of permission to appeal says that it is arguable that
      the FTTJ's findings were irrational and there is inconsistency between
      the reasoning and conclusions in paragraph 25 and 31, this is not  one
      of the grounds of appeal. The closest the grounds get to this  is  the
      submission that the reasoning is  inadequate,  although  this  is  put
      forward in the context of whether the  claimant's  circumstances  were
      either compelling or exceptional.


  15. Nevertheless, there is at first sight a possible inconsistency between
      the finding in paragraph 25 that "overall I consider that  the  family
      life was limited" and the conclusion in paragraph 31 that the claimant
      was in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son. It
      is not disputed that his son is a qualifying child or that it would be
      reasonable to expect him to leave the UK. The  fact  that  the  family
      life is limited, to some extent because of the fact that they are  not
      living together, has to be weighed against the important conclusion in
      paragraph 25 that; "I accept on the basis of the  consistent  evidence
      of all the witnesses that he (the claimant)  does  spend  considerable
      time with his partner and son and  spent  a  lot  of  time  with  them
      (sic)." I find that the FTTJ assessed the factors on both sides of the
      question  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
      relationship before reaching the conclusion in paragraph 31  that;  "I
      also considered on the evidence above that  whatever  the  appellant's
      shortcomings as a father he was in a genuine and  subsisting  parental
      relationship."  After  a  close  examination  of  the   findings   and
      reasoning, in particular in paragraphs 25 and 31, I find that  on  all
      the evidence it was open to the FTTJ to conclude that the claimant was
      in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  son.  In
      this regard there is no error of law.


  16. It is important to emphasise that this is not a deportation appeal. It
      is no part of my task to consider whether the Secretary of State could
      have or may still make a deportation order. No  automatic  deportation
      provisions apply and the claimant is not a foreign criminal as defined
      in the Immigration Rules.


  17. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 set out  where  the  public
      interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;


         117A Application of this Part
         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals
         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.
         (4) Exception 1 applies where-
         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
         C's life,
         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
         and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


         117D Interpretation of this Part
         (1) In this Part-
         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;
         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
         seven years or more;
         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
         (a) who is not a British citizen,
         (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
         (c) who-
         (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
         months,
         (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
         or
         (iii) is a persistent offender.
         (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject  to  an
         order under-
         (a) section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
         (insanity etc),
         (b) section 57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
         (insanity etc), or
         (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order  1986
         (insanity etc),
         has not been convicted of an offence.
         (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced  to
         a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
         (a) do not include a person who has received a  suspended  sentence
         (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or  any  part
         of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
         (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a  period  of
         imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to  that
         length of time;
         (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or  ordered  or
         directed to be detained, in an  institution  other  than  a  prison
         (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution  for  young
         offenders) for that length of time; and
         (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,
         or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
         (5) If any question arises for the purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."

  18. The FTTJ was correct to apply 117A, 117B and the definitions  in  117D
      but not to apply 117C which applies only to foreign criminals.


  19. The grounds of  appeal  argued  that  the  FTTJ  should  have  applied
      paragraphs 117A to 117D which set out  the  government's  view  as  to
      where the balance lies between an individual's rights  in  the  public
      interest. I find that this is exactly what  the  FTTJ  did,  excluding
      117C which did not apply.


  20. I also find that the FTTJ correctly  applied  paragraph  117B(6).  The
      claimant was not a person who was liable to  deportation  and  I  note
      that the Secretary of State  has  not  suggested  otherwise.  For  the
      reasons I have already given it was open to the FTT to  find  that  he
      was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
      qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
      leave the United Kingdom. In these circumstances  the  Act,  which  is
      primary legislation, states in the clearest of terms that  the  public
      interest does not require the claimant's removal. Paragraph 8  of  the
      grounds of appeal supports rather than calls into question the  FTTJ's
      reasoning and conclusions.


  21.  By whatever route the FTTJ  reached  her  conclusion,  whether  under
      primary legislation, the Immigration Rules  or  outside  the  Rules  I
      cannot see how, against the background of a correct interpretation  of
      paragraph 117B, it can be argued that  there  has  been  an  incorrect
      assessment of the public interest.


  22. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction but  consider  it
      necessary to do so in order to protect the interests of the claimant's
      partner and son. I make  an  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
      publication of any matter likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to
      identify the claimant, his partner, his son, or any  member  of  their
      families.


  23. I find that there is no  material  error  of  law  and  I  uphold  the
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 3 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

