
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31367/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               HIMANSHU SHARMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire (counsel) instructed by VK solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Telford, promulgated on 5 December 2014, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 24 June 1993 and is a national of India.  On
29 May 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK as a tier  4
(student) Migrant. On 29 July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Telford  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5 February  2015  Judge  Chambers
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "4.    The Judge is not to be criticised for failing to take account of
    evidence that was not  placed  before  the  Tribunal.  The  appellant's
    omission was however  an  unintended  slip  and  the  evidence  it  now
    transpires existed at the time.

    5.     Permission is granted to enable the unrepresented  appellant  to
    put the case he had intended. Though granted  permission,  it  must  be
    understood by the  appellant  that  the  burden  remains  upon  him  to
    demonstrate the reliability of the birth certificate. The addition of a
    translation does not, in itself, prove that".

6     (a)   At the start of the hearing, counsel for the appellant  tendered
a 122 page bundle which included new  documentary  evidence  and  a  witness
statement from the appellant  (dated  12  January  2016).  The  Home  Office
presenting officer had no objection to the production of the bundle.

    (b)    Mr  Claire,  for  the  respondent,  referred  to  the  grant  of
permission to appeal, & told me  that  it  was  at  least  implicit  in  the
decision that  the  appellant  has  produced  a  translation  of  his  birth
certificate to the respondent. He  told  me  that  the  respondent  has  not
challenged the authenticity of the birth certificate,  and  referred  me  to
the second page of the decision (at  [3])  under  the  heading  "grounds  of
appeal". There, the Judge records that the appellant claimed  to  have  sent
in further evidence - including a translation of his birth certificate.

    (c)    Mr Claire argued that although the Judge makes findings that the
appellant has not produced a translation of  the  birth  certificate,  those
findings are not adequately reasoned. He told me that the  failure  to  give
adequate reasons amounts to a material error of law. Mr Claire  argued  that
(if I am with him on that argument, then) I am empowered  by  the  grant  of
permission to appeal to consider the translation now reproduced at  document
109 of the appeal bundle presented today. He  urged  me  to  set  aside  the
decision  and  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence  now  produced,  and
thereafter to allow the appellant's appeal.

7.    Miss Johnstone, for the respondent, argued that the decision to  grant
permission to appeal itself contains a defect because it does  not  identify
an arguable error of  law.   She  reminded  me  that  [6]  of  the  decision
contains the Judge's findings of fact. The  second  sentence  of  [6]  is  a
finding of fact that the appellant does not discharge the burden of  proving
that he is related to the  financial  sponsor  because  a  translated  birth
certificate is not produced. She referred me to both [5] &  [7}  and  argued
that there are adequate reasons for making the findings  of  fact  contained
in each of those paragraphs.  She  also  argued  that,  even  if  I  was  to
consider the documentary evidence produced today, the  appellant  could  not
succeed because, to succeed, the documents must be produced at the  time  of
application, and it is obvious that the documents  were  not  produced  with
the application and are only produced now,  approximately  18  months  after
the date of application.

Analysis

8.    Counsel for the appellant is correct that at  [3]  the  Judge  records
the  appellant's  claim  to  have  submitted  a  translation  of  his  birth
certificate. The difficulty for the appellant is that it is at [3] that  the
Judge summarises the grounds of appeal. What is contained at [3]  is  not  a
finding of fact, but is part of the procedural  summary  setting  the  scene
for the actual decision.

9.    At [4] the Judge records that this case was determined on  documentary
evidence only. At [5] the Judge records a summary  of  the  evidence  placed
before him. There the Judge sets out, in clear and unambiguous  terms,  that
the translation of birth certificate is  not  placed  before  him,  and  the
information available to theJjudge indicated that  the  respondent  did  not
have a translation of the birth certificate.

10.   It is against that background that the Judge sets out his findings  at
[6], the second sentence of which reads "I find he has not shown that he  is
related to the financial sponsor as he has not produced to this court or  to
the respondent any copy of a translated birth certificate." That is a  clear
and unambiguous finding of fact which was manifestly open to  the  Judge  to
make.  It is a finding of fact which is not challenged.

11.   The wording of the  permission  to  appeal  creates  some  difficulty,
because it might be interpreted as an offer to the appellant to  re-litigate
this case. That was not the purpose of the hearing before  me.  The  purpose
of the hearing before me  is  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  decision
contains a material error of law. Neither the  grounds  of  appeal  nor  the
decision granting permission to appeal identify an error  of  law  (material
or otherwise).

12.   Although brief, the decision contains  findings  of  fact  which  were
manifestly open to the Judge to make. At [7] the Judge reaches a  conclusion
that the appellant cannot succeed under the  immigration  rules  because  he
has found that the translated  birth  certificate  has  not  been  produced.
There can be no criticism  of  the  fact-finding  exercise.  The  Judge  has
correctly directed himself in law. This appeal raises no  challenge  to  the
Judge's findings in terms of article 8 ECHR. Having carried  out  the  fact-
finding exercise and considered the  relevant  law,  the  Judge  reaches  an
unassailable conclusion.

13.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

14.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to him to reach.

15.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

16.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

17.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

