
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31154/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2015                 |On 17th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TA
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Al-Rashid of Carlton Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1961 and  he  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent dated 25th July 2014 to refuse his
    application under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. On 31 August 2011 the appellant entered the UK as an EEA family  member
    (spouse) with a residence permit valid until 21st March 2002.   He  was
    granted a residence permit on 24 January  2002  which  conferred  leave
    until 24 January 2007.  On 2 July 2003 his residence card  was  revoked
    as his marriage was no longer subsisting.  Subsequent  applications  by
    the  appellant  were  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  including
    applications by Ms A (his partner) and C1,  born  in  Nigeria  in  July
    2003, for entry clearance as visitors.  They entered the  UK  illegally
    on 3 June 2004.  Subsequent  applications  were  also  refused  and  in
    September 2006 C2 was born.

 3. On 2 January 2008 TA made an out of country entry clearance application
    which was refused in January 2008 and in September 2009  C3  was  born.
    On 1 April 2010 the appellant submitted an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under the Human  rights  Act  (Article  8)
    which was refused on 21 June 2010.  He became appeal rights  exhausted.
    On 9th October 2012 he submitted an application  for  leave  to  remain
    which was refused.  On  4  November  2013  the  appellant  requested  a
    reconsideration of that application for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds and following judicial review  proceedings,  the  Secretary  of
    State again refused the appellant's application under Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration on 25th July 2014.

 4. The appellant appealed and the matter came before  Judge  Nicholls  who
    identified that there had been a determination on  16th  December  2011
    which was the starting point  for  the  purposes  of  the  appeal.   He
    allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.  The  judge  specifically
    noted that there were no valid appeals for the partner and children.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State and in a decision dated 6th October 2015, I found an error of law
    in the decision of Judge Nicholls and the decision was set aside.   The
    matter was resumed before me.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing a medical note from [hospital] dated 23rd  October  2015
    was submitted  showing  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  treated  for
    epilepsy.  Mr Melvin indicated that he did not  wish  to  cross-examine
    the child C1, who was available to give evidence if required.   One  of
    the key issues was whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the  children  to
    relocate to Nigeria.

 7. It was agreed that although  the  appeal  related  to  the  father  the
    interests of the children needed to be  considered  under  S55  of  the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the Beoku-Betts v SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39 principle (that the impact of the  interference  of  the
    appellant's human rights on other family members should be  taken  into
    account).

 8. In examination-in-chief  the  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  left
    Nigeria 24 years ago and spent the last fourteen years in the  UK.   He
    was married under the customary marriage  in  Nigeria  to  his  current
    partner and had three children  two  of  whom  were  born  in  the  UK.
    Evidence was produced to the Upper Tribunal from  their  local  primary
    school.  The appellant stated that since his last  hearing  his  mother
    had passed away on 29th September 2015 from a  stroke.   There  was  no
    documentary evidence of this.

 9. Under cross-examination Mr Melvin asked the appellant if  he  had  left
    Nigeria at the age of 30 years and the appellant agreed  that  he  had.
    He stated, however, that his education finished in 1985 at the  age  of
    25 years.  Whilst he was working in Nigeria he was working in the  palm
    oil business and he then went to  Greece  and  spent  twelve  years  in
    Greece where he also worked.  He came to the UK in 2001 and worked as a
    carer.  He stated that there  was  no  employment  in  Nigeria  and  no
    healthcare system and most people were cared for by their  family.   He
    was asked why he could not  take  another  employment  to  support  his
    family and he stated that there was nothing he could do.  He  had  lost
    contact with the palm produce business.

10. He stated that the issue was about his children.  He could cope but the
    issue was his children, who had no links  to  Nigeria.   There  was  no
    infrastructure there.  He had been  repeatedly  applying  to  the  Home
    Office and did not wish to work illegally as he was doing  at  present.
    He had been advised by his solicitors to  make  repeated  appeals.   He
    stated that his sisters  were  in  Lagos  but  they  had  no  financial
    capacity to support the family as they were farmers.

11. He stated that state education was not free in Nigeria and that it  was
    not taught in English.  In his local area they spoke Igbo.

12. He also stated that the Catholic  Church,  of  which  his  family  were
    members, was not common in Nigeria.

13. He had no evidence of any research of  trying  to  find  employment  in
    Nigeria or opportunities as a carer.

14. His eldest child was now 12 years  old  and  was  in  year  2  and  was
    preparing for GCSEs.  His  son  was  undertaking  examinations  at  the
    moment and was also involved in rugby and football.

15. Under re-examination he confirmed that he had  not  been  dependent  on
    welfare.

16. In submissions Mr Melvin referred to EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 in  paragraphs  49  and  58  and  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    attempting to piggyback on the claims of his children.   The  appellant
    has deliberately made repeated applications  to  prevent  his  removal.
    The family including  the  children  had  benefited  from  primary  and
    secondary education and the NHS in this country.  There was no lack  of
    education in Nigeria and there was primary and secondary education  and
    the family could relocate in the capital and although it  might  be  in
    the children's best interests to enjoy a full education here the family
    were all Nigerian nationals with no leave to remain.  It was reasonable
    to expect the children to remove when  the  parents  had  no  right  to
    remain.  It was accepted that the children may need to make new friends
    but the appellant was not credible when he stated that the 12 year  old
    was taking GCSEs.  He was not.

17. There was no indication that the wife's condition could not be  treated
    in Nigeria and the death of the mother had not been substantiated.

18. Mr Al-Rashid submitted that the children were three young children  and
    the appellant was merely trying  to  look  after  his  children's  best
    interests.  He referred to ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and noted
    that the children were not appellants but  their  interests  should  be
    taken into account.  The two eldest children had been present in the UK
    in excess of seven years.

19. In EV (Philippines) the children in that case had only been present  in
    the UK for three years and nine months.   The  significance  of  Azimi-
    Moayed and others (decision affecting children; onwards appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 197 IAC was irrelevant and the reasonableness test under EX.1  and
    paragraph 276ADE was referred to.

20. I pointed out that Section 117 was relevant as the  appellant  was  the
    only appellant and he could not succeed under either  paragraph  276ADE
    or the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM.

21. Mr Al-Rashid cited Azimi-Moayed and  stressed  the  importance  of  the
    presence of the children from four years onwards was likely to be  more
    significant and that such was indeed the case with C1 and  his  younger
    siblings.

22. There were only limited countervailing factors which were  present  and
    there was a significant degree of integration.

23. The evidence showed that C1 was a talented child and the  letters  from
    the school indicated his great potential.  The level of integration was
    very significant and I was invited to find that it was  not  reasonable
    for the children to be relocated.  The father was working illegally but
    the mother was not working.

24. Nigeria was not an exempted country in relation to the English language
    requirements under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was  not  right  that
    English was the main language.   I  was  referred  to  R  (Agyarko  and
    Others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ and I should consider the best interests
    of the children.  This identifies that 'The "insurmountable  obstacles"
    criterion in section  EX.1  was  a  precondition,  that  needed  to  be
    satisfied before an A could be granted leave under the  Rules.  But  in
    the context of a wider Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it was a
    factor to be taken into account not an absolute requirement'.

Conclusion

25. Further to the requirements under  Appendix  FM  the  appellant  cannot
    succeed under the partner requirements because his  partner  is  not  a
    British citizen in the UK or present and settled  or  in  the  UK  with
    refugee leave or a person  with  humanitarian  protection  contrary  to
    paragraph E-LTRP.1.2.  His wife is a Nigerian national who entered  the
    country illegally.

26. Nor can the appellant make use of family life as a parent of a child in
    the UK.  The Immigration Rules read in this regard as follows:

         "E-ECPT.2.3.  Either -

         (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
             child; or

         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be
             -

             (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant; and

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for entry
                  clearance as a partner under this Appendix.

         E -ECPT.2.4.

         (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child; or

             (ii) direct access (in person) to the child,  as  agreed  with
                  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives  or
                  as ordered by a court in the UK; and

         (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,  and
             intend to continue to take, an  active  role  in  the  child's
             upbringing."

27.  The  appellant  cannot  comply  with  either  of   these   eligibility
    requirements.  Therefore EX.1 does not apply.

28. The appeal was in relation to the appellant himself and I find that  he
    cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  in  particular  paragraph
    276ADE.  The appellant has not been living continuously in the  UK  for
    twenty years and further to paragraph 276ADE(6) although he is over the
    age of 18 I do not find that there would be very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into the country  into  which  he  would
    have to go if required to leave the UK.  It  was  conceded  by  Mr  Al-
    Rashid that the appellant could not comply with the  Immigration  Rules
    and indeed the appellant himself stated that he himself could return to
    Nigeria but it was his children that were the  difficulty.   I  am  not
    persuaded that there are very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
    own reintegration in Nigeria.   For the benefit of doubt  I  enlist  my
    arguments in relation to my findings below in relation to the children.



29. I turn to a consideration of Article 8 on the basis that  not  all  the
    factors had been considered further to Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74
    and that would include a full exploration of the circumstances  of  the
    children.  SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  317  indicates  that  there
    must be compelling factors in order to consider the matter outside  the
    Immigration Rules.   That said, SS Congo v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  317
    referred to a large degree on entry  clearance  and  I  note  that  the
    family are seeking leave to remain. The factors however of  the  health
    of the mother  and  the  length  and  time  period  of  the  children's
    residence in the United Kingdom are important factors  which  were  not
    fully explored in the decision letter. The real question is whether the
    children could be reasonably expected to leave the UK and  whether  the
    appellant can rely  on  their  claim.   There  is  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant's removal would have an impact  on  the  children  under  the
    Beoku-Betts principle and I apply the five  stage  test  enunciated  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

30. There will be interference with the appellant's private  life  but  the
    decision made is in accordance with the law  as  set  out  through  the
    Immigration Rules.  Those rules are for the legitimate purpose  of  the
    protection of rights and freedoms of others through the maintenance  of
    immigration control.  The next question would be the proportionality.

31. With that in mind I turn to the consideration of  the  children's  best
    interests. Normally my starting point with regards the  children  would
    be the decision of Judge Hembrough of 16th December 2011 in  accordance
    with Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  This must, however, be  placed  in
    the context of the passage of time.  Nonetheless some of those findings
    of that decision are relevant to my consideration.   The  children  are
    now 12, 9 and 6 years old and all at school.  The first child was  born
    in Nigeria and the second two children were born in the United Kingdom.
     I accept that they have entered the education  system  here  and  will
    speak English.  None of the children speak Igbo.

32. At paragraph 24 of Judge Hemborough's decision it was recorded that the
    appellant confirmed that English was commonly spoken in Nigeria and  it
    was the medium of tuition in the Nigerian  education  system.   It  was
    accepted in that decision that the children were  unfamiliar  with  the
    culture, the food and the weather but it was also submitted that Mrs  A
    was a qualified accountant in Nigeria but was depressed here in the  UK
    through the instability of their  situation,  [paragraph  30].   Mrs  A
    confirmed that she had family in Nigeria.

33. As stated at paragraph 59 Judge Hemborough found the children  appeared
    to excel in the UK and with appropriate support there was no reason why
    they should not thrive in Nigeria.  I too find that to be the case.  As
    Judge Hembrough stated:

         "I have already found it reasonable to infer that the family  would
         enjoy a comparatively comfortable lifestyle  in  Nigeria.   I  have
         noted that despite being orphaned at the age of 6 Mrs A was able to
         progress through the Nigerian school system to university and on to
         a professional qualification.  It was not  explained  why  her  son
         would be unable to follow the same path.  There was no evidence  as
         to how his educational or social  development  would  be  adversely
         affected by removal to Nigeria",

    and at paragraph 60 Judge Hembrough stated quite clearly that:

         "There would be some disruption to his education and social  circle
         in the short term but there was no evidence  as  to  any  long-term
         prejudice to his welfare.  I note that he is still in  the  primary
         stage of his education in the UK and will within the next  year  or
         so have to contemplate a change of schools and  possibly  his  peer
         group when he moves on to secondary education."

34. I do not accept the appellant's contention that the elder child  C1  is
    preparing for his GCSEs as he is only in year 2  in  secondary  school.
    Nonetheless he is in secondary school and the letters produced indicate
    that he has settled there.  I find that although C1, the eldest  child,
    has moved to secondary education there is no reason to suppose that  he
    could not adapt to life in Nigeria. Despite the cultural issues and the
    fact that he is unfamiliar with life  in  Nigeria,  he  will  not  face
    isolation as he will have his family with him.

35. The decision letter from the Secretary  of  State  indicated  that  the
    national  language  in  Nigeria  as  well  as  that  of  the   Nigerian
    educational system is English, which was in fact  referred  to  in  the
    appellant's previous appeal on 16th December 2011 (paragraph 49 of  the
    appeal hearing IA/29043/2011).  That said, the COI  Report  dated  June
    2013 confirmed that "public schools remained substandard,  and  limited
    facilities precluded  access  to  education  for  many  children.   ...
    However, authorities rarely provided compulsory primary education,  and
    often charged numerous mandatory school fees."  I do  not  accept  with
    reference to the Country of Origin Information Report that certainly in
    the city areas that education is not presented in English.

36. There is evidence that there is further education in Nigeria and indeed
    the appellant's partner had acquired a university degree there.  It may
    not be the same standard that has been available in the UK, nonetheless
    there is education.

37. I take into account that there should be an overall assessment  of  the
    children's interests MK (best interests of  child)  India  [2011]  UKUT
    00475 (IAC) and I note  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decision  affecting
    children; onwards appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 IAC  and  particularly  that
    the two older children have now been in the UK for in excess  of  seven
    years.  C1 who was born in 2003 came at the age of ten  months  and  is
    now in year 2 at secondary school.  He had been in  the  UK  since  3rd
    June 2004.  By the date of the application  of  the  appellant  C1  has
    spent 8 years in the United Kingdom and by  the  date  of  the  hearing
    before me he had been in the United Kingdom for 11 years. From the  age
    of 4 years (which is a relevant age although after he came to the  UK),
    C1 had spent 8 years in the UK. The second child was born in  September
    2006 and has spent all his life and 9 years in the United  Kingdom  and
    thus five years on from the age of four. The third child  was  born  in
    September 2009 and has spent 6 years in the United Kingdom.  That child
    is very young and his life will be centred essentially on the  parents.
    They must have grown accustomed to life and friends here  but  the  two
    younger children are still  in  primary  education  and  their  primary
    support network will be that of their own family and  parents  who  are
    both Nigerian nationals and who are accustomed to the culture there and
    can assist the children in adapting.

38. I consider  the  situation  of  the  mother  when  assessing  the  best
    interests of the children.  The appellant also stated that his wife did
    not work in the UK, which may be the case presently but at paragraph 35
    of the appeal hearing IA/29043/2011 it was clear that the appellant had
    obtained experience and qualifications whilst working  in  the  UK  and
    that his partner was a  qualified  accountant  in  Nigeria.   Both  the
    appellant and his partner had spent formative years in Nigeria and both
    the appellant and the appellant's wife had siblings in Nigeria.  Indeed
    the appellant's partner had two sisters residing in Nigeria as at  2011
    and even if this was no longer the case the appellant confirmed that he
    himself had sisters living in Lagos.  I find that it would  be  in  the
    interests of the children  to  reconnect  with  their  family  back  in
    Nigeria and it would appear  that  there  is  still  a  family  network
    residing there.  It would not be in the children's  best  interests  to
    lose their social, cultural and family ties to their home country.

39. I take into account the written  statement  of  the  older  child,  who
    stated he would not like to be sent back  to  Nigeria  because  he  had
    achieved a great deal due to his opportunities here.  I am  aware  that
    he has friends but I am not persuaded that he would not be  availed  of
    opportunities equally in Nigeria.

40. It is open to the children  to  engage  in  their  activities  such  as
    football and the church on their return to  Nigeria  and  although  the
    churches may be less frequent than they are here I have no  doubt  that
    as the evidence states that their skills are transferable.

41. The letters from the Head teachers of [school] (C1's School) dated 21st
    September 2015 and [primary school] dated 14th September 2015 confirmed
    that the children were making good  progress.  I  accept  the  evidence
    regarding the settling of the children at school but it was clear  that
    those letters were informed by the mother herself and I do  not  accept
    the information in them regarding her health and it was not  clear  how
    the Head teacher of the primary school would know that it was essential
    for the mother  to  access  the  medical  expertise  at  Kings  College
    Hospital.  Both teachers in this regard strayed outside their remit.  I
    have no doubt that should the residency issue  be  settled  this  would
    benefit the children and the mother's mental health.  The letters  only
    made reference to the talents of C1 but notably identified  no  special
    educational needs in any of the children. Nor was  there  any  evidence
    that the three children suffered from any health issues.

42. I found it difficult to accept the very  bleak  picture  given  by  the
    appellant regarding the prospects for the family  life,  and  thus  the
    children's interests, in Nigeria and that he was prone to exaggeration.
      He  stated  in  the  hearing,  for  example,  that   there   was   no
    infrastructure in Nigeria which is not consistent with the evidence  of
    a health and education system there.

43. When considering the proportionality of the appellant's removal I  find
    that the interests of the children are served in remaining  with  their
    parents in a stable family unit.  The  children  are  still  relatively
    young and no doubt  with  the  support  of  their  parents  will  adapt
    particularly bearing in mind my findings on education above. There  was
    no evidence of unusual or particular  factors  or  that  they  had  any
    special educational or health needs. It may be in the  children's  best
    interests to remain in the UK educationally but they will  be  returned
    with their parents in one family unit.   Their  key  interests  are  to
    remain with their supportive parents in one unit. Further, it would not
    be in the children's interests to lose their own cultural heritage  and
    to lose touch with their own extended family there.  I find there is an
    education system and on balance I find it would be in  their  interests
    to return.

44. I consider whether it is reasonable to expect the parents to return  to
    Nigeria.  It is clear that their private life has been engaged but I am
    not persuaded that family life is engaged here as they will and can all
    be removed together.

45. Subsequent to the decision  of  Judge  Hembrough  there  has  been  the
    introduction of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as follows;

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

46. Little weight should be given to a private life formed whilst a  person
    is unlawfully in the UK or a person's immigration status is precarious.
     Every family member, in this case, is in the United Kingdom unlawfully
    and has precarious status in the United Kingdom.

47. The appellant claims that he is financially independent and that he has
    not claimed benefits. He continued to work albeit illegally because  he
    needed to support his family.  As he has been working  illegally  there
    was no up to date evidence of any tax paid by the appellant.  All three
    of his children were currently in  education  and  his  wife  had  made
    extensive use of the NHS system.  I therefore find as a fact that  they
    are not financially independent.  The father and no  doubt  the  mother
    can speak some English and I accept that the children can speak English
    fluently as they are at school.

48. I have taken into account the mother's ill  health  and  that  she  has
    epilepsy and depression.  I considered the letter from  AS,  Consultant
    neurologist dated 23 October 2015  from  the  Neurology  Department  at
    [hospital].  This was not on  headed  paper.   Nonetheless  the  letter
    stated that the appellant's wife was  under  care  and  known  to  have
    epilepsy and frequent seizures although  she  did  not  expand  on  any
    functional restrictions and that she had required  an  admission.   She
    was currently taking medication and the doctor was seeking to  optimise
    and better control her seizures.  This letter did not make reference to
    her inability to care for the children and did not say she could not be
    treated abroad or say anything about treatment abroad.

49. I am not persuaded, however, that she has  any  significant  functional
    difficulties particularly as there was no evidence that  she  does  not
    care for her three children. Indeed there was evidence  that  she  took
    them to school.  The  GP  stressed  the  uncertainty  of  the  mother's
    residence in the UK was a factor  in  her  depression.   There  was  no
    evidence presented that  there  is  no  treatment  for  either  medical
    condition in Nigeria and I apply GS (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ  40  which
    approved the principle that the United Kingdom is under  no  Convention
    obligation to provide medical treatment here when it is  not  available
    in the country to which the appellant is to be removed.

50. Under Section 117B(6) of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002  the public interest does not require the person's removal where

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

51. Both the two older children have lived in the UK for  more  than  seven
    years and therefore meet the definition of a qualifying child.  Section
    117B(6) does not necessarily defeat the public interest but  because  I
    find that it is reasonable for the children to relocate I do not accept
    that the weight to be placed on  the  public  interest  is  reduced  by
    Section 117B(6).  For the reasons given above I am not  persuaded  that
    it would be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

52. I am not persuaded that the appellant and his partner would  have  lack
    of access to sufficient resources to  enable  them  to  live  somewhere
    other than the  original  family  village.   There  was  no  background
    information to persuade me that  they  could  not  obtain  satisfactory
    employment in  Nigeria,  particularly  with  their  qualifications  and
    experience. Bearing in mind the extensive  working  experience  of  the
    appellant in industry in  Nigeria  and  abroad,  I  did  not  find  the
    appellant  in  his  evidence  to  be  credible  as  to  the   lack   of
    opportunities and his employment prospects in Nigeria.   The  statement
    from the grandmother dated September 2015 (whom the court was told  had
    subsequently died) told of the poor circumstances in  the  family  home
    but it is open to the family to relocate to their place  of  choice  in
    Nigeria.  The appellant has shown a resilience and resourcefulness when
    travelling and relocating outside Nigeria since the age of 30 years.

53. I also note that the best interests of the child  are  a  consideration
    than the consideration. As stated in EV (Philippines) the parent relies
    on the best interests of his or her children in order to "piggyback" on
    their rights.

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

54. It is also pertinent to note the statement by LJ Lewison at [60]

         'In our case none of the family is a British citizen. None has  the
         right to remain in this country. If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
         father has no independent right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
         removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the  children  to
         go with them. As the immigration judge found  it  is  obviously  in
         their best interests to remain with their parents. Although it  is,
         of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I  cannot  see  that
         the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK  can
         outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
         parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,
         so we cannot educate the world'.

55. I take into consideration the immigration history of the appellant  and
    note that this should not be visited on the children and I realise that
    the children in this case had not been here longer than the children in
    the EV (Philippines) case. However, my findings are such that the  best
    interests of the children are not necessarily to be found in the UK but
    primarily are to be with their parents and in a place  they  can  avail
    themselves of an education and enjoy their own cultural heritage.  They
    are all Nigerian nationals.  They are not financially  independent  and
    there is no reason to suppose that they cannot reasonably relocate as a
    family to Nigeria where they can obtain settled status. This is  not  a
    case as in ZH (Tanzania) where it would not be reasonable to expect the
    children  to  follow  their  mother  to   Tanzania   because   of   the
    circumstances there.

56. The position of the Secretary of  State  is  clearly  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules and I have taken that position into  account.   There
    is no  doubt  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  have  a  very  poor
    immigration history having either remained in the United Kingdom  after
    having their appeal rights exhausted or in the case of the wife  having
    entered illegally.  None of the appellants have any right to remain and
    I give weight to the public interest.  When balancing the rights of the
    parties I note the following:







         Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11

         "In an Article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by Article 8."

    Overall I find that it is reasonable to expect the family  to  relocate
    to Nigeria and I therefore dismiss the appeal.

57. I therefore dismiss the appeal under the Immigration rules and on human
    rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appeal of TA is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
