
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31657/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th April 2014                              |On 15th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        adetayo olanrewaju iheanachor

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz
For the Respondent:    Mr A Williams


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Henderson made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th January 2014.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 7th September  1972.   She
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  but
    was refused on 5th March 2013.

 3. The grounds were that, as she had  previously  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in order to study for an NVQ  in  the  health  and  social  care
    programme at Onto Limited, which was 26 months in duration, and she was
    now applying for leave to remain in order to study for a  course  below
    degree level which was 24 months in duration, a further grant of  leave
    would exceed a period of three years of  combined  study  below  degree
    level.

 4. The judge found that whilst the claimant was  making  progress  in  her
    studies and that the current course represented an academic progression
    from her previous studies the  fact  was  that  NVQ  level  5  was  not
    classified as at degree  level.  Consequently  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 5. She did however allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds.   The  claimant
    had come to the UK and paid substantial sums for the  payment  of  fees
    and maintenance.  She was following the advice of  her  highly  trusted
    Sponsor  in  making  the  latest  application  and   she   was   making
    satisfactory progress.  The judge relied on the decision  in  CDS  (PBS
    available Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 and considered that,  since
    there had been no  alteration  in  her  ambition  to  obtain  a  higher
    qualification and was now on a course which  represented  a  step  into
    management training at degree level, it would be  disproportionate  for
    her to be removed for the period of ten months required to complete the
    course.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge misdirected herself in  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The Secretary of State relies  on  the  case  of  MF  Nigeria
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192. The Immigration Rules are a complete code and  it
    will only be in very compelling circumstances that the Rules would  not
    provide a proportionate result.  The claimant's  private  life  in  its
    essential form can continue outside of the UK.

Submissions

 7. Mr Diwncyz relied on his grounds.

 8. Mr Williams submitted that the judge had  provided  adequate  reasoning
    and had referred to the relevant case law.  She considered  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control and  properly  applied  the
    reported case giving proper reasons  for  her  decision.  There  is  no
    legitimate aim in sending her home.  The claimant has been  in  the  UK
    for some seven years and has invested a great  deal  of  money  in  her
    course which will only take a further nine months to complete.  It  was
    not her fault that her course provider was unaware of the fact that the
    course does not meet the requirement of the Rules. She stands  to  lose
    everything if her appeal is not allowed and it would be extremely harsh
    to expect her to leave, given that she came to the UK to  do  a  degree
    and simply wishes to complete her course.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. The problem for the claimant is that her case is indistinguishable from
    very many other students who, whilst not to blame personally, simply do
    not meet the requirement of the Rules.

10. It is difficult to see what  the  compelling  circumstances  are  which
    require a finding that the UK would be in breach of  its  international
    obligations upon the claimant's removal.  She came to the UK  in  order
    to study and, contrary to the submissions  of  Mr  Williams,  does  not
    stand to lose  everything  by  this  decision  since  she  has  already
    obtained a number of different qualifications.  She only ever  had  the
    expectation of being here for a temporary purpose and if she  does  not
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  absent  compelling
    circumstances, she should expect to have to leave the UK.

11. Article 8 does not protect a right to  education  as  such.   No  other
    grounds were put forward to the judge as the basis  for  a  finding  in
    that her private  life  rights  would  be  breached  by  removal.   The
    claimant is a citizen of Nigeria and can continue  her  studies  there.
    Any  relationships  which  she  has  established  in  the  UK  can   be
    maintained.

12. There are no good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules and accordingly the judge erred in law in deciding otherwise.

Decision

13. The original judge erred in law.  The decision  is  set  aside  and  is
    remade as follows.  The claimant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


