
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/31459/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 August 2017                       |         On 29 August 2017           |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 SHIPON MIAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Rahman


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Bangladesh
   born on 1 January 1992 who entered the UK in April 2010 as a Tier 4
   (General) Student.


2. On 9 January 2014 he applied for further leave as a Tier 4 (General)
   Student. On 9 September 2015 the application was refused on the basis
   that he had submitted, with a previous application to the Home Office in
   October 2011, a TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS)
   that was fraudulently obtained by use of a proxy test taker.

3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In a decision
   promulgated on 18 November 2016 Judge Kaler allowed the appeal.  The
   Secretary of State is now appealing against this decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4. The judge, at paragraph 5, summarised the evidence upon which the
   Secretary of State was relying to demonstrate that the claimant used a
   proxy test taker. He noted that this included witness statements from
   Peter Millington, Rebecca Collings and Professor French which set out the
   procedures followed to establish whether a test taker used a proxy. The
   judge also mentioned two documents which identified the claimant as
   having not taken the test. The judge referred to these documents by their
   position in the Secretary of State's bundle. The two documents are the
   "ETS Invalid Test Analysis" and the "ETS SELT Source Data". The latter
   describes the tests taken by the claimant as "invalid"


5. At paragraph 6 the judge summarised the claimant's case, stating:

        "He has submitted a detailed witness statement setting out why he
        chose to attend this particular college to sit his test, what
        occurred when he took the test, and why he had to repeat the test.
        He stated in oral evidence how long it took him to get to the test
        centre."


6. At paragraph 12 the judge stated that he took into account the evidence
   of the Secretary of State (which he described as pointing to the test
   having been taken by a third party) as well as the claimant's "detailed
   evidence as to the taking of the test in question."


7. At paragraph 13 the judge stated that in reaching his conclusion he took
   into account the claimant's study and immigration history, as well as his
   spoken English.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

8. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed to provide adequate
   reasons for finding the Secretary of State did not discharge the legal
   burden of proof. The grounds state that in light of the evidence
   submitted by the Secretary of State it is clear that the Secretary of
   State reasonably concluded that the claimant had used deception in his
   application. It is also alleged that the judge provided inadequate
   reasons for finding the claimant credible.


9. Before me, Mr Singh argued that the judge had failed to appreciate that
   the evidence before him included a "look up tool" print out which
   specifically linked the fraud to the claimant, and that the Secretary of
   State was not relying on "generic" evidence. He also argued that the
   judge had not tested or adequately considered the claimant's innocent
   explanation. He commented that the claimant's statement could easily have
   been constructed based on publically available information.

10. Mr Rahman's response was that during the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
   both the Secretary of State's representative and the judge posed
   questions to the claimant and the judge was able to form a view on the
   claimant's credibility based on the oral evidence. He added that the
   claimant's English ability was demonstrated at the hearing.

11. Mr Singh noted that the First-tier Tribunal hearing was four years
   after the test and therefore the claimant's English ability at it was of
   no relevance, given the time that had elapsed. He noted also that even if
   someone is competent in English it does not mean they would have no
   reason to cheat on a test.

Consideration

12. The burden and standard of proof, where it is alleged that an ETS test
   is invalid, was discussed in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS-Evidence-Burden of
   Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229), and is as follows:


13. The legal burden of proving that the test taker used deception lies on
   the Secretary of State albeit that there is a three stage process.
         a) Firstly, the Secretary of State must adduce sufficient evidence
         to raise the issue of fraud.
         b) Secondly, the test taker then has a burden of raising an
         innocent explanation which satisfies the minimum level of
         plausibility.
         c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State
         must establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent
         explanation is to be rejected.
14. There is one civil standard of proof (which is the standard to be
   applied). The seriousness of the consequences does not require a
   different standard of proof but flexibility in its application will
   involve consideration of the strength and quality of the evidence. The
   more serious the consequence, the stronger must be the evidence adduced
   for the necessary standard to be reached.

15. The judge accepted that the Secretary of State produced evidence
   indicating a proxy test taker was used and that this was sufficient to
   satisfy the first evidential burden. Mr Singh maintained that the judge
   failed to recognise that the Secretary of State's evidence was not merely
   generic evidence. I do not agree. The judge made clear at paragraph 5
   that documents specific to the claimant were produced. At paragraph 12 he
   stated that the Secretary of State's evidence "points to the test having
   been taken by a third party".

16. Having found the initial burden was met, the judge proceeded to
   consider the claimant's "innocent explanation", which is the second of
   the three stages. The claimant, both in writing (by way of a detailed
   witness statement) and orally (giving evidence at the hearing and
   responding to questions from the judge as well as from the Secretary of
   State's representative) addressed issues such as why he chose a
   particular college and test, what occurred when he took the test, and why
   he had to repeat it. Evaluating this oral and written evidence, and
   forming a view on the claimant's truthfulness, was a matter for the judge
   and the judge was entitled to find the claimant credible and accept his
   "innocent explanation".

17. As explained in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT
   85 (IAC) reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes
   sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge. In this
   appeal, although the reasoning as to why the innocent explanation was
   accepted was brief, I am satisfied that it is sufficient. Having
   accepted, and found credible, the claimant's explanation of taking the
   test, and having considered his educational and immigration background,
   the judge was entitled to find that the claimant had met the evidential
   burden of showing an innocent explanation.

18. In paragraph 13 the judge commented on the claimant's current grasp of
   English and that he thought it sufficient to achieve the score he
   achieved in his test. In my view, taking into account the claimant's
   current English ability was an error of law. The gap in time between the
   test and hearing was 4 years. It would be surprising if the claimant's
   English level had not improved substantially during that time. His
   English ability in 2016 (at the hearing) can tell us very little, if
   anything, about his English four years earlier, when the test was taken.
   However, although taking this factor into account was an error, it was
   not material. It is clear from the decision that the judge has accepted
   the claimant's innocent explanation for a range of reasons that do not
   depend on his command of English at the hearing.

19. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge has reached a decision that
   was open to him on the evidence and that the grounds of appeal do not
   establish that a material error of law was made.

Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  25 August 2017               |

