
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/31110/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 June 2017                          |    On 28 June 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             tendayi lee janyure
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Tendayi Lee Janyure, was born on 22 May 1977  and  is  a
    male citizen of Zimbabwe.  The appellant had been granted discretionary
    leave to remain for a period of three years on 27  July  2011.   On  30
    June 2014, the appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain.   That
    application was refused by the decision of the respondent dated 1 April
    2015.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  James)
    which, in a decision promulgated on  12  October  2016,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I was greatly assisted by Mr Mills, for the respondent, who was able to
    explain the background  of  the  grant  of  leave  to  this  appellant.
    Although the letter of grant of 27  July  2011  is  silent  as  to  the
    reasons for granting discretionary  leave,  it  is  apparent  from  two
    screenshots produced by Mr Mills that the reason had been the fact that
    the appellant has an ongoing relationship with two children, C  and  S.
    Both C and S  attended  court  with  Mrs  Makoni,  the  mother  of  the
    appellant and the principal  carer  of  both  children.   As  Mr  Mills
    explained, a letter was written to the appellant by the respondent on 4
    March 2015 asking for details of the appellant's contact with C and  S.
    When no response  was  forthcoming,  the  appellant's  application  for
    further leave to remain was  refused.   This  refusal  letter  records,
    "your application has been considered on the  evidence  you  originally
    submitted".  The author of the letter considered that  the  appellant's
    circumstances "do not remain the same as your previous grant of leave".
     In the absence of particulars regarding the relationship  between  the
    appellant and C and S, the application was refused.   When  the  appeal
    came before Judge James, he found that the  appellant  has  an  ongoing
    relationship with both C and  S;  in  other  words,  he  made  findings
    relating to the very matters which had been raised by the respondent in
    her letter of 4 March 2015 to which the appellant  had  not  responded.
    Mr Mills told me that, in the light of the judge's findings, the policy
    of the Secretary of State would be to extend the appellant's  leave  to
    remain for a further period of three years.  At the end of that period,
    the appellant would be in a position to apply  for  settlement.   Given
    that this is an "old" case (predating 5 April 2015), the  judge  should
    have allowed the appeal to  the  limited  extent  that  the  matter  is
    returned to the Secretary of State in order to follow  her  own  policy
    and to grant a further period of three years' leave to remain.

 3. Judge James did the best that he could with the material before him but
    he  did  not,  like  the  Upper  Tribunal,  have  the  advantage  of  a
    representative from the Secretary of State before him at the hearing.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  12
    October 2016 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal  of
    the appellant against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  1
    April 2015 is allowed to the limited extent that the matter is remitted
    to the Secretary of State for further consideration of the  appellant's
    application and on the basis of the findings as regards contact between
    the appellant and his children as set out in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 23 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

