
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th September, 2016              |On 22nd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         KRISHNAPRASANTH SITTAMPALAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed, Amirthan & Suresh Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I am going to refer to her  as,  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  was  born  on  11th
    December,  1988.    On  12th  November,  2012,  he  made   a   combined
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system  and  for  a
    biometric  residence  permit.   On  27th  August,  2015,  the  claimant
    considered  the  respondent's  application  and  concluded   that   the
    application should be refused. She decided  to  remove  the  respondent
    from the UK with directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The reasons for her decision were that the respondent had  submitted  a
    TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service [ETS]  to  the  Home
    Office and to the respondent's sponsor, in order for  them  to  provide
    him with a Certificate of Acceptance for  Studies  in  accordance  with
    information provided to the Secretary of State by ETS,  which,  it  was
    alledged, was obtained by decption. The respondent obtained  the  TOEIC
    certificate numbers 00442022016034001 and 0044202371019001 as a  result
    of tests which were taken at BIETCC on 18th September,  2012  and  20th
    November, 2012.  ETS reported that it had a record of the  respondent's
    speaking test and using voice and verification  software  was  able  to
    detect when  a  single  person  was  undertaking  multiple  tests.  ETS
    undertook a check  of  the  respondent's  test  and  confirmed  to  the
    Secretary of State that there was significant evidence to conclude that
    the respondent's certificate was obtained fraudulently, by the use of a
    proxy test taker. ETS had declared the tests to be invalid  because  of
    the presence of a proxy tester taking  the  test  in  the  respondent's
    place and his scores were, therefore, cancelled.

4.   As a result of the evidence placed before the Secretary of  State,  she
    was satisfied that the test certificate was fraudulently obtained.  She
    refused the application under paragraph 322(1A) of Statement of Changes
    in Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended (Immigration Rules).

5.   The respondent appealed and his appeal  was  heard  at  Columbus  House
    Newport on 26th January, 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge M Whitcombe.
     The judge allowed the appeal because  he  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    balance of probabilities that there was fraud and he also went to allow
    the appeal under Article 8.

6.   The judge's conclusions are at paragraphs 29 to  34  of  the  decision.
    What the judge said was this:

         "29. I  have  weighed  the  [claimant's]  rather  generic  evidence
             against the [respondent's] firm and clear  denials  in  cross-
             examination. The [respondent]  was  able  to  give  convincing
             detail of arrangements at the test centre on the days he  took
             the tests.  I have also considered the background evidence  of
             the extent of fraud at the institution concerned.

         30.  While I do give some weight to the  [claimant's]  verification
             evidence, its weight is diminished  by  the  failure  to  call
             anyone who could vouch  for  the  care  and  accuracy  of  the
             analgises in the [respondent's] particular case.  The  generic
             evidence of the systems put in place only  goes  so  far,  and
             does not really establish with  sufficient  cogency  that  the
             analysis in the [respondent's] own case was reliable.

         31.  I was also influenced by a number of other points. I gave some
             limited weight to the fact that the [respondent's]  successful
             tests were undertaken on different days. That is arguably  the
             behaviour of someone who wished to  maximise  the  chances  of
             passing.  If a proxy candidate was  sitting  the  tested  then
             there would be less incentive to do that, although  of  course
             there might be other reasons. The pattern of scores themselves
             is not inherently odd. A narrow fail turned into a pass on re-
             testing. That is not surprising. There is  nothing  suspicious
             about the [respondent's] choice of institution. While  it  may
             very will be that significant levels of fraud tainted  BIETTEC
             tests, the [respondent] chose that institution because of  its
             links with Aylssa School, where he  wished  to  study  in  the
             future. His reasons for choosing it were innocent.

         32.  Overall I am not satisfied that fraud has been established  on
             the balance of probabilities in the [respondent's]  particular
             case.

         33.  Because I am not satisfied on  the  balance  of  probabilities
             that  there  was  fraud,  the  appeal   succeeds   under   the
             Immigration Rules.

         34.  It also  follows  that  the  decision  was  otherwise  not  in
             accordance with the law because the [claimant] had  failed  to
             afford the [respondent] the 60 day period of grace to obtain a
             fresh CAS and supporting documents because of  its  conclusion
             as to fraud.  On my findings, that approach  offended  against
             Patel  principles,  which  are  also  now  enshrined  in   the
             Immigration Rules themselves."

7.   The judge went on to purport to deal with Article 8  and  in  doing  so
    simply said this:

         "35. In those circumstances the Article  8  point  adds  little  of
             significance, since the interference  with  private  life  was
             neither in accordance with the law nor proportionate.

         36.  I can nevertheless indicate I did not find anything especially
             significant about the [respondent's] private life,  which  was
             limited to studying.  It was at all times 'precarious' in  the
             sense considered in AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260
             (IAC) and therefore carried relatively little  weight.   There
             was  nevertheless  an  interference  with  the   unexceptional
             private life sufficient to engage Article 8 because  I  accept
             the [respondent's] evidence that he would not simply  be  able
             to continue his studies in Sri Lanka where left off in the UK.



         37.   Had  I  been  satisfied  of  the  existence  of  fraud,  then
             interference with that private life would certainly have  been
             proportionate to the legitimate aims of  and  public  interest
             in, firm and effective immigration control.

         38.  The appeal will be allowed for those reasons."

8.   The respondent challenged the decision and in addressing me,  Mr  Tufan
    explained that in this appeal the judge has simply not made  clear  and
    sufficiently reasoned findings  of  fact.   The  judge  does  not,  for
    example, make any findings as to what the test arrangements were at the
    test centre which he refers to at paragraph 29.   The  judge  fails  to
    make clear findings and give  proper  reasons  for  those  findings  in
    respect of what he says at paragraphs 30 and at paragraph 31.

9.   Simply to find that the judge was not satisfied  that  fraud  had  been
    established on the balance of probabilities, as he did at paragraph 32,
    without an explanation as to why he had reached  that  conclusion,  was
    insufficient, he suggested. The judge's consideration of Article  8  is
    also inadequate. The judge has made no attempt at  considering  whether
    or not the respondent might be able to satisfy the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules, said the Prestenting Officer.

10.  For the respondent, Mr Ahmed  valiantly  sought  to  persuade  me  that
    There  was  no  error  in  the  determination.    While   the   judge's
    consideration of Article 8 was wrong, that did not affect or in  anyway
    contaminate the judge's decision in respect of the  Immigration  Rules.
    He pointed out that the judge considered all the  evidence  before  him
    and at paragraph 31 noted that he was influenced by the fact  that  the
    respondent's tests were taken on different days  and  that  that  would
    arguably be the behaviour of  someone  who  wished  to  maximise  their
    chances of passing examinations.  The judge noted that  a  narrow  fail
    turned into a pass on retesting.

11.  I have concluded that the judge's determination is  materially  flawed.
    The judge has failed to make adequate, properly reasoned  findings  for
    his decision in respect of the respondent's immigration appeal. If  the
    judge was satisfied that the respondent met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, he should have properly explained why and  it  would
    not have been necessary for  him  to  go  on  to  consider  Article  8.
    However, if Article 8  was  to  be  considered,  then  he  should  have
    approached the  Article  8  assessment  in  the  way  he  describes  at
    paragraph 23 of his determination but there was no consideration at all
    of whether or not the respondent might meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

12.  The  result  is,  I  believe,  that  although  the  judge  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal, the respondent's appeal has not been heard fairly.
     I set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Whitcombe.
    The representatives indicated that they believed the matter  should  be
    referred back to the First-tier Tribunal in  order  that  it  might  be
    heard afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Whitcombe.   Given  the
    inevitable delays that would occur were I to retain this file and  hear
    the matter myself, I believe that this is the appropriate course.



Notice of Decision

13.  I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Whitcombe and  direct  that
    the appeal should be heard afresh by another Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   I believe that 2 hours should be adequate for the hearing.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

