
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31619/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 17 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mr Danjuma Bala Jubril Shekarau

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Bostwick-Barnes, Thompson & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (whom I shall refer  to  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal) is a citizen of Nigeria and his date of
    birth is 9 May 1987.


2.   There  is  a  significant  background  to  this  case.   The  appellant
    originally came to the UK as a visitor on 5 February 1991 when  he  was
    aged 3. His visa expired on 31 July 1991 and he  has  overstayed  since
    then.

3.   The appellant has committed a number of  previous  offences.  The  most
    comprehensive list of these was set out in the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the FtT") Judge Norton-Taylor  (promulgated
    on 14 August 2012) at [36]. There are more recent convictions  which  I
    shall refer to later, but Judge Norton-Taylor made the  following  list
    and I quote:


    "a) shop-lifting:  27 April 2004, 8 October 2004, 7  October  2005,  18
    August 2009, 4 January 2012 (the last offence having been committed  on
    9 December 2011. Community Order sentence);
    b) Robbery: 24 November 2004, 11 August 2006  (two  years  in  a  Young
    Offenders Institution);
    c)  Attempted Robbery: 15 March 2004;
    d) Burglary: 26 October 2009 (two years three months custodial);
    e) Handling stolen goods: 26 October 2009 (nine months custodial);
    f) Possession of cannabis: 30 July 2009, 11 August 2009;
    g) Failing to surrender: 8 October 2004, 16 June 2005;
    h) Breach of a conditional discharge: 20 May 2005;
    i) Assault: two on 27 April 2004, 20 May 2005;
    j) Using threatening or abusive words or behaviour: 16 June 2005;
    k) Obstructing a police officer: 8 October 2004;"



4.   On 12 March 2007 the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant pursuant to section 3(5) of the
    1971 Immigration Act as a consequence of his conviction for robbery  at
    Snaresbrook Crown Court in 2006 when he was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment. It then  appears  that  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  a
    decision of 5 April 2010, decided not to make a deportation order as  a
    result of representations made by the appellant.

5.        On 25 October 2006 the appellant made an application for leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence pursuant to paragraph 276B of the
    Immigration Rules ( hereinafter  "the  rules").   His  application  was
    refused pursuant to paragraph 276B (ii)(e) of the rules  following  his
    criminal conviction for robbery.  The appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision and his appeal was dismissed on 31 December 2008.

6.       In the Secretary of States' bundle that was before the  FtT,  there
    is a letter from the Secretary of State dated 18 March  2010  which  is
    addressed for the attention of the governor of the  prison  (where  the
    appellant was at that time serving a sentence). It  appears  from  this
    letter that the Secretary of State had decided that  the  appellant  is
    liable to deportation,  pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007  (hereinafter "the 2007 Act") as a result of his conviction on  26
    October 2009 at Inner London Crown  Court  for  burglary  and  handling
    stolen goods.  There is no reason to believe that a  deportation  order
    was ever made against the appellant as a result of this.


7.   The appellant made an application on 6 March 2009 for leave  to  remain
    pursuant to paragraph 317 of  the  rules.   This  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 7 February  2012  under  paragraphs
    317 and paragraph 322(5) of the rules, in the light of the  appellant's
    character and criminal record.   It  was  noted  that  since  2007  the
    appellant had been convicted of further offences.  The application  was
    also considered and refused under Article 8 of the 1950  Convention  on
    Human Rights.


8.   The appellant appealed against this decision of  7  February  2012  and
    his appeal was allowed by Judge of the FtT Norton-Taylor, in a decision
    that was promulgated on 14 August 2012 following a hearing on 2  August
    2012.  The appeal was allowed by a  "relatively  narrow  margin."   The
    appellant was not granted leave in accordance with the decision of  the
    FtT.  Instead the Secretary of State issued another decision of 9  July
    2013 refusing the application under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of
    the rules because the appellant had committed  further  offences  since
    the determination of Judge Norton-Taylor.    On 14 September  2012  the
    appellant was convicted of possessing cannabis (on 31 August 2012)  and
    on 5 March 2013 he was convicted of possessing  cannabis  and  criminal
    damage (on 30 September 2012). He received financial penalties for  all
    these offences.


9.   Paragraph 276ADE of the rules contains the requirements to  be  met  by
    an applicant for leave to remain on grounds of private life in  the  UK
    and there are a number of requirements.  Paragraph 276ADE  (i)  of  the
    rules  requires that the applicant does not fall for refusal under  any
    of the grounds in Section S-LTR.1.2. to S-LTR.2.3.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  in
    Appendix FM. The position  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  the
    appellant engages S-LTR.1.4, S-.LTR.1.5. and S-LTR.1.6.

10.  S-LTR.1.4. reads as follows:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for less  than  four
         years but at least twelve months."

11.  S-LTR.1.5. reads as follows:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because in the view of the  Secretary  of  State  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law."

12.  S-LTR.1.6. reads as follows:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to   1.5.),   character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK."

13.  The appellant appealed against the decision of 9  July  2013  (and  the
    removal decision of 10 July 2013) and his appeal was allowed  by  Judge
    of the FtT Aziz under Article 8 Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention  on
    Human Rights in a decision dated 4 April 2014 following a hearing on 19
    March 2014.  The Secretary of State sought leave to appeal and this was
    granted in a decision of 14  May  2014  by  Judge  of  the  FtT  Grant-
    Hutchison. Thus the matter came before me.


The Hearing Before Judge Aziz

14.  The appellant's evidence was that in relation to the  cannabis  offence
    this had taken place on 31 August 2012 and he was on bail at  the  time
    of  the  hearing  before  Judge   Norton-Taylor.    He   accepted   all
    convictions. His  evidence  was  that  he  had  been  living  with  his
    girlfriend for three to four years and that he had  not  committed  any
    further offences (since September 2013). In relation  to  the  cannabis
    offences, he had been smoking cannabis in a social context.
.
15.  The FtT heard evidence from the appellant's mother, Dr  Rose  Shekarau.
    Her evidence was that she and her other children had made  applications
    for indefinite leave to remain in the 1990s and she did  not  know  why
    the appellant's application was not considered as  part  of  the  joint
    application.  All the family  members,  save  for  the  appellant  were
    granted ILR. Her son's relationship with his girlfriend is  strong  and
    they hope to marry one day. The appellant had been seriously  assaulted
    as a child by his adopted brothers.

16.  Judge  Aziz  found  that  the  appellant's  mother  was  an  impressive
    witness.  He found that the appellant showed a level  of  maturity  and
    recognition of wrongdoing at the hearing before him.  He found that the
    appellant had failed to fully appreciate the decision of Judge  Norton-
    Taylor, but Judge Aziz  was  satisfied  that  he  now  understands  the
    decision and that he realises the impact that his actions have on other
    members of his family. He found that the appellant had a troubled  past
    and his lack of status may provide an explanation  for  his  behaviour.
    Judge  Aziz  was  persuaded  that  the  appellant  fully  realises  the
    predicament he is in  and  that  he  showed  contrition  for  his  past
    behaviour and a real desire to better himself through work or studies.

17.  At [76], [77] and [78] the Judge made the following findings:

         "76. Whilst I fully take into account all of the concerns raised by
             Mr Lobo and find that the additional offences  have  caused  a
             further narrowing of the margins, I  am  not  quite  persuaded
             that the commission of these particular offences has  resulted
             in the pendulum  swinging  the  other  way.   On  all  of  the
             evidence before me, I find that by an  even  narrower  margin,
             that  the  appellant's  private  life  outweighs  the   public
             interest.


         77.  However, the appellant needs to understand that he is  in  the
             'last chance saloon' and that if he were to appear before  the
             Tribunal again in similar circumstances, he may find  it  very
             difficult to persuade a Tribunal (for a third time)  that  his
             awful criminal record outweighs the public interest."

         78.  Although I do not in any way wish to condone  the  appellant's
             actions, I note  that  the  respondent  has  sought  to  delay
             issuing the appellant with some sort of leave regularising his
             immigration status.  This is far from  satisfactory.   One  of
             the main reasons why the appellant's 'private  life'  argument
             is so strong is because of the respondent's  decision  not  to
             take deportation action against him at a much earlier stage in
             his life.  At the same time they have not sought to regularise
             his stay and left him in 'limbo'.  This cannot continue.   The
             appellant's appeal has been allowed  and  I  direct  that  the
             respondent grant him leave in line with the findings  of  this
             Tribunal."


The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions



18.  The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT  failed  to  consider  whether
    removal is proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  in  accordance  with
    Razgar, R ( on the application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. It failed  to
    consider whether the appellant  had  addressed  his  drug  habit.   The
    decision was contrary to the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and  Nagre,  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720.

19.  It is argued that the FtT failed to provide adequate  reasons  why  the
    appellant's circumstances are compelling or exceptional.  The appellant
    is old enough to live independently in  Nigeria.   The  Judge  did  not
    properly take into consideration the appellant's lack  of  credibility.
    The Judge allowed the appeal because of the  delay  in  processing  the
    application and did not address the delay in the context of EB (Kosovo)
    [2008] UKHL 41.

20.  I heard oral submissions from both Mr Whitwell and Ms  Bostwick-Barnes.
     Mr Whitwell expanded on the  grounds  seeking  leave  to  appeal.   Mr
    Whitwell accepted that there  was  some  difficulty  with  the  grounds
    because it is likely that ta deportation  order  would  not  be  lawful
    because it would be contrary to the Secretary of States' own rules.  He
    also indicated that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  appealed  the
    decision of Judge Norton-Taylor. He argued that it was not  clear  what
    effect  the  Judge  Aziz  found  the  latest  offences   had   on   the
    proportionality assessment.  The assessment under Razgar was flawed. In
    relation to the delay Mr Whitwell argued that  the  offences  had  only
    occurred sixteen days after  Judge  Norton-Taylor's  determination  had
    been promulgated. Ms Bostwick-Barnes relied on the Rule 24 response.



Conclusions


21.  The FtT allowed the appeal in a determination prepared by Judge Norton-
    Taylor.  There was no appeal against this decision, but  the  appellant
    was not granted leave in accordance with it as  he  should  have  been.
    Instead the Secretary of State issued  another  decision.   The  second
    decision was produced eleven months after the  determination  of  Judge
    Norton-Taylor was promulgated.  The  refusal  letter  of  9  July  2013
    invoked paragraph 276ADE of the rules. There is also  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the rules, but the decision maker decided that  there
    no compelling or compassionate circumstances.

22.  The grounds argue that the Judge erred because he did not consider  the
    appeal in the context of Gulshan and that the  Judge's  proportionality
    balancing exercise was flawed for a number of reasons, the first  being
    that he did not attach weight to the legitimate aim.

23.  The application was made on 6 March 2009 and the decision was  made  on
    13 July 2013.  Whether or not the decision maker can rely on  paragraph
    276ADE of the rules and Appendix FM was not an issue raised before  me.
    There is some tension  on  this  issue  between  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decisions of Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 558. I will adopt the approach of the Court of Appeal in the latter
    case.

24.  Judge Aziz did not have regard to the rules  and  misdirected  himself.
    In my view that was a material error of law. I set aside  the  decision
    under section 12 (2) (a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 and remake it pursuant to section 12 (2) (b)  (ii).  Both  parties
    agreed that I could remake the decision on the evidence before the  FtT
    and that there would be no need for a re-hearing.

25.      The Secretary  of  State  has  deemed  that  the  presence  of  the
    appellant is not conducive to the  public  good  for  various  reasons.
    However, there has  been  no  deportation  decision.  The  most  recent
    offences committed by the appellant, since his appeal  was  allowed  by
    Judge Norton-Taylor, would not give rise to  an  automatic  deportation
    under section 32 of the 2007 Act. However, as a result of his  previous
    convictions the appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by the  2007
    Act and as such his deportation would be conducive to the  public  good
    (whether or not such an order has been made). Thus the  appellant  does
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 267ADE of the rules.

26.      The issue is whether or not there are  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave outside the rules.  The Court  of  Appeal  found  in  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD EWCA Civ 1192 that the new rules are a  complete  code
    and  that  the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the
    balancing exercise involve the application of a proportionality test as
    required by Strasbourg jurisprudence. This is required  to  be  carried
    out in cases of deportation where paragraph 399 or 399A of the rules do
    not apply. However, where these paragraphs apply the Secretary of State
    cannot deport a foreign criminal (notwithstanding that  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good). Should the Secretary  of  State  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant (under the 2007 Act or  by  the
    exercise of discretion) instead of a removal decision,  having  decided
    that the appellant is a persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law (paragraph 398 (c) of the rules), she would  then
    have to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A apply. It is likely,  in
    my view, that 399A (a) would apply. I am confident about  this  because
    it is a fact that the appellant has lived in the UK  in  excess  of  20
    years. In addition the Secretary of State accepts  that  the  appellant
    has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with Nigeria in  the
    context of 276ADE (vi) of the rules.   In these  circumstances,  in  my
    view, if this was a case involving a decision to deport this appellant,
    his appeal would succeed under paragraph 399A  (a)  of  the  rules  and
    there would be  no  need  for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  exceptional
    circumstances.


27.      Returning now to the decision which is the subject of  this  appeal
    and taking into account the above, there must be arguable  grounds  for
    granting leave outside the rules in accordance  with  the  guidance  in
    Gulshan. It supports this finding that the appellant has been in the UK
    since the age of three.  The public interest in favour  of  deportation
    or removal may be stronger or weaker and the more pressing  the  public
    interest in removal or deportation the stronger must be the claim under
    Article 8 if it is to prevail. The legitimate aim in this case  is  the
    prevention of crime and disorder. Here the appellant has no right to be
    here and so the economic well-being of the country is also engaged. The
    fact is that the appellant is a foreign criminal  and  his  removal  is
    conducive to the public good. This  is  a  significant  factor  in  the
    favour of the Secretary of State.  However,  in  this  case  there  are
    significant factors is favour of the appellant which tip the balance of
    the  scales  in  his  favour.  There  are  exceptional  and  compelling
    circumstances  and  the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  is   not
    proportionate to the legitimate aim. The reasons  for  this  conclusion
    can be summarised as follows:



       a) In accordance with N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094, I have attached
       weight to the public indignation at the appellant's conduct  and  the
       deterrence both of which contribute to the legitimate  aim,  but  the
       interference has to  be  proportionate.  The  appellant  has  been  a
       persistent offender  but  Judge  Aziz  accepted  that  he  had  shown
       contrition and a real desire  to  better  himself.  He  accepted  the
       evidence of the appellant and his mother and  there  is  no  coherent
       challenge to these findings. He accepted his evidence in relation  to
       possession of cannabis namely that it  arose  in  a  social  context.
       Judge Aziz made favourable findings about the appellant's  intentions
       and there is no reason for me to go behind those findings.


       b)  The appellant's appeal (against a removal decision)  was  allowed
       under Article 8 by Judge Norton- Taylor. There was no appeal  by  the
       Secretary of State against this. The further  offences  committed  by
       the appellant, which gave rise to the  decision  under  appeal,  date
       back to August 2012 (according to the appellant)  or  September  2012
       and they are relatively minor in nature, given  that  they  were  all
       dealt with by way of financial penalties.




       c)     Whilst the removal of the appellant is conducive to the public
       good and he cannot satisfy the rules, there has been  no  attempt  to
       deport him as a result of the recent offences. The Secretary of State
       is aware that she would face  a  significant  hurdle.  A  deportation
       order, in my view, would be contrary to the Secretary of States'  own
       rules. There has been no decision pursuant to section 32 of the  2007
       or any other legislative source which may add force to  the  pressing
       social need. The necessity (of removal) is weakened by the fact  that
       the Secretary of State has failed to act upon her intention to deport
       the appellant on two previous occasions (before the  new  rules  came
       into play). If one applied the Secretary of States' own  rules  to  a
       hypothetical decision to deport the appellant, the decision would not
       be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim.  I   accept   that   the
       consequences of  removal  for  an  appellant  are  less  severe  than
       deportation, but I do not accept that in this case this would  result
       in a disproportionate decision becoming proportionate. There  may  be
       an irrationality argument, but this was not pursued before me or  the
       FtT.




       d)     Proportionality and exceptionality must be considered in the
       context of Boultif v Switzerland (no 54273/00) [2001] ECHR 479 which
       was adapted and augmented in subsequent judgments in Maslov v Austria
       no 1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546. When considering Maslov, it weighs
       heavily in favour of the appellant that he has been here since the
       age of three and he does not have ties with Nigeria. The appellant
       has overstayed for a considerable time, but he was a very young child
       when he came here and it appears that for one reason or another he
       was not considered for ILR along with other members of his family who
       were subsequently granted leave. In this case very serious reasons
       would be required to justify expulsion. The appellant has been
       convicted of a number of offences some of which are very serious
       (robbery and burglary) and this is reflected by custodial sentences.
       There is a pattern of persistent offending albeit some of the more
       recent offences are less serious. However, the most serious offence
       of robbery was committed in 2004 when the appellant was a youth.



The Decision


28.  The appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human
Rights.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date  15 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam






























