
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31933/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 7 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                        Mr Benjamin Edobor Ebikueluye

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ugoh of Liberty & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of  26
    June 2013 refusing  to  grant  a  residence  card.   He  had  made  his
    application on 20 September for a residence card on the basis of  being
    the spouse of the sponsor who is a person exercising treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom as a citizen of France, and the  parties  said  that
    they had married in a customary marriage by  proxy  in  Nigeria  on  16
    September 2011.

2.   In the Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent considered that  since
    there was no evidence that the couple  were  present  at  the  marriage
    ceremony and resident in Nigeria before the wedding  the  marriage  had
    not been conducted in accordance with the  Nigerian  Marriage  Act  and
    therefore dismissed  the  application  and  also  addressed  Article  8
    issues.

3.   The judge  considered  that  the  main  issue  of  contention  was  the
    validity of the alleged marriage between the parties,  noted  what  the
    respondent said about this, noted evidence put  in  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant which was a certificate of registration, commented that there
    was nothing before him to show whether the French  Republic  recognised
    proxy marriages such as that apparently entered into by  the  appellant
    and with regard to any argument under  Regulation  8(5)  of  a  durable
    relationship the appellant told him that he came to the United  Kingdom
    under a student visa, had never actually studied, had met  the  sponsor
    at a party in  November  2010  and  they  had  moved  in  together  the
    following month and he was unable to produce any document  that  showed
    both their names as living  together  at  the  same  premises.   So  he
    dismissed the appeal.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    arguably erred in providing a lack of reasoning for preferring what was
    said in the US State Department Report  about  the  validity  of  proxy
    marriages in  Nigeria  as  opposed  to  what  was  said  by  the  local
    registrar.

5.   That issue has essentially fallen away today.  There  is  reference  in
    the grounds to the COI Report about proxy  marriages  being  recognised
    under Nigerian customary law as a form of customary  law  marriage  and
    that is endorsed in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem and Ms
    Ong very properly does not seek to argue against that  joint  agreement
    on the evidence.

6.   So it is clear that  proxy  marriages  are  recognised  under  Nigerian
    customary law as a form of customary law marriage but as Ms Ong rightly
    says, an ancillary matter to that is the point that is the  main  issue
    in Kareem and one can summarise the conclusion on that in paragraph 17:

         "In a situation where the marital  relationship  is  disputed,  the
         question of whether there  is  a  marital  relationship  is  to  be
         examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from which
         the Union citizen obtains nationality and from which therefore that
         citizen derives free movement rights"


    and this is the starting point in this decision.


7.   Back at paragraph 5 one can see the addressing of the  assumption  that
    for the purposes of EU law a Member State can use its own  legal  order
    to determine whether or not a person is married  to  another,  and  the
    reason why that is not correct and the difficulties that  are  inherent
    in that approach and then the conclusion at paragraph 17  and  then  in
    paragraph 18 that the legal system of  the  nationality  of  the  Union
    citizen must itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.


8.   The judge noted here whether as a matter of original observation or  as
    a consequence of Kareem [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) that it had not been shown
    by the appellant that proxy marriages of this kind  are  recognised  by
    the French Republic and therefore the appeal could not succeed on  that
    basis.


9.   The two other matters are first  the  matter  of  the  Regulation  8(5)
    issue and there the evidence was somewhat scant,  as  the  judge  said.
    There is a little more to it than the appellant himself seems  to  have
    accepted because there is a British Gas bill in the joint names of  the
    couple from 10 December 2013 but otherwise there was evidence  relating
    to  payslips  and  other  matters  referring   to   the   sponsor   who
    unfortunately could not be at the hearing because her mother was ill in
    Nigeria and she had gone to visit her.

10.  But I think that it was open to the judge to find that Regulation  8(5)
    had not been shown to be satisfied in this case in  that  the  evidence
    was simply lacking in that regard, and in light of the  findings  about
    it not being shown that there was a durable relationship and about  the
    difficulties of  showing  the  validity  of  the  marriage,  the  brief
    findings on Article 8 I think were properly  made  also,  and  for  all
    these reasons therefore I consider that he was entitled to dismiss  the
    appeal as he did, and so his decision is upheld.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

