

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/31447/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |    Determination Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2014                          |On 14th February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                   HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MR STEPAN NIKOLAEV
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr B Hawkin, Counsel

     DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Proceedings


  1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State  for  the
     Home Department.  Hereafter  in  this  determination  the  parties  are
     referred to as they  were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the
     Secretary of State for the Home Department is  the  respondent  and  Mr
     Stepan Nicolaev is the appellant.
  2. Mr Nicolaev was born on 14th July 1947 and is a citizen of Russia.   He
     entered the United Kingdom as a visitor to see  his  daughter  and  her
     family settled in the United Kingdom.  Just before the  expiry  of  his
     visitor's leave the appellant and made an application, on 27th November
     2008, for further leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in
     order to receive medical treatment.  The application was refused on 2nd
     January 2009 for reasons including the expectation that he  would  have
     recovered by May 2009 from  the  surgery  he  underwent  at  University
     College Hospital after admission there in June 2008.


  3. Notice was served on the appellant of his liability  to  removal  as  a
     person remaining beyond his leave, followed by a decision to remove him
     from the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed against this  decision
     on human rights grounds at a hearing on 16th  October  2013  at  Hatton
     Cross before First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond (the Judge).  The  Judge
     allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


  4. On 4th December 2013 the respondent was granted permission to appeal to
     the Upper Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sommerville as follows:




         "The first ground seeking permission contended that the  FTJ  erred
         in law in allowing the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  without
         reference to the provisions of Appendix FM of the Rules as  amended
         on 12th July 2012 insofar as they relate to  the  circumstances  in
         this appeal.  The grounds are arguable."


  5. The matter accordingly  came  before  me  for  an  initial  hearing  to
     determine whether the making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal
     involved the making of an error on a point of law.  The  appellant  and
     his family attended the hearing but the proceedings did not progress to
     a stage where it was appropriate to hear evidence from any of them.



Consideration of the Issues and Submissions


  6. The respondent's grounds of appeal assert that  Judge  failed  to  give
     adequate reasons and made a material misdirection of law to himself. In
     considering the fourth and fifth Razgar questions  about  a  legitimate
     aim and proportionality the Judge is submitted  to  have  placed  undue
     weight on the fact  that,  in  his  opinion,  the  appellant  would  be
     entitled to succeed in making an application from Russia as an  elderly
     dependant.  The Judge is submitted to have erred by taking into account
     only part of the Rules without reference to Appendix FM, in particular:
     E-ECDR.2.5 - the inability to obtain the required level of care in  the
     country where the applicant is living because of its unavailability and
     the lack of any person in that country who could reasonably provide it,
     and the financial requirements of E-ECDR.3.1. and ECDR.3.2. as set  out
     in the grounds of appeal.


  7. The respondent states that the  Judge  did  not  have  the  ability  to
     determine the availability to the appellant in Russia  of  care  homes,
     visiting daily nurses, social services, personal carers, or other  paid
     assistance which would be available or affordable in Russia. The  Judge
     failed to consider the issue of recourse to public funds in the  United
     Kingdom in circumstances where the appellant had already benefited from
     a large amount of NHS care and it is unclear whether  the  family  have
     the funds to pay for the continuation of his treatment privately; it is
     submitted to be more than likely that the family do not have the  funds
     to meet the requirements of the Rules.


  8. The respondent submits that in these circumstances there is a  wrongful
     assessment of  the  weight  to  be  afforded  to  immigration  control,
     including the economic well being of the country, given  the  level  of
     dependency on the NHS the appellant is likely to have for the  rest  of
     his life; the Article 8 analysis has been infected. In conclusion,  the
     respondent asserts that the Judge's assessment  of  Article  8  is  too
     greatly dependent on his assumption that the appellant would  meet  the
     requirements of the Immigration Rules if he  made  an  out  of  country
     application. It is not in the public interest that an appellant  should
     be entitled to sidestep the  requirements  of  having  no  recourse  to
     public funds by entering as a visitor and overstaying.


  9. Mr Tarlow, for the secretary of State for the Home  Department,  relied
     on the grounds of appeal (as set out above) in his oral submissions  to
     me at the hearing.  He submitted in particular that the whole Article 8
     assessment is flawed because the Judge  failed  to  refer  to  all  the
     elements of ECDR.3. Mr Tarlow placed emphasis on the lack of  reference
     by  the  Judge  to  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5,  the   lack   of
     consideration of the facility and its  affordability  as  well  as  the
     requirement to show access to  treatment  without  recourse  to  public
     funds.


 10. Mr Tarlow  referred  me  to  paragraph  32  of  the  determination  and
     submitted that it is flawed in finding that the interference to  family
     life would not be necessary in the  interests  of  immigration  control
     because an out of country  application  would  be  "almost  certain  to
     succeed".  Paragraph 27 of the determination gives consideration to the
     private and family life provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  is
     submitted  to  lead  to  a  material  error  of  law   in   Article   8
     proportionality balancing exercise.


 11. The appellant served a response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
     (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 indicating opposition to the appeal in  the
     Upper Tribunal which was relied upon by Mr Hawkin in his submissions to
     me. The decision of the Judge is submitted in  this  response  to  have
     been detailed, thoughtful, balanced and  without  material  error;  the
     approach of the Judge by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  was  one
     which was open to him in the light of the particular  circumstances  of
     the case. It is submitted that this was clearly a compelling case  from
     the factual background.  The Judge heard evidence  from  not  only  the
     appellant, his daughter,  son-in-law  and  three  family  friends.  The
     Judge's conclusions under Article 8 of the ECHR, in findings set out in
     paragraphs 28 - 34 of his determination, are  submitted  to  have  been
     entirely open to him.


 12. In  his  oral  submissions  to  me  Mr  Hawkin  stressed  the  need  in
     considering the making of a material  error  of  law  to  look  at  the
     determination as a whole. Paragraph 2 of the determination set out  the
     important medical background to the case.  The appellant had  undergone
     surgery to remove a giant cell tumour on the right side of  his  pelvis
     after suffering severe hip pain and being  unable  to  walk  after  his
     arrival in the United Kingdom. The surgery was  to  do  a  massive  hip
     reconstruction and in paragraph 3 of the determination the  Judge  took
     into account the appellant's evidence that his recovery had been a  lot
     slower than expected by the doctors; his condition had in fact worsened
     after 2009. Infection to the appellant's pelvis had spread rapidly  and
     resulted in the amputation of one of his legs and part  of  the  pelvis
     leaving him wheelchair-bound, in excruciating pain,  unable  to  remain
     seated for more than 15 minutes at a time and dependent upon his family
     members to move him around.


 13. The Judge took into account the emotional trauma to the  appellant  and
     his evidence, set out in paragraph 5  of  the  determination,  that  he
     could not bear the thought of  being  separated  from  them;  they  had
     provided great  support  to  him.  Mr  Hawkin  relied  on  the  Judge's
     acceptance of the appellant's evidence, also set out in paragraph 5  of
     the determination, that there were very close bonds with the family and
     careful consideration had been given to the impact upon all the  family
     members of the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.


 14. Mr Hawkin submitted that the case goes beyond being about health  care;
     the Judge had properly considered a range of  different  emotional,  as
     well as medical, factors and in paragraph 6 of  the  determination  the
     Judge took account of the appellant's current situation  including  his
     heavy dependency on others. Medical evidence showed him to be unable to
     manage his daily living tasks independently and to need a high level of
     pain management medication  in  circumstances  where  he  suffers  very
     limited mobility, constant pain and chronic phantom limb pain.


 15. Mr Hawkin drew  my  attention  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
     presence of the appellant in the United Kingdom for  7  years  and  his
     lack of ability to travel, making the case  extreme.  The  respondent's
     assertion that the appellant would have a life-long dependency  on  NHS
     services was speculative and was not the evidence before the Judge.  Mr
     Hawkin submitted that the respondent's assertion that the appellant had
     already received a great of NHS treatment was equally speculative;  the
     evidence was that the appellant had received life-saving  surgery.  The
     respondent failed to take into account  the  lack  of  availability  of
     emotional support, as opposed to medical support, for the appellant  in
     Russia and had made assumptions in the  grounds  of  appeal  about  the
     family finances.


 16. In conclusion, Mr Hawkin invited me find that any error of law  on  the
     part of the Judge was not material and asked me to allow  the  decision
     of the Judge to stand.  Taking account of all the submissions before me
     I found merit in these submissions for the appellant and I announced to
     the parties at the end of the hearing that I was satisfied that, taking
     the determination of the Judge as a whole, he has not made  a  material
     error of law in the making of his decision.  I reached this  conclusion
     for all the following reasons.


 17. In relation to the respondent's submission that it is not in the public
     interest  that  an  appellant  should  be  entitled  to  sidestep   the
     requirements of having no recourse to public funds  by  entering  as  a
     visitor and overstaying I take account of the Judge's acceptance of the
     evidence that the appellant did not  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
     health tourist but as a genuine family  visitor  who  was  overcome  by
     events after his arrival in the United Kingdom.  Nor did  the  evidence
     before the Judge show that there would be recourse to public funds.


 18. The Judge explicitly took account of the arguments and submissions from
     both representatives at  paragraph  27  of  his  determination  and  he
     specifically considered the Immigration Rules in relation to family and
     private life.  He concluded that the appellant could not succeed  under
     those Rules before proceeding to consider Article 8 under the  relevant
     jurisprudence.  The appeal was not allowed under the Immigration  Rules
     but the Judge nonetheless returned to the Rules at paragraph 32 of  his
     determination  and  found  that  the  appellant  would  succeed   under
     ECDR.2.4. because in his finding the appellant did, as a result of age,
     illness or  disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
     everyday tasks. It was not in my  view  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
     consider the Immigration Rules any further.


 19. The criticism is that the Judge misdirected himself at  this  stage  by
     finding the interference to family life not to be necessary because  of
     the likely success of an out of country application. If the  Judge  did
     err in his approach to this issue I am satisfied  that  it  was  not  a
     material error in the light of the strength of the evidence he accepted
     from and on behalf of the appellant which made this, as  submitted  for
     the appellant, an extreme and compelling  case.  I  am  satisfied  that
     taking the determination as a whole the Judge's findings were justified
     on the evidence and were properly open to him.  I am satisfied that his
     findings could not have led to a conclusion that  the  interference  to
     his Article 8 rights was necessary  in  the  interests  of  immigration
     control,  aside  from  the  likely  success  of  an  out   of   country
     application.


 20. It is  submitted  by  the  respondent  that  the  Judge  erred  in  the
     proportionality assessment  by  failing  to  weigh  adequately  in  the
     balance the economic factors in  favour  of  the  public  interest  and
     economic factors linked with the interests of immigration control;  the
     Judge is submitted only partially to have  considered  the  Immigration
     Rule requirements. In this regard I find merit in the submissions  from
     Mr Hawkin that the respondent enters the realms of speculation in  this
     ground of appeal. The evidence before the  Judge  was  not  that  there
     would be a life-long dependency on the NHS.  The  evidence  before  the
     Judge was that the family members of the appellant  were  employed  and
     not that a there would be recourse to  public  funds  which  should  or
     could have been weighed in the balance. Mr Hawkin  submitted  that  the
     respondent's assertion that the appellant had already received a  great
     deal of NHS treatment was equally speculative.


 21. I am satisfied that the issues reflected by the evidence were  properly
     weighed in the balance by the Judge on both sides, as opposed  to  what
     the evidence might have been. There was a considerably greater quantity
     of evidence to weigh in the proportionality balance on the side of  the
     appellant and I am satisfied that any factors not explicitly weighed in
     favour of the respondent would not have swayed that balance.


 22. I reach this conclusion in the light of the careful  consideration  and
     analysis the Judge undertook of the evidence from the witnesses  before
     him  leading  to  the  following   findings  at  paragraph  28  of  the
     determination:


         "I found all the witnesses to  be  credible  and  honest  in  their
         account of this very deep bond between them, the appellant and  his
         immediate family members in the UK, which has  been  tried  in  the
         fire of the serious life threatening illness that both he  and  his
         daughter Natalia have gone through and not been found wanting."


 23. In the light of these findings and the primary consideration the  Judge
     gave to the interests of a child in the family unit I am satisfied that
     the Judge could not arguably have  come  to  any  decision  other  than
     allowing the appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  in  favour  of  the
     appellant.   The  Judge  considered  the  impact  of  the  respondent's
     decision upon Nicole, the appellant's British, minor,  grandchild  with
     whom he accepted there was an attachment and a deep bond. He found,  in
     effect, that the removal decision of the respondent ran counter to  her
     best interests of her psychological and emotional welfare.


Decision


 24. I find that the making of the previous decision  did  not  involve  the
     making of a material error on a point of law and it  follows  that  the
     First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision stands.


 25. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State for the Home
     Department is dismissed.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made did not make an  order  pursuant  to  rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005
    and there has been no application for such an order by any party to the
    proceedings.


Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 13th February 2014



Fee Award

In the light of the dismissal of the appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  the  fee
award of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 13th February 2014

