
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/31934/2014
                                                               IA/31938/2014
                                                               IA/31912/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 22 June 2015                        |On 4 September 2015       |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMED SADIQ
                               MS NASEEM BEGUM
                           MASTER MUHAMMED ZEESHAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:             Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the first respondent:  Ms J Isherood Senior Presenting Officer


                                DETERMINATION

1. The appellants are citizens  of  Pakistan  born  on  1  January  1943,  1
   January 1956 and 2 February 1998. They are mother  father  and  son.  The
   respondent in a decision  dated  24  July  2014  decided  to  remove  the
   appellants as illegal entrants/a person subject to administrative removal
   under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 following refusal
   of their applications pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  Immigration
   Rules and their human rights claim.


2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
   under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
   Human Rights.


3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Garrett gave permission for  the  appellant  to
   appeal in a decision dated 1 April 2015 stating that it is arguable  that
   the Judge erred by failing  to  take  into  consideration  the  Court  of
   Appeal's decision in Edgehill [2014] EWCA civ 402  as  specified  in  the
   case of Khaled and Singh [2015] EWCA civ 74 in respect  of  the  date  of
   application and the date of decision in this  appeal.  The  Judge  stated
   that the second ground of appeal is not arguable as the circumstances  of
   the third appellant were properly examined in the decision,  particularly
   his ability to integrate into life in Pakistan.


      The first-tier Tribunal's findings

4. The first-tier Tribunal made the following  findings  in  dismissing  the
   appellants' appeal which I summarise.


5. [32] The appellants are unable to meet the requirements of paragraph  276
   ADE (iii) or (vi) of the Immigration Rules. It  has  not  been  suggested
   that the appellants qualify under the Immigration Rules in any other way.
   However, Mr Saleem submits that because the application was made in 2011,
   it should not have been considered under the new  Immigration  Rules.  My
   understanding of the incomplete papers is that the  respondent  gave  the
   appellants an opportunity to make a fresh  application  but  because  the
   Home  Office  file  was  not  available  (counsel  was  acting  for   the
   respondent) the background to this application was not clear.


6. The immigration history states that removal notices  were  served  on  20
   March 2012 and appeals were lodged on  11  April  2012.  The  appeal  was
   struck out due to a preliminary issue on 16 May 2012 (no  information  is
   before the Tribunal about the reason for this but it is likely that there
   was no right of appeal). The immigration history notes that  "on  4  June
   2014 the appellant submitted his statement of additional  grounds".  This
   was done in a letter from Malik &Malik.


7. [37] The first appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2005. His  purpose
   was to visit his brother. His visa expired on 30 September  2005  and  he
   lived in the United Kingdom without leave for almost 10 years. He has had
   health problems which are described in detail in his medical records.  It
   is claimed that his family home was sold prior to their arrival  here  on
   visit visas.


8. The third appellant began his studies at Norwood School when  he  was  12
   years old. He is now studying  at  South  Thames  College  and  hopes  to
   qualify  as  an  electrician.  The  family  appears  to  have   supported
   themselves from the first appellant's earnings. The first  appellant  has
   done some work as a butcher and at a stall selling fruit. It  is  claimed
   that the second appellant, Mrs Begum brought  money  from  Pakistan  from
   proceeds of sale of their property in that country.


9. [39] from the oral evidence given by the appellants, it is apparent  that
   they do not wish to return to Pakistan for a number  of  reasons  namely,
   the lack of adequate medical treatment for the  appellant,  the  lack  of
   appropriate educational provisions for the third appellant  who  is  well
   integrated socially in the United Kingdom and  the  financial  impact  of
   moving back to a country where they have no work prospects.


10. [40] I accept that several aspects  of  private  life  exists.  For  the
   reasons given in the refusal, the respondent contends that the  applicant
   does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I  concur  with
   this conclusion.


11. [41] As the appellants do not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
   Rules, I take the view that the main issue to be  decided  turns  on  the
   proper answer to be given to  the  fifth  questioning  in  Razgar  namely
   whether  the  interference  with  the   appellants'   private   life   is
   proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be pursued.


12. [42] I consider each appellant's private life in the context of  his/her
   age, health and personal circumstances, his/her  immigration  status  and
   immigration history. I also take into account the length of his/her  stay
   in the United Kingdom, his/her links with the community is so for as they
   are known and the nature of his/her relationships with others."


13. [43] For the majority of the period the appellants have  stayed  in  the
   UK, the appellants  have  lived  here  unlawfully,  i.e.  without  leave.
   Although they came on visit visas the person or persons they claim to  be
   visiting  has  not  provided  evidence  for  their  appeal  hearing.  The
   appellant's brother who lives in Bristol has not written to the  Tribunal
   in support of the appellants' applications.


14. [44] The first appellant has submitted letters from his  son's  friends.
   He has also submitted his son's academic references. I  accept  that  the
   third  appellant  has  received  education  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
   according to the Deputy Headmaster of Norwood School, was a hard-working,
   popular and conscientious pupil. His friends  who  attended  the  hearing
   bear this out. He is now in the middle of  a  one-year  course  at  South
   Thames College and would like to finish his studies  here.  Initially  he
   did not want to leave school and friends in Pakistan. Now he has  adapted
   to life in the UK, he does not want to return. He  appears  to  like  the
   lifestyle in London. He had a Polish girlfriend who was  about  his  age.
   They have split up because it appeared that there was no future for  them
   as a couple. The fact that she is pregnant has no bearing on this  appeal
   as the girl has not suggested that the third appellant is the  father  of
   her unborn child.


15.  [45]  The  appellants  held  positions  thoroughly  described  in   the
   documents before the Tribunal and it is apparent that the third appellant
   is receiving treatment from the NHS which meets his needs. The respondent
   has  produced  documentation  which  indicates  to  me  that  appropriate
   treatment and medication is available in Pakistan. The  disadvantage  for
   the appellants is that they would have to pay for it.


16. [51] I have carefully considered the appellants  connection  with  their
   country of origin. They have family members there. Mrs Begum has referred
   to her sisters. I accept that they would be unlikely they would  be  able
   to provide financial support for the appellants but  there  are  extended
   family members and the appellant speaks to them by telephone. It  appears
   to me that they would be in a position  to  provide  some  emotional  and
   practical support in the event the appellants return to Pakistan.


17. [52] I conclude from all the available evidence that  it  would  not  be
   unreasonable to expect the appellants to return to  Pakistan  where  they
   have family connections and they are familiar with the language,  culture
   and environment. Objective evidence shows that  the  appellant  would  be
   able to access appropriate medical care in any of the major  cities.  The
   third appellant is an intelligent young  man  with  qualifications  which
   would assist him to obtain gainful employment. I take the  view  that  he
   has benefited from education in  the  UK  and  has  learned  some  useful
   practical skills.


   Grounds of appeal


18. The Judge failed to take into account  the  findings  of  the  Court  of
   Appeal in Edgehill [2014] EWCA civ 402, where it was held by the Court of
   Appeal that where an application was made  prior  to  9  July  2012,  the
   Secretary of State was bound to consider the Immigration Rules in  effect
   prior to 9 July 2012. The Judge misdirected himself in law by failing  to
   take into account that the Secretary  of  State  had  applied  the  wrong
   Immigration Rules to the appellant's applications.


19. This is the only ground that permission to appeal was granted.








   Decision on error of law


20.  The  Judge  stated  that  the  appellants  are  unable  to   meet   the
   requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (iii) or (vi) of the Immigration Rules.
   He went on to say that "It has not been  suggested  that  the  appellants
   qualify under the Immigration Rules in  any  other  way.  Mr  Saleem  who
   represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal had  submitted  that
   because the application was  made  in  2011,  it  should  not  have  been
   considered under the new Immigration Rules. The  Judge  stated  that  his
   understanding of the incomplete papers is that the  respondent  gave  the
   appellants an opportunity to make a fresh  application  but  because  the
   Home Office file was not available at the hearing as counsel  was  acting
   for the respondent the background to this application was not clear.


21. There is no dispute, however that the removal notices were served on  20
   March 2012 and appeals were lodged on  11  April  2012.  The  appeal  was
   struck out due to a preliminary issue on 16 May  2012.  The  Judge  noted
   that there was no information before the Tribunal about  the  reason  for
   this but speculated that it is likely that there was no right of  appeal.
   The immigration history however notes that "on 4 June 2014 the  appellant
   submitted his statement of additional grounds  in  a  letter  from  Malik
   &Malik.


22. It is clear that in the case of Edgehill, the Court  of  Appeal  settled
   the question of whether the new human rights rules introduced on  9  July
   2012 apply to applications made before that date and held  that  they  do
   not. Specifically, it is unlawful to apply rule 276ADE on long  residence
   to applications that  were  already  outstanding  at  the  date  the  new
   Immigration Rules came into force.


23.  The  background  of  this  appeal  is  not  entirely  clear  from   the
   determination  but  it  would  appear  that  the  appellants  made  their
   applications on 9 July 2012 under the old Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge
   found that the appellant's did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276
   ADE of the current Immigration Rules which came  into  effect  after  the
   date of the appellants' applications and while  their  applications  were
   still pending.


24. The appellant's evidence is that he came to this country in  2005  on  a
   visitor visa which expired in September 2005. This means that  the  first
   appellant has been unlawfully in the country since 2005.  The  other  two
   appellants joined him in this country later. It is now September 2015 and
   therefore the first appellant could  only  have  been  resident  in  this
   country for 10 years, subject to proof.


25. Therefore I find that the appellant would not be  able  to  satisfy  the
   old Immigration Rules with required that the appellant  demonstrate  that
   he has had continuous residence in the United Kingdom for 14  years.  The
   grounds of appeal do not outline how the appellant would  have  satisfied
   the old Immigration Rules.


26. The Judge's approach to the question of whether the appellants in  their
   particular circumstances met the requirements of the  new  paragraph  276
   ADE is erroneous. I find however that it is not a material error  of  law
   because the Judge would have come to the same conclusion even if  he  had
   applied the old Immigration Rules.


27. On the evidence, I find that  the  Judge  made  proper  and  sustainable
   findings of fact on the evidence available in respect of the  appellants'
   Article 8 rights. I find  that  the  all  three  appellant's  cases  were
   properly considered pursuant to Article 8. The Judge was entitled to find
   that the appellants circumstances do not raise or contain any exceptional
   circumstances which, consistent with his right to respect for private and
   family life in respect of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
   Rights.


28. The permission Judge stated that the second  ground  of  appeal  is  not
   arguable as the  circumstances  of  the  third  appellant  were  properly
   examined in the decision, particularly his ability to integrate into life
   in Pakistan. These are sustainable findings on the evidence.


29. I therefore find  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
   determination such that it should be set aside.


30. In the alternative,  I  set  aside  the  determination  and  remake  the
   decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal pursuant to paragraph 276  of
   the old Immigration Rules. I find that the appellant has not demonstrated
   that he has lived in this country continuously for 14 years  as  required
   by the old Immigration Rules which are applicable to the appellant.


31. In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



Appeal dismissed


Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Mrs S Chana


 Dated this 31st day of August 2015

