

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31391/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 10 July 2017                       |on 20 September 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD AMJAD ISLAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Professor S Juss instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr P Singh Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I
        Ross promulgated on 28 October 2016 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal.






Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  15  August  1978,
        entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 12 June 2005 as  a  student.
        Such leave as extended to expire on 19 January 2015. On 16  January
        2015, the appellant applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
        family and private life in the United Kingdom which was  varied  on
        18 March 2016 to an application for indefinite leave to  remain  on
        the grounds of 10 years continuous lawful residence.
     3. On 9 December 2015, the application  was  refused.  The  respondent
        asserts that in a previous application for leave  to  remain  as  a
        student  dated  23  May  2012  the  appellant  submitted  a   TOEIC
        certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS) in  relation  to
        which it was concluded the certificate was fraudulently obtained by
        the use of a proxy test taker. The appellants scores from the  test
        taken on 18 April 2012 at Elizabeth College were cancelled by  ETS.
        The  respondent  was  satisfied  the  appellant's  certificate  was
        fraudulently obtained  and  that  he  had  used  deception  in  the
        application  of  23  May  2012.  The   respondent   concluded   the
        appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the
        public good because his conduct made  it  undesirable  for  him  to
        remain in the UK leading  to  the  refusal  pursuant  to  paragraph
        322(2) the Immigration Rules.
     4. The Judge considered the evidence before setting  out  findings  of
        fact from [13-26] of the decision  under  challenge  which  can  be
        summarised in the following terms:


   a. The main issue in the appeal was whether the appellant used a proxy to
      undertake the test taken on 18 April 2012 [13].
   b. The respondent provided standard  generic  process  evidence  commonly
      seen in ETS cases, evidence pertinent to the appellant in a  statement
      from Hilary Rackstraw, a report from Professor  French,  and  evidence
      specific to Elizabeth College produced as part of the "Project Facade"
      criminal enquiry into abuse of TOEIC [14 - 20].
   c. Whilst the evidence in relation to Elizabeth College does not directly
      prove the appellant's test was taken by  proxy  taker  it  shows  that
      organised and  widespread  use  of  the  TOEIC  was  taking  place  at
      Elizabeth College at the relevant time which amounted to  clear  prima
      facie evidence of TOEIC corruption at the college around the time  the
      appellant took his test there [21].
   d. The Judge was satisfied the Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  the
      evidential burden of establishing  that  the  appellant  procured  his
      TOEIC certificate by deception [22].
   e. The Judge found the appellant's  evidence  unsatisfactory  in  several
      respects including the  witness  statement  being  silent  as  to  the
      earlier tests taken by him on 28 March 2012 which were "questionable",
      the failure to provide a credible explanation as to why he resat tests
      at a different college from the first college, or  why  the  appellant
      chose Elizabeth College situated across London from  where  he  lives.
      Nor was there any explanation as to why the  appellant  maintained  an
      identical score for speaking over the two tests nor  how  his  writing
      score was able to jump from 140 to 160 after only 21 days [23].
   f. The Judge found the appellant's evidence in relation to the use of his
      Master's degree as evidence of his English ability  to  be  vague  and
      confusing. The appellants claim he did not need to place any  reliance
      upon the TOEIC certificate was not consistent with his oral  evidence.
      The Judge found as a question of fact that  the  appellant  did  place
      reliance  on  the  TOEIC  certificate  by  submitting  it   with   his
      application. The fact the appellant may be proficient in English  does
      not assist in determining whether he or a proxy  took  his  test.  The
      Judge did not find it was necessary to determine what the  appellant's
      motive, or lack of, may have been [24].
   g. The Judge was satisfied that the appellant has  manifestly  failed  to
      raise an innocent explanation for any element of the prima facie  case
      of deception established against him and the Secretary  of  State  has
      discharged the burden of proving on a balance of probabilities the ETS
      TOEIC test results submitted by the appellant in May 2012 amounted  to
      false information or false representations. The decision to refuse the
      application pursuant to paragraph 322(2) was therefore correct [25].
   h. The Judge concludes that the appellant's application for further leave
      to remain made in  May  2012  ought  not  to  have  been  granted  and
      accordingly that the appellant has not been lawfully resident  in  the
      United Kingdom for 10 years. The decision to  refuse  his  application
      for indefinite leave to remain was also correct and is not  in  breach
      of his human rights [26].


     5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge the First-tier Tribunal.  The matter  is  opposed  by
        the Secretary of State.



Error of law


     6. The appellant relied upon five grounds of  appeal.  These  are  (1)
        that the Judge erred in law in failing to  consider  and  determine
        the Article 8  claim  in  any  reasoned  matter,  (2)  the  Judge's
        conclusion that the Secretary of State  discharged  the  evidential
        burden in relation to the TOEIC/ETS test certificate  is  wrong  in
        law and inconsistent with the Court Appeals judgement in  Shezad  v
        Secretary State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  615,  (3)
        that the Judge's approach to the evidential burden that was on  the
        appellant and the subsequent legal burden on the Secretary of State
        is wrong in law and inconsistent with SM and Qadir,  (4)  that  the
        Judge misread paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration  Rules,  (5)  the
        Judge's conclusion that the appellant had not lived in  the  United
        Kingdom lawfully for 10 years is wrong in law.
     7. Re Ground 2 - the appellant asserts that  in  Shezad  guidance  was
        given in relation to the evidential burden upon  the  Secretary  of
        State in ETS cases after  consideration  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
        decision in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 229. The  ground  specifically
        refers to the judgement of Beatson LJ at [30] where it was said..."
        The tribunal might be open to criticism in  its  treatment  of  the
        Millington/Collings evidence at the initial stage. In circumstances
        where the generic evidence is not accompanied by  evidence  showing
        that the individual under considerations test  was  categorised  as
        "invalid",  I  consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State  faces   a
        difficulty in respect of  the  evidential  burden  at  the  initial
        stage".
     8.  The  appellant  asserts  that  the  generic  evidence   alone   is
        insufficient to discharge the evidential burden and  that  must  be
        something showing that the particular test  of  the  individual  in
        question was deemed invalid. The appellant asserts the  finding  at
        [21] in which the Judge refers to clear  evidence  of  prima  facie
        corruption at Elizabeth College is inconsistent with Shezad as  the
        fact there was  corruption  at  Elizabeth  College  in  itself  was
        insufficient to discharge the evidential burden upon the  Secretary
        of State without there being  further  evidence  showing  that  the
        TOEIC certificate of the appellant was invalid.
     9. It is accepted that in SM and Qadir (ETS -  Evidence  -  Burden  of
        Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) it was  held  that  the  Secretary  of
        State's generic evidence, combined with her evidence particular  to
        the two appellants in that case was  sufficient  to  discharge  the
        evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates had been
        procured by dishonesty. What the Tribunal in that case  also  found
        was that  "every  case  belonging  to  the  ETS/TOEIC  stable  will
        invariably be fact sensitive.  To this we  add  that  every  appeal
        will be determined on the basis of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
        parties".
    10. The evidence in this case included not only  the  generic  evidence
        but also the additional witness statement  from  Hilary  Rackstraw.
        This was disclosed by fax on the 19 September 2016. Appendix  a  of
        that statement contains the ETS Source Data entry relating  to  the
        appellant showing the  results  of  the  two  tests  taken  by  the
        appellant  at  Elizabeth  College  have  been  declared  "invalid".
        Although the Judge refers to corruption at Elizabeth College  there
        is also reference to Mrs Rackstraw's statement. That  evidence  was
        arguably sufficient to discharge the  evidential  burden  upon  the
        Secretary of State. In Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 it
        was held that a decision  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Rules
        required material justifying a conclusion that the individual under
        consideration had lied or submitted false  documents.  The  initial
        evidential burden of furnishing  proof  of  deception  was  on  the
        Secretary of State. Where the Secretary  of  State  provided  prima
        facie evidence of deception, the burden shifted onto the individual
        to provide a plausible innocent explanation, and if the  individual
        did so the burden shifted  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  In
        effect, it was held that a screenshot of the results  which  stated
        that that was the position and included the "ETS Lookup Tool" which
        showed the tests that were categorised  as  "invalid"  sufficed  to
        discharge the initial burden.
    11. The Judge had available to him arguably sufficient evidence to show
        that the particular tests of this appellant were deemed invalid. No
        arguable legal error is made out in relation to this ground.
    12. Re Ground 3 - It was found in SM and Qadir that if it is  concluded
        the Secretary of State had  discharged  the  evidential  burden  of
        showing the TOEIC test certificates  were  invalid  the  evidential
        burden shifted to the appellant to raise an  innocent  explanation.
        The appellant asserts the Judge misunderstood this passage  as  all
        the  appellant  was  required  to  do  was  provide   an   innocent
        explanation with no burden of proof on the  appellant  at  all  and
        that he or she was merely required to put  forward  an  explanation
        and that once  that  was  done  the  legal  burden  passed  to  the
        Secretary of State to prove on the balance  of  probabilities  that
        the TOEIC certificate was fraudulent.  The  appellant  asserts  the
        Judge wrongly assumed the appellant was required to prove that  his
        explanation was well-founded. The appellant also asserts the  Judge
        failed to reason how the Secretary of State discharge the  ultimate
        legal burden.
    13. The Judge was arguably aware of the three-stage process  identified
        in the case law for having  found  that  the  Secretary  State  had
        discharged the  evidential  burden  the  Judge  then  moved  on  to
        consider the appellant's position. The Judge clearly considered the
        evidence relied upon by the appellant and the explanation  advanced
        which was not found to be satisfactory. This is clearly  a  finding
        by the Judge that the appellant had not  discharge  the  evidential
        burden. There is no arguable misunderstanding for in [25] the Judge
        clearly finds that the appellant had manifestly failed to raise  an
        innocent explanation. The inference in  the  grounds  that  all  an
        appellant has to do is  provide  an  innocent  explanation  without
        more, and particularly with no suggestion that there should be  any
        relationship between the explanation and the evidence considered by
        the Judge in assessing the first stage  process,  has  no  arguable
        merit. The test is not for the appellant to provide an explanation.
        The  particular  emphasis  in  the  case  law  is  upon  the   word
        "innocent". This  must  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  explanation
        established that the evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State
        to discharge the initial evidential burden  should  be  given  less
        weight, be  distinguished,  or  shown  to  be  wrong  or  that  the
        appellant was not responsible for or directly involved in an  event
        yet suffering its consequences. The Judge  gives  adequate  reasons
        for why it  was  concluded  the  appellant's  explanation  was  not
        sufficient to discharge this evidential burden.
    14. At the hearing  Professor  Juss  sought  to  rely  upon  additional
        documents including a witness statement from the appellant dated  5
        July  2017.  This  had  not  been  produced  to  the  Tribunal   or
        respondent's representative at the date of the hearing although was
        subsequently brought to the attention of the Tribunal. This  is  an
        error of law hearing based upon  the  evidence  considered  by  the
        Judge which will  not  include  explanations  provided  in  witness
        statements written some nine months later. That  statement  is,  in
        effect, no more than disagreement with the findings reached by  the
        Judge. There is for example reference to  questions  asked  by  the
        Judge and answers given in which the appellant then criticises  the
        findings in the determination. The Judge in  [23]  does  not  state
        that the appellant gave no explanation for why he reset  the  tests
        at a  different  college  but  rather  that  he  gave  no  credible
        explanation. This is an assessment by the judge of  the  weight  he
        was willing to give to the appellant's  evidence  not  a  statement
        that such evidence was not given. There is  no  obligation  upon  a
        Judge to give reasons for each and every aspect of  an  appeal.  No
        arguable  legal  error  is  made  out   in   relation   to   Judges
        understanding of the evidence made available.
    15. The Judge was clearly aware  of  the  evidential  burden  upon  the
        appellant.  The finding  the  appellant  had  failed  to  raise  an
        innocent explanation, which is  a  fact  sensitive  assessment,  is
        within the range of findings reasonably open to the  Judge  on  the
        evidence in this appeal.
    16. The assertion the Judge failed to give  any  reasons  for  how  the
        Secretary of State had discharged the ultimate legal burden has  no
        arguable merit. It is asserted at [12] of the grounds that  if  the
        Judge found inconsistencies and gaps in the evidence the Judge  was
        obliged to give an opportunity to the appellant to address them and
        there is no account  of  any  material  cross  examination  in  the
        determination. As stated above, the Judges are not required to  set
        out details in relation to each and every aspect of  the  evidence.
        Although the author of  the  grounds  was  not  the  representative
        before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was represented by his
        solicitors. The assertion the Judge should have put further matters
        such as inconsistencies to the appellant and that a failure  to  do
        so amounts to legal error has no arguable merit. Proceedings before
        the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  adversarial.  The   appellant   was
        represented. He was given ample opportunity to present his case  by
        way of written evidence, evidence in chief  and  re-examination  to
        clarify issues that may have arisen in cross  examination,  and  by
        his advocate making final submissions. That procedure entitles  and
        enables an appellant to present to a judge the  evidence  they  are
        seeking to rely upon. If  a  judge  when  assessing  that  evidence
        identifies deficiencies or problems there is  no  legal  obligation
        upon the judge to call the parties back or seek further submissions
        unless such arise as a result of matters that the parties  may  not
        have been aware of. In this case the issues identified by the Judge
        in the decision were clearly known to  the  parties.  There  is  no
        assertion the Judge relied on matters of which the parties  had  no
        knowledge or of any procedural irregularity in the  decision-making
        process sufficient to amount to an arguable error of law.
    17. The appellant fails to make out any arguable legal  error  material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal relevant to the  finding  the
        appellant did use deception when taking the English  language  test
        as asserted by the respondent.
    18. Re Ground 4 - the appellant asserts  the  Judge  misread  paragraph
        322(2) of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  it  is  stated  this  is  a
        discretionary ground which  leave  to  remain  should  normally  be
        refused. The rule provides:

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused


         ......


         (2)   the  making  of  false  representations  or  the  failure  to
             disclose any material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave
             to enter or a previous variation  of  these  or  in  order  to
             obtain documents from the Secretary of  State  or  third-party
             required in support of the application for leave to enter or a
             previous variation of leave.


    19.  The  grounds  assert  the  Judge  ignored  the  fact  this  is   a
        discretionary provision applying paragraph 322(2)  as  it  would  a
        mandatory provision such as 322(1A) of the Rules.
    20. In Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  the
        Tribunal held that  (i)  If  a  decision  maker  in  the  purported
        exercise of a discretion vested in him noted his function and  what
        was required to be done when fulfilling it and  then  proceeded  to
        reach a decision on that basis, the decision is a  lawful  one  and
        the Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of a  statutory  power
        to  decide  that  the  discretion  should   have   been   exercised
        differently (see s 86(3)(b) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002); (ii) Where  the  decision  maker  has  failed  to
        exercise a discretion vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on
        appeal is limited to  a  decision  that  the  failure  renders  the
        decision 'not in accordance with the law' (s 86(3)(a)). Because the
        discretion is vested in the Executive, the appropriate course  will
        be for the Tribunal to require the decision maker to  complete  his
        task by reaching a lawful decision on the outstanding  application,
        along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a
        case, it makes no difference whether  there  is  such  a  statutory
        power as is mentioned  in  paragraph  1  above;  and  (ii)  If  the
        decision maker  has  lawfully  exercised  his  discretion  and  the
        Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must  either  (a)
        uphold  the  decision  maker's  decision  (if   the   Tribunal   is
        unpersuaded that the decision maker's discretion should  have  been
        exercised differently); or (b) reach a different  decision  in  the
        exercise of its own discretion.
    21. Ukus was decided under the previous appeal regime  in  relation  to
        which there was a 'not in accordance with the law' ground of appeal
        which no longer exists, although that is not a point that needs  to
        be discussed at any length at this stage in these  proceedings.  In
        Ukus it was found "The expression 'normally be refused' connotes  a
        discretion to be exercised by the decision  maker  which,  in  this
        case, is the Entry Clearance Officer".
    22. It is important to consider the circumstances in which a  decision-
        maker may contemplate whether to dismiss an appeal by reference  to
        paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Rules.  The  Modernised   Guidance   to
        caseworkers in relation to paragraph 322(2)  states  the  decision-
        maker should normally refuse leave  when  the  applicant  has  made
        false representations or submitted false documents  in  a  previous
        application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
        State or a third party required in support of the  application  for
        leave to enter or a previous variation of leave.  In this case  the
        findings  of  the  Judge  show  that  the  primary  requirement  is
        satisfied by the use of a fraudulently obtained certificate by  the
        use of a proxy tester. The  guidance,  in  relation  to  whether  a
        decision-maker needs to refer to a senior caseworker before refusal
        states  "No,  but  you  must   check   the   harm   matrix   before
        consideration". It is not made out the decision-maker, being  aware
        of the guidance, then promptly ignored it and there is evidence  of
        the exercise of discretion by reference to the finding that is  not
        conducive to the public good, because the appellant's conduct makes
        it undesirable, to allow him to remain in the United Kingdom  which
        imports a balancing exercise giving consideration to factors relied
        upon  by  the  appellant   against   the   question   of   whether,
        notwithstanding the use of  fraud,  the  appellant  should  not  be
        entitled to remain in the United Kingdom. No arguable  legal  error
        material to this ground is made out the appellant's behalf.
    23. Re Ground 5 - the appellant asserts the Judge erred  in  concluding
        that the appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom lawfully for
        10 years. The appellant refers to paragraph 276A of the  Rules  and
        argues the fact the Judge's view was that leave to remain ought not
        to have been granted does not negate the reality that the leave  to
        remain was actually granted, has not  been  revoked,  cancelled  or
        curtailed at any point, and that a plain reading of paragraph  276A
        (b) means the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom has  been
        lawful and that he has lived continuously in the UK for 10 years.
    24.  Paragraph  276A  contains  a  definition  of  terms  relevant  for
        assessing an application pursuant to paragraphs 276B  to  276D  and
        276ADE(1). Within that paragraph at 276A(b) it is written:
        (b)  "lawful  residence"  means  residence  which   is   continuous
        residence pursuant to:
              i. (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or
             ii. (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971  Act
                 where leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or
            iii. (iii) an  exemption  from  immigration  control,  including
                 where an exemption ceases to apply  if  it  is  immediately
                 followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain.
        (c) 'lived continuously' and 'living continuously' mean 'continuous
        residence', except that paragraph 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply.
    25. The belief by the Judge that the appellant  should  not  have  been
        granted a period of leave which he was granted  does  not  arguably
        have the effect of making such leave  "unlawful".  That  does  not,
        however, automatically admit arguable legal error. The  finding  by
        the Judge at [26], even if impacted by legal  error  in  which  the
        Judge finds the appellant has not been  lawfully  resident  in  the
        United Kingdom for a period of 10 years, needs to be considered  by
        reference to the actual finding in relation to the relevant  aspect
        of the rule which is that the respondent's decision to  refuse  the
        application for indefinite leave to remain was correct.
    26. The appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United
        Kingdom on the basis of long residence. He was  therefore  required
        to show he can satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  which
        state:


        276B. The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
        leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom are that:
           (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence
           in the United Kingdom.
           (ii) having regard to the public interest there are  no  reasons
           why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave
           to remain on the ground of long residence, taking  into  account
           his:
                 (a) age; and
                 (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
                 (c)  personal  history,   including   character,   conduct,
                 associations and employment record; and
                 (d) domestic circumstances; and
                 (e) compassionate circumstances; and
                 (f) any representations received on  the  person's  behalf;
                 and
           (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
           grounds for refusal.
           (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of  the
           English language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the
           United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.
           (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
           laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of these  Rules  applies,
           any current period  of  overstaying  will  be  disregarded.  Any
           previous period of overstaying between  periods  of  leave  will
           also be disregarded where -
                 (a) the previous application was made  before  24  November
                 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or
                 (b) the  further  application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                 November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.


    27. A reading of the refusal clearly shows that the decision-maker  was
        aware of the correct provision of the rule but found the  appellant
        could  not  satisfy  276B(ii)  and  (iii)  which  is  an   arguably
        sustainable finding in light of the conclusions by the Judge of the
        use of deception in relation to  the  English  language  test.  The
        factors outlined in (ii) are those factors relevant to  considering
        whether having regard to the public interest there is no reason why
        it would be undesirable for the appellant to be granted  indefinite
        leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence,  which  entails
        consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  the  application   and
        resultant decision. (iii) is more absolute in that if a person does
        fall for refusal under a general ground  they  cannot  succeed  the
        rule. Whilst the Judge may have erred in stating the appellant  has
        not been lawfully resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  such  is  not
        material as on the findings as a whole the appellant cannot satisfy
        the relevant rule to entitle him to succeed on this basis.
    28. Re Ground 1 - article 8 ECHR - this ground has been  left  to  this
        stage of the decision as it is  relevant  to  have  considered  the
        application under the Rules first before moving on to the ground of
        appeal relating to a leave outside the Rules. The appellant asserts
        that he relied heavily  on  private  life  and  relationships  with
        family members settled in this country and that the Judge failed to
        determine this particular aspect by reference to  paragraph  276ADE
        of the Immigration Rules in relation to  whether  there  were  very
        significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Pakistan
        or  other  circumstances  that   meant   his   removal   would   be
        disproportionate.
    29. Article 8 does not enable an individual to choose where  they  wish
        to live, its sole purpose being to prevent unwarranted interference
        with a protected right. The evidence before the Judge  in  relation
        to article 8 ECHR can be found in  the  appellant's  first  witness
        statement in which he confirmed he entered the United Kingdom on 12
        June 2005 and that he has arguably  remained  lawfully  since.  The
        appellant speaks  of  his  educational  attainment  in  the  United
        Kingdom [12] in the statement of 14 July 2016 and stated that since
        his arrival in the United Kingdom he has managed  to  establish  an
        active social life with a number of close friends and that  he  has
        been in the United Kingdom for a large proportion of his adult life
        and finds himself woven into the very fabric of British  life.  The
        appellant also asserts he has a number of  family  members  in  the
        United Kingdom including his  brother,  sister-in-law,  nieces  and
        nephews.  The appellant  refers  to  contributing  to  the  economy
        whilst working as a salesman at Next and asserts he should be given
        the opportunity to remain in the United Kingdom.
    30. The appellant stated at [14] that he believes it  is  important  to
        say how he is a genuine and honest applicant but  this  is  clearly
        undermined by the findings of the  use  of  deception  to  take  an
        English  language  test.  Although  Mr  Singh  in  his  submissions
        accepted the Judge did not specifically deal with the  question  of
        integration in the determination it is important to revert  to  the
        decision as a whole and the reference to 276B in relation to  which
        age, strength of connection to the United Kingdom, personal history
        etc  as  outlined  above  are   all   taken   into   account.   The
        proportionality of the decision to exclude a person from the United
        Kingdom under 276B arguably requires  a  similar  assessment  of  a
        claimant's circumstances as that required under the  fifth  of  the
        Razgar questions. It is not asserted the appellant has the required
        20 years residence required to succeed under  paragraph  276ADE  on
        the basis of his private life.
    31. The Judge in the decision found the refusal of the application  for
        indefinite leave to remain was correct and  not  a  breach  of  the
        appellant's human rights.  The  author  of  the  grounds  may  have
        misunderstood what the Judge was saying when  inferring  that  this
        was a shorthand and incomplete assessment of the proportionality of
        the decision whereas it is anything but. The  Judge  clearly  found
        that the assessment relevant  to  276B  was  lawful  and  that  the
        finding the appellant should not be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
        remain in the United  Kingdom  and  so  would  have  to  return  to
        Pakistan, even in light of the issues he raised in support  of  his
        application for leave to remain under the long residence  rule  was
        of importance, as this equates to finding the  appellant's  removal
        would not amount to a  disproportionate  breach  of  any  protected
        right. The appellant fails to make out any material  difference  in
        the test or to identify issues that  were  not  considered  by  the
        decision-maker or Judge under the long residence rule. The evidence
        provided by the appellant does not suggest a degree of  integration
        such that it would be  disproportionate  in  the  circumstances  to
        remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.
    32. It must be remembered that the core finding  relating  to  the  ETS
        aspect was the use of deception. In Mumu (paragraph 320; Article 8;
        scope) [2012] UKUT 00143(IAC) the Tribunal said, in the context  of
        Article  8  and  proportionality  on  an  out  of  country   spouse
        settlement appeal where 320(7A) was found to apply that "those  who
        engage, or who might be tempted to engage, in dishonest attempts to
        deceive the United Kingdom authorities in relation  to  immigration
        control  need  to  be   aware   that   such   actions   will   have
        disadvantageous  consequences  for  those  who  are  the   intended
        beneficiaries of the dishonest conduct. In the  present  case,  the
        appellant and the sponsor have chosen to marry against the backdrop
        that the appellant had no automatic  entitlement  to  live  in  the
        United Kingdom. In all the circumstances, it is, we  consider,  not
        disproportionate for the respondent to refuse the  application,  on
        the basis of paragraph 320(7A)".
    33. Although the refusal in this appeal was not a mandatory  refusal  a
        careful  examination   of   the   evidence   and   the   appellants
        circumstances warranted to refusal of his application on the  basis
        of deception and, arguably, his removal from the United Kingdom.
    34. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out in relation to the key finding that there  shall
        be no disproportionate interference with a protected right.
    35. It was recognised by Professor Juss in [23] that the matters relied
        upon may or may not have fallen in the appellant's favour but  that
        any error was material as they had not even been considered. Whilst
        there is an argument that if there is no self-contained  article  8
        assessment within the  decision  this  comment  may  have  arguable
        merit, it is important to read the decision as a  whole.  Reference
        to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
        8113 was made by Professor Juss and the finding by that Court  that
        the concept of integration is one which is abroad one because it is
        not confined to the mere ability to find  a  job  or  sustain  life
        while living in the other country that is one which calls for broad
        evaluative judgement to be made as to whether an individual will be
        enough of an insider in terms of  understanding  how  life  in  the
        society and that countries carried on and a capacity to participate
        in it, so to have reasonable opportunity be to be  accepted  there.
        As   stated   above,   the    compassionate    circumstances    and
        representations received are factors that were taken  into  account
        and it has not been made out  that  those  representations  or  the
        evidence made available to the Judge was  sufficient  to  establish
        that the appellant will not have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
        accepted in Pakistan or to be able to re-establish his life in that
        country. The appellant's evidence in his witness  statement  refers
        solely to time in the United Kingdom and presence of  other  family
        members with no evidence that he would not be able to  re-establish
        himself in Pakistan.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  that  a  period  of
        readjustment  may  be  required  the  appellant  is   an   educated
        individual. Considering the evidence as a whole, notwithstanding Mr
        Singh's acceptance that integration does not appear  to  have  been
        specifically considered in the decision under challenge, I  do  not
        find the appellant has established arguable legal error material to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal. Article 8 ECHR is raised  as  a
        specific ground of challenge in the original appeal to  the  First-
        tier Tribunal indicating the appellant was aware  of  the  need  to
        adduce all the evidence he seeks to rely upon which, as stated,  is
        arguably limited to telling the Judge about life in the UK, without
        more.
    36. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student.  This  is  a
        temporary status which confers no legitimate  expectation  that  he
        would be permitted to settle. The finding by the  Judge  responding
        to discharge the burden of proof upon her to the required  standard
        to establish the proportionality of  the  decision  is  within  the
        range of defined  things  reasonably  open  to  the  judge  on  the
        evidence. I do not find it established had the Judge approached the
        evidence in any other manner that  the  decision  would  have  been
        anything other than that set out in the decision under challenge in
        light of the nature of the evidence and the use of deception.


Decision

    37. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    38. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 September 2017

