
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/31432/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 January 2016                        |               On 4 February 2016     |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   mr kehinde akinwunmu abooluwa fakolujo

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Westmaas, Counsel, instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 23 July  2014  refusing
    the respondent further leave to remain and  to  remove  the  respondent
    from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born  in  1985.  The  respondent
    applied for a six month visit visa on 28  January  2002  and  that  was
    subsequently issued, valid from 17 June 2002 to 17 December  2002.  The
    respondent arrived in the UK and subsequently applied for  registration
    as  a  minor  for  British  citizenship  on  15  March  2006  but  that
    application was refused  on  14  June  2006.  On  6  October  2010  the
    respondent lodged a human rights application under Article 8  but  that
    was refused on 24 March 2011 with no right of  appeal.  The  respondent
    made further representations on 18 May  2011  and  10  June  2014.  The
    respondent claimed to have family and private life in the UK  with  his
    twin brother, sister and their children.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that he did not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances  such  as
    to justify a grant of leave outside the  Rules.  There  might  be  some
    degree of bond with his siblings but that did not  go  beyond  ordinary
    emotional ties.  Length  of  residence  and  good  character  were  not
    sufficient to allow him to remain in the  UK.  The  respondent  had  no
    leave to remain in the UK since 2002.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 8  July  2015.  He  was  represented  by  Mr
    Westmaas. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  respondent  had  been
    caught by the change in nationality rules after  being  born  in  South
    London and without any parent or relative left in Nigeria. He had every
    reason to think  that  he  would  have  the  benefit  of  compassionate
    exercise of discretion  but  he  was  instead  subject  to  the  strict
    nationality rules. He had nobody in Nigeria  except  an  aunt  who  had
    recently gone there. He was a great support  to  the  children  of  his
    sister and brother and they would be lost if he  were  to  be  removed.
    Best interests of the children applied. The respondent should have  the
    exercise of compassionate discretion in his favour remembering that all
    of his life was in the UK and he had no one  in  Nigeria  to  give  him
    support.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal  outside  the
    Rules and by failing to consider section 117B of the 2002 Act or taking
    into account the policy as reflected in the Rules.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    29 October 2015 on the basis of both grounds advanced by the  Secretary
    of State.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr  Staunton  submitted  that  there  were  no  reasoned  compassionate
    circumstances and no reason why the  rule  of  law  should  favour  the
    respondent. There was no reference to the 2002  Act  and  no  balancing
    exercise. The appeal should be remitted for a de novo hearing.

10. Mr Westmaas conceded that he would be wasting my  time  by  seeking  to
    maintain that there was not a clear error of law in relation to failure
    to consider the 2002 Act. The appeal should go back to  the  First-tier
    but there was no need for a  de  novo  hearing.  The  appeal  could  be
    remitted for a more detailed hearing. Paragraph 23 of the decision is a
    reasonable  assessment  of  the  evidence.  The  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraph 10 should be preserved. Following MK (section 55  -  Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC), the decision letter  was
    clearly flawed and there was no cross-examination  of  the  respondent.
    The judge considered this to be a  clear  cut  case  and  that  is  not
    surprising. The appeal should be remitted back to the same judge.

11. Mr Staunton submitted that it was not appropriate to  go  back  to  the
    same judge. There were enough issues in the decision for it to go  back
    to a different judge.

12. I find that the decision is incomplete. The judge  did  not  explicitly
    find that there were identified compelling circumstances to  support  a
    claim for grant of leave to remain outside the Rules,  as  required  by
    paragraph 33 of SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ   387.  Nor  did  the
    judge  consider  the  factors  identified  in  section  117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as required by Forman  (ss
    117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC). Nor  was  there  a  clear
    proportionality  assessment,  taking  the  section  117B  factors  into
    account. The errors of law  are  material  and  a  further  hearing  is
    required.

13. However, I find force in the submissions made by Mr Westmaas. The judge
    clearly regarded this as a clear cut case where leave should be granted
    outside the Rules and the respondent should  not  be  deprived  of  the
    favourable findings of fact made by the judge. I find that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the same judge to consider the outstanding issues
    and to make findings.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under Article 8 involved the making of errors  of  law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.



Decision

15. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the previous findings of fact
    set out at paragraph 10 of the decision should be preserved.

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined again by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Majid.


Signed

[pic]


Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Archer
      Date 1 February 2016


