
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31754/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2017                      |On 12 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            ABDALLA ISSA MOHAMMED
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     MS D Dhaliwal, instructed by Lords Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan promulgated 29.11.16, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    10.9.15, to refuse his application for LTR on private and  family  life
    grounds. The Judge heard the appeal on 19.10.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dineen  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.5.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission  to  appeal
    on 4.7.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 4.9.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. In summary, the appellant, who is a citizen of Tanzania, came to the UK
    as a student in 2008. His leave expired in 2011 and he  overstayed.  He
    entered into an Islamic marriage ceremony with  a  citizen  of  Somalia
    settled in the UK with refugee status along with her child born in 2009
    from a previous relationship. The couple had a further child,  born  in
    the UK in 2011, and at the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing, she  was  expecting  a  further  child  of  the  relationship,
    subsequently born in April 2017.

 6. The first child of the appellant's partner  has  a  significant  health
    condition, namely a heart condition, as detailed in  the  evidence  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge McWilliam observed that  whilst
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered availability to  treatment  in
    Tanzania, he did not consider accessibility to that treatment.

 8. Ms Dhaliwal submitted  that  on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  there  were  not  facilities  in  Tanzania  to   treat   the
    appellant's step-child. It was argued that  the  judge  overlooked  the
    fact that as the child is not a citizen of Tanzania, he  would  not  be
    able to benefit from the arrangements provided for  Tanzanian  citizens
    to receive such treatment in Israel or India. It is also submitted that
    the decision is silent as to  the  accessibility  or  affordability  of
    medical treatment in Tanzania.

 9. Ms Dhaliwal also submitted that there was no proper analysis as to  the
    best interests of that child in remaining in the UK and no reference to
    the impact of the appellant's removal on that child, or  the  children,
    pursuant to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009. It is claimed that the judge failed to address the  role  of  the
    appellant in the lives of the children, and in particular  how  he  was
    able to look after the children during his wife's recent pregnancy.

10. In carefully considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it is
    clear that the judge accepted the  evidence  relating  to  the  child's
    heart condition. At [14] the judge cited the letter of Dr Bhole,  dated
    23.6.15, to  the  effect  that  at  the  last  assessment  things  were
    satisfactory. The heart condition will  require  life-long  follow  up.
    When he is older he will require cardiac surgery and in the interim, if
    any other issues arise, he may require  cardiac  catheterisation  at  a
    centre with expertise  to  perform  this  in  a  child.  "Overall,  his
    prognosis  is  good,  provided  he  has  cardiac  reviews  at   regular
    intervals."

11. The judge made a careful assessment of the evidence as to  availability
    of medical treatment in Tanzania. There is  not  a  single  specialised
    hospital in Tanzania that can deal with the complex heart  problems  of
    the child. At [19] the  judge  did  not  overlook  that,  not  being  a
    Tanzanian citizen, the child would not be able to be sponsored to India
    or Israel for treatment.

12. On the other hand, at [20] the judge noted the evidence adduced by  the
    respondent that there are facilities in Tanzania to treat children with
    heart conditions, but there is a lack of trained cardiac surgeons.  The
    judge concluded that treatment is available, but it may come at a cost.



13. At [21] the judge pointed out that on the evidence the child  will  not
    require surgery until he is much older.  It  follows  that  his  health
    would not deteriorate if he were to go to Tanzania with the  appellant.
    He would not need to  be  sponsored  to  India  or  Israel.  There  was
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  medication  he  is  currently
    prescribed is not available in Tanzania. The  burden  of  demonstrating
    that treatment  is  not  available  is  on  the  appellant.  The  judge
    concluded that ongoing treatment is available in Tanzania, although  it
    may come at a cost.

14. In Paposhvili [2016] (41738/10), the EHCR reviewed  the  relevant  case
    law, including N v UK, that it is not correct to apply article  3  only
    in cases where the person facing expulsion is close to death,  as  this
    deprives aliens who are seriously ill,  but  whose  condition  is  less
    critical, of the benefit of article 3. "Other very  exceptional  cases"
    should be understood to refer to situations involving the removal of  a
    seriously ill person in which substantial grounds have been  shown  for
    believing that he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would
    face a real risk, "on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment
    in the receiving country or the lack of access to  such  treatment,  of
    being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  his  or
    her state of health, resulting in intense suffering or to a significant
    reduction in life expectancy." This remains a high threshold. At  [186]
    of that case, the ECHR pointed out that it  is  for  the  appellant  to
    adduce evidence capable of demonstrating  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that, if removed, they would be exposed to a real
    risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to article 3. Where  such
    evidence is adduced, it is for the  state  authorities  to  dispel  any
    doubts.

15. Considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that the conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal  were  fully
    open to it on the evidence and for  which  cogent  reasoning  has  been
    provided. The crucial facts are that if the appellant's partner decides
    to accompany the appellant to Tanzania, with her children, the child in
    question will not need cardiac surgery until  he  is  much  older.  The
    judge was satisfied that treatment that he  currently  needs  would  be
    available, and it is  clear  from  the  correspondence,  including  the
    letter from a paediatric cardiologist in  Tanzania,  that  the  regular
    reviews spoken of  in  other  correspondence  will  be  available.  The
    appellant failed to provide evidence to show that the  child  would  be
    exposed to treatment contrary to article 3, and in particular failed to
    show  that  the  reviews  and  any  ongoing  medication  would  not  be
    available. On the facts of  this  case,  they  do  not  meet  the  high
    threshold required under  article  3.  In  the  circumstances,  further
    attention to the issue of accessibility of  treatment  would  not  have
    made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

16. Further, the judge has adequately addressed the best interests  of  the
    children. It will be for  the  appellant  and  his  partner  to  decide
    whether she and the children will accompany him, or remain in  the  UK,
    where they have settled  status.  He  could  make  an  entry  clearance
    application from Tanzania. Neither the partner nor the children will be
    obliged to leave the  UK.  The  judge  also  carefully  considered  the
    reasonableness of expecting the children to leave  the  UK  with  their
    parents, it being in their best interests to  remain  with  the  parent
    and/or step-parent. In the light of the Court of Appeal's  more  recent
    decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA 705, the wider  public  interests
    are relevant to that reasonableness assessment, which must take account
    of the immigration history and the public interest. In that light, I am
    not satisfied that any more detailed attention to  the  fact  that  the
    eldest child was a qualifying child under s117B(6) would or could  have
    made any difference to the outcome of the appeal. The judge  concluded,
    for cogent reasons, that it would be reasonable to expect the  children
    to leave the UK.

17.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting, the family relationship with  the  partner  was  precarious
    from the outset. The judge spent considerable time considering  whether
    there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK, concluding that there  are  not.  That  conclusion  was
    fully open to the judge on the evidence and for which cogent  reasoning
    has been provided. There is no merit in the grounds of appeal  relating
    to article 8 family life.

Conclusions:

18. For the reasons summarised  above,  I  find  that  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

