

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2015                          |On 2 July 2015                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                        Luane Lidiang Landes Albigaus
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee instructed by M Reale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil who was born on  6  January  1992.
    On 12 May 2014, she applied for a residence card as confirmation of her
    right of residence as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended).  On 21 July 2014, the
    Secretary of State refused her application under reg  17  of  the  2006
    Regs.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that under  reg  8  the
    appellant was an "extended family member"  of  her  brother-in-law,  an
    Italian national, who lived in the UK.

The Appeal

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 8 December 2014, Judge Camp  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  In order to qualify as an "extended family member" under reg 8
    of the EEA Regulations 2006, the appellant had to  establish  that  she
    was (1) dependent or was a member of the household of  her  brother-in-
    law in Brazil before she came to the UK and (2)  was  either  dependent
    upon him now or lived as a member of his household in the  UK.   Whilst
    the judge accepted that the appellant was "currently a  member  of  the
    sponsor's household", he did not accept  that  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant and other witnesses that the  appellant  had  been  dependent
    upon her brother-in-law while she lived in Brazil or had been a  member
    of his household.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 11
    February 2015, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lambert)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the following ground:

         "The judge made adverse credibility findings relating to the  issue
         of dependence on the sponsor outside and since arrival in  the  UK.
         The  grounds  effectively  argue  lack  of  logic  in  the  judge's
         reasoning and undue reliance on failure by the sponsor  to  mention
         the appellant's presence in  the  family  home  at  another  appeal
         hearing at which the judge himself notes this issue  may  not  have
         been  relevant.   They  are  both  arguable  and  material  to  the
         outcome."

 4. On 25 February 2015, the Secretary of State filed a  Rule  24  response
    arguing that the judge's adverse credibility finding and therefore  his
    conclusion that the appellant had not  established  she  was  dependent
    upon the sponsor in Brazil were sustainable in law.

 5. Thus, the appeal came before us.

The Submissions

 6. Mr Lee challenged the judge's adverse finding on two bases.

 7. First, he submitted that the judge had been wrong to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding in relation to the appellant's mother simply on the
    basis that at an earlier appeal, in respect of  an  application  for  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations 2006 by her and  her  husband,
    that she had  failed  to  mention  that  the  appellant  lived  in  the
    sponsor's house (as was now claimed) at that time.   Mr  Lee  submitted
    that that finding was impermissible as it was not clear upon what basis
    the appellant's mother had given evidence at the previous  hearing,  in
    particular in response to what questions.

 8. Secondly, Mr Lee submitted that, in any  event,  even  if  the  adverse
    credibility finding was sustainable  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    mother, the judge had wrongly treated the witnesses  as  a  homogeneous
    group.  The adverse finding in relation to the appellant's mother could
    not, he submitted, taint the  evidence  of  the  other  witnesses.   In
    particular, he relied upon the judge's phraseology in para  31  of  his
    determination where he had referred to the "overall lack of credibility
    of the witnesses".  Mr Lee submitted that the judge gave no reasons for
    doubting the credibility of the other witnesses.  His  reasons  related
    wholly to the appellant's mother.

 9. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had been  entitled  to  take  into
    account  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  mother  in  the  previous
    determination when she had not  mentioned  all  the  occupants  of  the
    sponsor's house by omitting the appellant.   The  appellant's  mother's
    evidence was supported  by  the  other  witnesses  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that there was an  element  of  collusion  to  falsify
    evidence.  He submitted that it was properly open to the judge  on  the
    evidence to find all the witnesses to lack credibility.

Discussion

10. Dealing first with  Mr  Lee's  first  submission  in  relation  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's mother the judge dealt with this at para
    29 of his determination as follows:

         "The fact that the appellant's presence in the sponsor's  home  was
         not mentioned at the previous hearing may not, as Mr Lee  submitted
         on the appellant's behalf, be of direct relevance  to  her  factual
         situation, but it is clearly of relevance to the credibility of her
         mother and other family members who gave evidence at  the  hearing.
         It is not, in my view, sufficient for the appellant's mother to say
         that she simply answered the questions she had  been  asked.   What
         she  was  asked,  as  appears  from  the   previous   determination
         (paragraph 20), seems to have been to describe her  current  living
         arrangements.  She did so in  some  detail,  stating  which  family
         members slept in which rooms.  The house is small,  with  only  two
         bedrooms.  The occupants, according to Mrs de Landes Pereira,  were
         the sponsor and his wife,  their  children,  and  herself  and  her
         husband.  The appellant, whose evidence is that she had been living
         there for over three months at the time, was not mentioned."

11. We do not accept Mr Lee's submission that the judge was not entitled to
    take into  account  the  inconsistency  between  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's mother given at  the  earlier  hearing  and  what  was  now
    claimed that the appellant had already been  living  at  the  sponsor's
    house for three months.

12.  The  evidence  of  the  appellant's  mother  was   recorded   in   the
    determination of Judge Waygood promulgated on 22 January 2014  at  para
    20 as follows:

         "E (that is the appellant's mother) said she  had  lived  with  her
         daughter for one and a half to two years.  The  last  transfer  her
         daughter had made to her was about two years  ago.   She  confirmed
         they (that is the appellant's mother and her  husband)  lived  with
         their daughter and there are two bedrooms  at  the  property.   She
         said that she and her husband slept in one room, her  daughter  and
         son-in-law in the other bedroom with one child, the 2-year-old  and
         the other child sleeps in the living room.  There is a mattress put
         in the living room on the floor.  She said that  they  are  looking
         for a larger house."

13. No mention is made of the appellant despite the comprehensive catalogue
    of occupants of  the  sponsor's  house.   It  was  no  answer  for  the
    appellant's mother to say that she only answered the question that  she
    was asked in order to explain the  absence  of  any  reference  to  the
    appellant.

14. We see nothing impermissible in the judge's reasoning in  paragraph  29
    based upon an obvious inconsistency in the evidence of the  appellant's
    mother, upon which, he was entitled to  base  his  adverse  credibility
    finding.

15. That said, we do accept Mr Lee's second submission.  The focus  of  the
    judge's reasons is directed towards the credibility of the  appellant's
    mother.   However  at  para  31  he  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's  sister  concerning  the
    crucial issue of whether the appellant  had  been  sent  money  by  the
    sponsor or her sister as follows:

         "An attempt was made by the appellant, the sponsor and his wife  to
         explain why it was the sponsor who sent money to his mother for the
         benefit of the appellant and the appellant's sister who sent  money
         to the appellant.  The sponsor's wife has  her  own  bank  account.
         Although I do not reject out of  hand  the  explanation  given,  it
         would be a natural inference that the sponsor  was  supporting  his
         mother whereas the appellant's sister was supporting the appellant.
          It is not axiomatic that a married couple treat  their  individual
         finances as indistinguishable.  In the light of the overall lack of
         credibility  of  the  witnesses,  I  do  not  consider   that   the
         explanation given is persuasive."

16. As Mr Lee submitted, the judge doubted the explanation - which  he  did
    not "reject out of hand" - because the "overall lack of credibility  of
    the witnesses".  However, his reasons within the preceding paras 29  to
    30 are concerned exclusively  with  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    mother and therefore it is difficult to see what  is  intended  by  the
    statement of the  "overall  lack  of  credibility  of  the  witnesses".
    Subsequent to para 31, the judge again expressed an adverse view of the
    appellant's mother as a witness stating, at para  35,  "That  strenuous
    attempts were being made to obfuscate the facts".

17. As regards the other witnesses, the only comment of substance  directed
    towards their evidence is at para 36 where he states:

         "I am satisfied that matters emerged at the hearing  during  cross-
         examination which the witnesses  would  have  preferred  to  remain
         unknown and had deliberately not mentioned previously."

18. The judge offers no further explanation of the "matters [which] emerged
    at the hearing".  It may be that the judge had in mind that  the  other
    witnesses, in particular  the  sponsor,  had  also  not  mentioned  the
    appellant was living at his house but, he had explained,  that  he  did
    not believe it was relevant to his  mother-in-law's  appeal  (see  para
    17).  It was also the explanation of the appellant who said that no one
    had asked about her at the previous  hearing  (see  para  12).   Whilst
    there may well have been aspects of the witnesses' evidence  which,  if
    properly explored in the judge's reasoning, could have been relevant to
    his credibility finding in relation to those witnesses, it is far  from
    clear to us upon  what  basis  the  judge  determined  that  the  other
    witnesses were not credible.  It was  not  sufficient  to  doubt  their
    credibility simply on the basis of the adverse credibility  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's mother.  The judge did not engage with  the
    other witnesses'  explanations  of  why  they  had  not  mentioned  the
    appellant in their evidence.   In short, the judge failed to  give  any
    or any adequate reasons for his conclusion  of  "the  overall  lack  of
    credibility of the witnesses".

19. For these reasons, we are satisfied that the judge materially erred  in
    law in reaching his adverse finding and in dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal.  In our view, none of his findings can stand.  The  credibility
    of all of the witnesses needs to be considered properly -  individually
    and cumulatively.

Decision and Disposal

20. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  2006  involved  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision cannot stand and  we  set  it
    aside.

21. We were invited to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
    basis that fresh findings were required on all the issues under  reg  8
    as to whether the appellant is  an  "extended  family  member"  of  the
    sponsor.   Applying  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statement, having regard to the nature and extent of  the  findings  of
    fact required, in our judgment this is a proper case to  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

22. For these reasons, we remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    rehearing de novo before a judge other than Judge Camp.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

