
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 11 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                  (Sitting as judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    ROZER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M M Rahman, Legal Representative, Simon Noble
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no  need  for,  and  do  not  make,  an  order  restricting  the
    publication of details about this case.

 2. The appellant appealed a decision of the respondent on 16 July 2014  to
    refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.   The
    application  was  refused  because  the  appellant  did  not   have   a
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies, commonly referred to as a  CAS.
    It  had  been  withdrawn.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    apparently in the genuine belief that he was entitled by reason of some
    imprecisely identified policy to a period of 60 days' grace in which to
    sort out his circumstances and make a new application.

 3. When the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain  sitting
    at Richmond he found, correctly, that the strict  requirements  of  the
    Rule were not met.  He found that  there  was  no  valid  form  of  CAS
    because it had been withdrawn by the college the  appellant  wanted  to
    attend. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly minded to dismiss the
    appeal but was concerned at the strongly advanced, but not particularly
    clearly explained, argument that there was a relevant  policy,  and  he
    gave directions that the appellant produce a  copy  of  the  policy  by
    sending it by facsimile to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Something was sent in response to directions but it was  not  a  policy
    document and the First-tier  Tribunal,  wholly  consistently  with  the
    directions given, went on to determine the  appeal.   Contrary  to  the
    suggestion in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not dismiss the appeal  because  directions  had  not
    been followed or because the policy document  had  not  been  sent  but
    because the appellant did not comply with the Rules.  He had not got  a
    form CAS.

 5. The  appellant  was  not  satisfied  served  grounds  of  appeal  which
    persuaded a First-tier Tribunal Judge that there might have  been  some
    unfairness.

 6. We make clear that we are not aware of any Court  of  Appeal  authority
    confirming that there no general duty on the Secretary of State to help
    people who do not fill in their forms properly or  do  not  support  an
    application with the required documents. We are however quite satisfied
    that it is wrong to suggest that there is any such  duty.   It  is  the
    appellant's duty to comply with the Rules. This was  confirmed  in  the
    case of EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517. For example at paragraph 33 Sales LJ said:

         "I do not consider that an approach by the Secretary of State which
         involves a simple check whether an applicant has in place  a  valid
         CAS letter at the time the decision is made on  their  application,
         rather than seeking to inquire further into the  background  if  it
         appears  that  a  CAS  letter  has  been  withdrawn,  involves  any
         unfairness to an applicant for which the Secretary of  State  bears
         responsibility. The  PBS  places  the  onus  of  ensuring  that  an
         application is supported by evidence to meet the relevant test  for
         grant of leave to enter or  remain  upon  the  applicant,  and  the
         Immigration Rules give applicants fair notice of this. The  essence
         of the CAS element within the PBS is that the  Secretary  of  State
         relies on a check on certification by approved colleges,  and  does
         not have to investigate further. It is inherent in the scheme  that
         an applicant takes the risk of administrative error on the part  of
         a college."

 7.  In  response   to   Judge   Hussain's   directions   the   appellant's
    representatives sent a "refusal" and a "determination" in the  case  of
    another of their clients, a Mr Rahman, who appeared to  be  in  similar
    circumstances to the present appellant and who appeared to have got the
    relief that he wanted.  Certainly that was the judge's finding  in  the
    case relied upon and that decision has not been appealed.  We  have  to
    say it does not seem to us that that decision was right in law.  Rather
    we think that the judge just made a mistake but, as was explained to us
    by Miss Brocklesby-Weller, the Secretary of State had no need  to  take
    matters further because there was a change  of  circumstances  in  that
    case which meant that the Secretary of State decided it  was  right  to
    extend  leave  anyway.   The  decision  to  extend  leave  was  not  an
    endorsement of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It  may  simply
    be fortuitous but whatever the explanation the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not bind the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  this  case
    and most emphatically does not bind us.

 8. We do know that there is a  policy  that  might  be  thought  relevant.
    Indeed a copy of the policy was produced today. It  is  a  policy  that
    applies in certain circumstances that do not exist here. The key to  it
    is that it is a policy that applies when a college has had  its  status
    withdrawn by the Secretary of State. In those circumstances, subject to
    many qualifications that  need  to  be  looked  at  in  the  particular
    circumstances, the Secretary of State will give an  applicant  60  days
    leave in which to make a fresh application.  That is not a policy  that
    applies to the circumstances here which is  the  circumstances  of  the
    college withdrawing the CAS.

 9. If what we have been told is right, the appellant may have a  justified
    sense of grievance towards the college and may feels that his  CAS  was
    withdrawn unfairly, as a way of putting pressure on him in a  financial
    dispute.  We are in no position to make any findings about that  beyond
    saying that if it is right we can understand his  irritation.   As  was
    explained by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the  case  of  EK,  in  those
    circumstances his remedy lies in an  action  in  contract  against  the
    college.

10. It is quite clear to us that this is an appeal that ought to have  been
    dismissed for the very  reason  it  was  dismissed.   It  is  that  the
    appellant did not have a CAS that the Rules required him to have.   The
    only reason it has taken the course that it has is that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was tumbling over backwards to be fair and that  led  to
    further difficulties.  If the First-tier Tribunal Judge  really  though
    it right to permit documents to be served after the hearing  he  really
    should have given directions that  the  documents  be  served  on  both
    parties and to have gives both  parties  and  opportunity  for  written
    submissions.  If that had been done it  should  have  been  plain  that
    there was nothing in the appellant's point.

11. We understand that from  the  appellant's  point  of  view  this  is  a
    frustrating decision. If his explanation to us is  right  then  he  has
    done nothing wrong. Rather he has been let down by the college. Be that
    as it may, there is no relevant policy here.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not think there  was  a  relevant  policy  but  he  gave  the
    appellant an opportunity to produce the relevant policy  and  none  was
    produced. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal.  We  find
    he was right to do that and we find there was a no error of law on  his
    part and we dismiss the appeal that is in front of us.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 June 2015                    |

