
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/31645/2015
                                                               IA/31648/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2016                   |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AMARVEERPAL KAUR
                               SUMANDEP SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Sufian, Counsel instructed by Strand Chambers
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I see no need for and not make any order restricting reporting about
       this case.

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the present  respondents
      (hereinafter "the claimants") against a decision of the  Secretary  of
      State on 14 September 2016 refusing them leave to remain in the United
      Kingdom.  The first claimant was seeking leave as a  student  and  the
      second claimant as her dependant husband.

   2. I think that the unhappy saga of the involvement of ETS is now so well-
      known in our jurisprudence that it is sufficient if I refer to it  for
      the purposes of explaining  my  decision,  slightly  colloquially,  as
      "another ETS case". It must, of course, be decided on its own merits.

   3. There were two points of contention before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      The first was whether in fact the first claimant had obtained  a  test
      result improperly which is what the Secretary of State  alleged.   The
      second was whether she supported her application  with  a  valid  form
      CAS.  I will deal with that point first because the answer is,  in  my
      judgment, quite clear.

   4. The first claimant did not have a valid CAS.  She said  that  she  did
      not know that she  did  not  have  a  valid  CAS  when  she  made  her
      application because it had not come to her attention that her CAS  had
      been cancelled by her college. That might be right but  it  is  wholly
      irrelevant.  The status of the CAS is a matter of fact and it does not
      require knowledge on the part of a claimant to maintain or  extinguish
      its existence.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was just wrong  to  find
      for the claimant on that point.  Her  knowledge  was  immaterial.   It
      follows therefore that I have to set aside the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal and I have to  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  both
      appeals.

   5. I say at this point that Mr Sufian has been as helpful as  he  can  be
      expected to have been but he really had no answer to that  point.   He
      says that it is the first claimant's case that it is not true  to  say
      that the CAS was cancelled by the  college.  Rather  the  college  was
      suspended  and  so  the  CAS  was  invalid.  He  had  some  incomplete
      instructions to explain  his  submission  but  said  that  there  were
      judicial review proceedings.  He could not take the point any  further
      and I decline to adjourn proceedings to given him another  opportunity
      to develop it.  This is a point  that  should  have  been  sorted  out
      before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

   6. His instructions were vague and although I certainly do not in any way
      criticise Mr Sufian for making an application I was  not  prepared  to
      give him further time to deal with the point that should already  have
      been anticipated and answered.

   7. This still leaves the question of the finding that  the  claimant  did
      not use an improperly obtained ETS certificate.  I have to say that  I
      find the Secretary of State criticisms of that finding are  made  out.
      The problem is at paragraph 30 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
      where the judge said:

  "I have regard to the ETS invalid Test Analysis.  It  gives  no  specific
  reason for the invalidation of the  test.   I  have  had  regard  to  the
  statement of Rebecca Collins.  This is a generic statement and, whereas I
  accept it supports  the  impersonation  of  ETS  tests,  it  contains  no
  information pertaining to the Appellant."

   8. The Secretary of State maintained  that  this  does  not  show  proper
      consideration of the nature of the evidence in ETS  cases.   The  fact
      that there was  an  ETS  valid  test  analysis  which  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge noted means that the test analysis has been  picked  up
      by  a  computer  and  then  checked  by  two   human   agents   acting
      independently and they were all satisfied that the test  result  could
      not be confidently attributed to the claimant.  This  is  prima  facie
      evidence that the test result was obtained improperly but the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not reflect this.

   9. The  decision  does  give  proper  reasons  for  accepting  the  first
      claimant's evidence.  The claimant has now has passed  an  appropriate
      test and had a good command of English.  That does not mean  that  she
      had the necessary command of English at the necessary  time.   Neither
      does it mean that she actually took the test but  it  certainly  helps
      her case.

  10. The judge also discounted the  criticisms  of  the  claimant  for  not
      knowing the name of the test centre which she attended.  She  gave  an
      explanation which the judge found to be satisfactory.

  11. This leads the finding that the  claimant  obtained  her  test  result
      lawfully in an unsatisfactory state.  It was supported  by  persuasive
      evidence but the decision was based on an understanding  of  the  Home
      Office's evidence which is inadequate.

  12. I have to set aside the entire decision and I make it plain I  do  not
      reserve the finding that the test certificate  was  obtained  properly
      but neither do I make a finding that it was  obtained  improperly.   I
      just do not know and I decline to take the matter any further  because
      it is not my function to make findings on points that are not decisive
      because either or both of the parties would find it convenient.   That
      is not the role of this Tribunal and  I  decline  to  do  it.   In  my
      judgment  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the   ETS
      certificate was obtained properly is unreliable.  It  is  based  on  a
      misunderstanding of the evidence and I set it aside.

  13. I hope that it is clear from the above that I set aside and substitute
      a decision dismissing the appeal because the claimant did not  have  a
      form CAS and not because she has been shown to  have  relied  upon  an
      improperly obtained ETS certificate.

  14. The second claimant's case follows the first claimant's case.

  15. It follows that  I  allow  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and  I
      substitute a decision dismissing the appeals of the First  and  Second
      Respondent against the Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal and I substitute a decision  dismissing  the
appeals of the First and Second Respondent against the Secretary of  State's
decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 November 2016               |





