
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 November 2017                       |On 28 December 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            mr tara bikram thapa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley to dismiss his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse him further leave to remain in the
    UK as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant  pursuant  to  paragraph  245  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

2.    The  appellant  also  appealed  against  a  decision  in  relation  to
    paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Rules  in  relation  to  a  Certificate  of
    Sponsorship allegedly produced through deception.

3.   The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK on 30 October  2009  as
    a Tier 4 student and at various stages his leave was extended to remain
    from 9 October 2013 to 9 July 2014.  On 9 July 2014, the appellant made
    an in-time application for further leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier
    2 (General) Migrant.

4.   Between December 2009 and August 2013, the appellant  worked  part-time
    at "Al Boccon D'vino"  in  management.   Before  his  leave  to  remain
    expired he was also looking for a further job in a  similar  field.   A
    friend told him about a job vacancy at Al Faisal restaurant.  Following
    an interview, he was selected for the job.  However,  before  he  could
    start work, he first had to sort out his visa as he did not have  leave
    to work.  His employer, Al Faisal, issued him with a sponsorship letter
    known as COS (Certificate of Sponsorship).  He made the application for
    leave to be employed by Al Faisal on 9 July 2014 on the day  his  leave
    to remain was expiring, by attending the visa service so that he  could
    receive a decision promptly.  He had been kept  waiting  since  9  July
    2014 and in the meantime his sponsor's licence was revoked.

5.   On 2 September 2015, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  application
    because she was not satisfied that the appellant had provided  a  valid
    Certificate of Sponsorship reference number and had not therefore  been
    awarded  any  points  of  sponsorship.   UKVI  conducted  checks  which
    confirmed that the sponsor, Al Faisal, had  not  issued  the  appellant
    with a Certificate of Sponsorship and  they  did  not  hold  a  sponsor
    licence.  Accordingly, the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245HD of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied the appellant did not gain the certificate through deception.

6.   The appellant informed the judge that he expected 60 calendar  days  to
    be given an opportunity to locate an alternative  sponsor,  but  simply
    received a refusal letter stating  his  application  had  been  refused
    because he had an invalid COS.  He told the  judge  that  the  COS  was
    genuine.  He believed that the respondent had acted unlawfully.  At the
    hearing before the judge the HOPO, Mr Lumb,  indicated  in  submissions
    that he could not specifically point within the  respondent's  file  to
    identified  evidence   in   relation   to   deceptive   or   fraudulent
    documentation, and he proposed, instead, to  ask  that  the  appeal  be
    dismissed in relation to paragraph 245 requirements in relation to  the
    absence of a lawful Certificate of Sponsorship.

7.   The judge accepted that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  that
    he had been in  possession of a lawful Certificate of Sponsorship.   He
    accepted Mr Lumb's submission that there was no formal requirement  for
    the appellant to be afforded an additional 60 days in which to identify
    an alternative sponsor, in relation. The judge held that this provision
    only applied in relation to Tier 4 applications, and not those relating
    to a Tier 2 visa.

8.   The judge went on to say at paragraph 22 that in his oral  evidence  Mr
    Thapa accepted that the sponsor licence in relation to  the  Birmingham
    restaurant did not seek to continue in existence  after  the  appellant
    had formally applied for it.  The judge made  no  further  or  separate
    findings in relation to paragraph 322(2) of the Rules.

9.   The appellant appealed the judge's decision on two  grounds:  (1)  that
    the judge failed to apply the respondent's  60  days  policy;  and  (2)
    failed to make a finding on the paragraph 322 allegation given that the
    SSHD had not provided evidence of any deception.

10.  From the outset,  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  in  view  of  Mr  Lumb's
    concession on the paragraph 322  point,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to make a finding on this issue in  favour  of  the  appellant.
    That disposed of the appellant's second ground.

11.  I also find that the judge erred in finding that  the  respondent's  60
    days policy only applied to a Tier 4 application and not to  a  Tier  2
    application.

12.  The  appellant's  first  ground  argued  that  it  was  unfair  of  the
    respondent not to grant him 60 days to find a new sponsor in line  with
    her policy.

13.  I shall at this stage quote the policy. It says:-

     "Employees: if your visa sponsor loses their licence

         You'll have to leave your job and leave the  UK  if  your  employer
         loses  their  sponsor  licence  -  unless  you  make  a  new   visa
         application to stay in the UK.


         You could also be affected if:


         .    their licence is suspended
         .    they're taken over
         .    they don't renew their licence


         What happens to you depends on whether you're already in the k when
         your employer's sponsor licence changes.


         If you're already in the UK


         When your sponsor loses their licence your:


         .    certificate of sponsorship is cancelled
         .    visa is limited to 60 days (or however long you have  left  on
             the visa if it's less than 60 days)


         You'll have to leave your job and leave the UK unless  you  make  a
         new visa application within that time - check your eligibility  for
         visas.


         If you're involved in the  reasons  why  your  sponsor  lost  their
         licence, your visa will be withdrawn and you'll have to  leave  the
         UK immediately."

14.  Mr Khan for the appellant submitted that the Secretary  of  State  does
    not say that the COS was invalid.  However, if the Secretary  of  State
    is  saying  that  the  COS  was  obtained  fraudulently,  which  brings
    paragraph 322 into play, we need to know the reason why  the  Secretary
    of State believed it was obtained fraudulently.  If  the  Secretary  of
    State revoked the COS for this reason,  then  the  Secretary  of  State
    needed to give the appellant 60 days to find a new sponsor.

15.  Mr Khan argued also that if the Secretary of State  has  conceded  that
    there is not a 322 point in that there is no deception, the  respondent
    has not provided any  evidence  that  the  COS  was  invalid.   If  the
    Secretary of State was conceding the  paragraph  322  point,  then  the
    issue of invalidity does not come into it.

16.  Mr Clarke relied on the Secretary of State's policy guidance.  He  said
    the reality is that the appellant applied on the day his visa ran  out,
    so he could not get the 60 days.  He said  Mr  Khan  did  not  identify
    anything in the policy that would require the respondent to  grant  the
    appellant 60 days in order to find an  alternative  sponsor.   He  said
    when the sponsor lost its licence, it was not in  place  and  therefore
    the appellant could not be afforded the 60 days.

17.  Mr Khan relied on the decision in Thakur (PBS  decision  -  common  law
    fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT  00151  (IAC)  to  argue  that  the
    respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    respondent's failure to comply with a common law duty to act fairly  in
    the decision-making process when an appellant had not had  an  adequate
    opportunity of finding another sponsor following the withdrawal of  his
    sponsor's licence or making further representations before the decision
    was made,  meant  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  unfair.   The
    decision was not in accordance with the spirit of the policy.

18.  I find for the reasons given earlier, that the judge erred  in  law  in
    not  making  a  decision  under  paragraph  322(2)  in  favour  of  the
    appellant. Given that the respondent was conceding  the  paragraph  322
    point, it means that the issue of invalidity does not come into it.

19.  In any event, my understanding of the Tier  2  policy  is  that  if  an
    appellant already had leave to remain as an employee of his sponsor and
    the Certificate of Sponsorship  was  cancelled,  then  the  appellant's
    leave was limited to 60 days or whatever was left on his visa if it was
    less than 60 days.  This appellant has never had leave to remain as  an
    employee of a sponsor.  Until  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  his
    application and granted him leave to remain  as  an  employee  with  Al
    Faisal, I find that the appellant could not bring  himself  within  the
    Secretary of State's policy in  respect  of  his  Tier  2  application.
    Furthermore, the appellant had no leave left as his visa ran out on the
    day he made the application.  Therefore, I fail to see  on  what  basis
    his visa could be limited to 60 days as a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant,
    when he did not have such leave prior to making his  application  on  9
    July 2014.

20.  On the evidence, I reject Mr. Khan's  argument  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

21.  I find that the judge  did  make  errors  of  law.   Those  errors  are
    however not material as  the  judge's  decision  that  the  appellant's
    appeal could not succeed shall stand.




Notice of Decision

22.  I find that the Secretary of State's decision was  in  accordance  with
    the law.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


23.  No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date: 22 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun








