
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2017                           |On 23rd August 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MD SADIKUR RAHMAN CHOWDHURY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Steven Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Michael Biggs of Counsel, Universal Solicitors


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   In this appeal, the Secretary of State is the appellant and,  to  avoid
    confusion, I shall refer to her as being the, "claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh, who was  born  on  10th  May
    1986.  On 10th  September  2015,  the  claimant  refused  to  vary  the
    respondent's leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant and decided to remove the respondent from the
    United Kingdom by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration
    and Nationality Act 2006.  The respondent appealed and his  appeal  was
    heard at Taylor House on 27th  October  2016,  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R G Walters.

3.   The basis for the claimant's decision was that, in conjunction  with  a
    previous application for an extension of his student visa (made on 22nd
    December 2011), the  respondent  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from
    Educational  Testing  Service  ("ETS")  to  the  claimant  and  to  his
    educational sponsor, in order for the latter to provide the  respondent
    with a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  ("CAS").   The  claimant
    contends that ETS has found evidence to conclude that  the  examination
    was taken by a proxy and not by the respondent and, therefore, declared
    the  respondent's  test,  "invalid".   The  claimant  was,   therefore,
    satisfied that a false document had been  used  by  the  respondent  in
    connection with his previous application and so refused the application
    under paragraph 322(2) of HC 395, as amended ("the Immigration Rules").



3.   Judge Walters, in a brief determination which fails to set out  even  a
    precis of the oral evidence he heard, found the  respondent  to  be  an
    honest and reliable witness and accepted his evidence.  He  found  that
    the respondent had not made false representations to ETS and  that  the
    result of his test was not, therefore, invalid.   In  consequence,  the
    judge found that paragraph 322(2) did not apply to the  respondent  and
    allowed the respondent's appeal.

4.   Dissatisfied with the judge's determination, the  claimant  sought  and
    obtained permission to  appeal.   In  granting  permission,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ransley thought that it was arguable as submitted in the
    grounds that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding that
    the claimant had not discharged the legal burden for proving  that  the
    respondent had acted dishonestly.

5.   The grounds point out that the Secretary of State provided a number  of
    documents  in  support  of  the  ETS  allegation,   including   witness
    statements from Mr Peter Millington, Ms Rebecca Collings and Ms  Hilary
    Rackstraw and the ETS SELT sourced data.  The grounds assert  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons for  finding
    the respondent to be credible and, in reaching material  findings,  the
    First-tier Tribunal relied on the respondent's level of spoken  English
    at the appeal hearing.  As the grounds point out, there may be  reasons
    why a person who is able to speak English to the required level  would,
    nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate to undertake the ETS test
    on their behalf, or otherwise cheat and the judge erred in  failing  to
    consider the possibility of these other reasons.

6.   At the hearing before me, Mr Walker relied on the grounds  and  pointed
    out that the judge had nowhere engaged with  the  claimant's  evidence.
    For the respondent, Mr Biggs reminded me of paragraph 36 of South Bucks
    District Council and Another v Porter [2004] UKHL 33.

7.   He suggested that at paragraph  4  of  the  judge's  determination  the
    judge demonstrates that he has examined and read the claimant's bundle.
     Mr Biggs suggested that what the judge had said at paragraph 4 of  the
    determination was an adequate consideration of the claimant's  evidence
    by the judge.  His findings of  fact  start  at  paragraph  11  and  at
    paragraphs 12 to 15 the judge analyses the evidence of  the  respondent
    and his conclusions at paragraph 19 are he submitted  wholly  adequate.
    The Secretary of State is very  well  aware  of  the  reasons  for  the
    judge's finding in favour of the respondent, Mr  Biggs  suggested.   He
    found the respondent to be a credible witness.  Any error of law cannot
    be immaterial because he made an unassailable conclusion in respect  of
    the respondent's credibility.  In addressing me in  closing  Mr  Walker
    simply emphasised that the determination was  not  adequately  reasoned
    and that there had been no engagement at all  by  the  judge  with  the
    respondent's evidence.  I reserved my decision.

8.   At paragraph 36 of South Bucks District Council and  Another  v  Porter
    Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood said:-

         "36. The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must
             be adequate.  They must enable the reader  to  understand  why
             the matter was decided as it was  and  what  conclusions  were
             reached on the  'principle  important  controversial  issues',
             disclosing how any issue of fact or law was resolved.  Reasons
             can be briefly stated, the degree  of  particularity  required
             depending entirely on the nature of  the  issues  falling  for
             decision.  The reason must not  give  rise  to  a  substantial
             doubt as to whether the  decision  maker  erred  in  law,  for
             example by misunderstanding some relevant policy or some other
             important matter or by failing to reach a rational decision on
             relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will not readily
             be drawn.  The reasons need refer only to the main  issues  in
             dispute, not to every  material  consideration.   They  should
             enable disappointed developers to assess  their  prospects  of
             obtaining some alternative planning  permission,  or,  as  the
             case may be, their unsuccessful opponents  to  understand  how
             the policy or approach underlying the grant of permission  may
             impact upon future such applications.  Decision  letters  must
             be read in a straightforward manner, recognising that they are
             addressed to parties well aware of the issues involved and the
             arguments advanced.  A reasoned challenge will only succeed if
             the  party  aggrieved  can  satisfy  the  court  that  he  has
             genuinely been substantially  prejudiced  by  the  failure  to
             provide an adequately reasoned decision".

9.   The respondent's bundle, which, as he confirms at paragraph  4  of  his
    determination, was before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  contained  a
    nine-page witness statement by Rebecca Collings dated 23rd  June  2014.
    It  also  contained  a  fourteen-page  witness  statement  from   Peter
    Millington dated 23rd June 2014 and a two-page  statement  from  Hilary
    Rackstraw, a senior caseworker employed by the Home Office  dated  25th
    October, 2015.  The bundle relied upon by the Secretary of  State  also
    contained a report on forensic speaker comparison tests  undertaken  by
    ETS and a witness statement from Professor Peter French of J  P  French
    Associates Forensic Speech and Acoustics Laboratory  and  Professor  of
    forensic speech science at the Department of  Language  and  Linguistic
    Science at the University of York, extending  to  fourteen  pages.   At
    paragraph 4 of the judge's determination, he says that  he  heard  oral
    evidence  from  the  respondent  and   oral   submissions   from   both
    representatives, all of which are  fully  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and have been taken into account by him.  He has also taken
    into account the following documents placed before him:

         (1)  the appellant's bundle;

         (2)  the respondent's bundle.

10.  That, with respect, is the  only  reference  the  judge  makes  to  the
    documents placed before him on behalf of the claimant.  Nowhere does he
    refer to any of the specific evidence relied on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and  nor  does  he  indicate  why  he  prefers  the  respondent's
    evidence.

11.  In paragraphs 11 to 18 the judge said this:-

         "11.     The [respondent] gave evidence  and  adopted  his  witness
             statement at P2 onwards.  In it he states that  he  personally
             attended the TOEIC English test and did not use a  proxy  test
             taker.

         12.  In support of the [respondent's]  competence  in  the  English
             language he submits certificates relating to his IELTS test in
             January 2009, a communicative English language training course
             in March to May 2009 and an ETS TOEIC test in 2011.

         13.  Additionally the [respondent] states that since coming to  the
             UK he has obtained  an  advanced  diploma  in  human  resource
             management, a BA Hons in business administration and an MSc in
             international marketing.  He  produces  the  certificates  for
             these and states that all the instruction  for  these  courses
             and examinations were in English.

         14.  The [respondent] then gave detailed evidence  in  his  witness
             statements as to the actual test and its component parts taken
             on 22.12.11.

         15.  The [respondent] gave evidence in English and demonstrated his
             fluency in the language.  I found him an honest  and  reliable
             witness and accepted his evidence.

         16.  Paragraph 322(2) bears the heading:

             'Grounds on which leave to remain and variation  of  leave  to
             enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  should  normally  be
             refused' and continues:

                  '(2) the making of false representations or the failure to
                      disclose  any  material  fact  for  the  purpose   of
                      obtaining leave to enter or a previous  variation  of
                      leave in order to obtain documents from the Secretary
                      of State or a third party required in support of  the
                      application  for  leave  to  enter  on   a   previous
                      variation of leave ...'

         17.   The  [claimant's]  allegation  is   that   the   [respondent]
             represented to ETS that it was he who was answering  the  test
             whereas it was in fact a  proxy  test  taker.   ETS  therefore
             issued the TOEIC certificate for the [respondent]  to  produce
             to the [claimant].

         18.   I  did  not  find  that  the  [respondent]  made  such  false
             representations to ETS."

12.   In  reaching  the  conclusion  he  does  at  paragraph   18   of   his
    determination, First Tier Tribunal Judge Walters has failed to  examine
    and consider the witness statements  relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Instead, the judge  appears  to  have  been  satisfied  by  the
    English language certificates and the  fact  that  the  respondent  has
    obtained a diploma in human resource management, a Bachelor's degree in
    business  administration  and  a  Master's  degree   in   international
    marketing, all taught in  English.   The  judge  also  found  that  the
    respondent  demonstrated  his  fluency  in  the  language  when  giving
    evidence to him, but of course that was almost  five  years  after  the
    test in question.  Having looked at the evidence of the respondent, the
    judge should have considered the witness statements and other  evidence
    relied upon by the claimant.

13.  The First Tier Tribunal Judge says in paragraph 4 of his  determination
    that he has read the claimant's bundle, but he does not engage with  it
    and explain why  he  prefers  the  evidence  of  the  respondent.   The
    evidence of the claimant makes  very  serious  allegations,  suggesting
    that the respondent has been a party  to  an  attempted  fraud  on  the
    claimant.  The evidence was such and the allegations so serious that it
    needed more than a mere acknowledgement, which is all  this  judge  has
    given to  it.   It  needed  to  be  carefully  examined  and  a  proper
    explanation give  as  to  why  the  respondent's  evidence  was  to  be
    preferred.

14.  It was simply not sufficient to find that the respondent was  credible,
    without undertaking an examination and consideration of the  claimant's
    evidence. It appears that, the judge was influenced by  the  fact  that
    the respondent had gained qualifications  after  being  taught  in  the
    English language. He also appears influenced by the  fact  that  before
    him, the  respondent,  "demonstrated  his  fluency  in  the  language".
    However, the judge does not appear to have considered that even  though
    the respondent might very well have been qualified in 2011 to pass  the
    TOEIC test, he may have used  a  proxy  instead  of  sitting  the  test
    himself.

15.  I have concluded that the judge's reasons are inadequate, they  do  not
    enable the reader to understand why the matter was decided  as  it  was
    and what conclusions were reached on "principal important controversial
    issues", disclosing how any issue of law or fact was resolved.

16.  It might well be  that,  having  considered  the  claimant's  evidence,
    together with the evidence of the respondent, another  judge  may  very
    well reach the same conclusion as this judge and allow the respondent's
    appeal, however, for  the  reasons  I  have  given,  I  find  that  the
    determination of Judge Walters cannot stand.  I set it aside and direct
    that the appeal should be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal by a judge
    other than Judge R G Walters.  Two hours  should  be  allowed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley



Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
 22nd August 2017
