
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31128/2014
                                                               IA/28705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Sent                                 |
|On 29 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                       Albert Ufuoma Akpoghor-Sitebro
                           Maria Akpoghor-Sitebro
                         (anonymity Orders NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Shittu, Legal Representative, Focus Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL
          (TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008, RULE 17)

1.   These cases come before me today seeking to challenge the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain promulgated on  24  October  2014
    dismissing the Appellants' appeals against the  Respondent's  decisions
    dated 6 December 2013 to refuse variation of leave  to  remain  and  to
    remove the Appellants pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   It is unnecessary for me to rehearse the relevant personal  immigration
    histories of the Appellants: these are a matter of record on file.

3.   The issue upon which the Appellants have  challenged  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is essentially  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    proceeded to a determination 'on the papers'  in  accordance  with  the
    request of the Appellants in their Notices of Appeal, but did so  prior
    to the expiry of the deadline for submitting supporting documents.  The
    Appellants complained in their application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal that they had submitted a bundle within  the  period
    of the deadline but that  it  had  been  returned  to  them  because  a
    decision had already been taken by the First-tier Tribunal  in  respect
    of the appeals.  Necessarily the ground of challenge pleaded in  effect
    that there had been a breach of natural justice.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted in consequence by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davidge on 17 December 2014.

5.   Today Mr Shittu, who appears on behalf  of  the  Appellants,  indicates
    that he is instructed to withdraw the appeals.  He states that this  is
    for two reasons.  The first is that  the  Appellants  wish  to  make  a
    further application to the Secretary of State and they are not able  to
    do so whilst there are pending appeal proceedings.  The second  matter,
    which is more relevant to the substance of the appeal, is  that  it  is
    now acknowledged that because of the operation of section  85A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  any  documents  that  the
    Appellants might have sought to place reliance upon before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that post-dated the  application  would  be  inadmissible
    bearing  in  circumstances  relating  to  a   'Points   Based   System'
    application.  In short, even if the bundle of documents had been before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  relevant  materials  would  not  have   been
    admissible, and therefore  the  decision  taken  in  absence  of  those
    documents could not have been materially different.  This is in  effect
    a recognition that ultimately there is no merit in the appeal.

6.   The provisions of rule 17 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 require the consent of the Tribunal to a  withdrawal  of  an
    appeal.  In  those  circumstances  I  have  invited  the  comments  and
    observations of Ms Pal, who appears on behalf of the Secretary of State
    today.  Ms Pal does not object to the withdrawal.

7.   In all of the circumstances I  give  consent  to  the  application  for
    withdrawal of the appeals before the Upper Tribunal and accordingly the
    Upper Tribunal takes no further action in  respect  of  these  appeals.
    The effect of that is that the decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dismissing each of the Appellants' appeals stands.

Notice of Decision

8.   The appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  each  of  IA/28705/2014  and
    IA/31128/2014 are withdrawn and the Upper  Tribunal  takes  no  further
    action in the appeals.

9.   The decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  stand:  the  appeals  remain
dismissed.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex  tempore  ruling  given
at the hearing on 29 January 2015.



Signed        Date: 5 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

