

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/31541/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th October 2016                     |On 12th October 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              MR ARSLAN GHAFOOR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Parker, Counsel instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 19th  March  1991.  He
       arrived in the UK on 31st October 2010 as a Tier 4  student  migrant
       with leave to enter valid until 17th May 2013. On 16th May  2013  he
       applied to extend his leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  migrant.
       This application was refused  on  3rd  September  2015.  His  appeal
       against the decision was allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Frazer in a determination  promulgated  on
       the 29th March 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Appleyard on the 26th August 2016 on the basis that it
       was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  law  in
       failing to give adequate reasons for why the Tribunal found that the
       claimant had not exercised deception  given  the  specific  evidence
       which identifies him as having done such.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law & Remaking

    4. The Secretary of State argues firstly that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred by failing to  appreciate  that  the  witness  statements  and
       extract from the spread sheet do assist  the  Secretary  of  State's
       case, contrary to what is said at paragraph 21 of the decision. They
       show how the claimant was identified by ETS as  someone  whose  test
       was invalid. It was not correct therefore to say that there  was  no
       evidence  of  deception  against  this  claimant,  as  is  done   at
       paragraphs 19-21  of  the  decision  and  the  engagement  with  the
       evidence by the First-tier Tribunal was superficial and shallow.

    5. The Secretary of State argues that their evidence was sufficient  to
       find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  claimant  used
       deception and the Tribunal ought therefore to have properly done so.

    6. Secondly the Secretary of State argues that as the claimant  had  no
       valid  English  test  and  no  valid  CAS  he  could  not  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  thus  that  the  appeal
       should not have been allowed on this basis, and further  that  there
       was no requirement of  fairness,  in  accordance  with  Thakur  (PBS
       decision - common law fairness) [2011] UKUT 151, that he given extra
       time now to retake an English test  and  find  another  sponsor,  or
       other evidence that the  decision  of  the  respondent  was  not  in
       accordance with the law. Thakur is an old case, and the authority of
       EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 held that even if a CAS
       ceased to be valid whilst an application was pending  this  did  not
       make a decision in breach of common law rules  of  fairness  if  the
       claimant was not given an opportunity to obtain a further CAS. As  a
       result the appeal could  not  be  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
       decision was not in accordance with the law.

    7. Ms Parker argued for the claimant that the decision on deception was
       well argued by the First-tier Tribunal and no error existed in  this
       decision. She accepted that it was an error to say  the  appeal  was
       allowed under the Immigration Rules, as the claimant had no  CAS  or
       English certificate, but maintained that it should have been allowed
       as not in accordance with the law as this was said to be the case at
       paragraph 23 of the decision. She maintained that the  decision  was
       reasoned as there was reliance on the delay in decision-making of 19
       months by the respondent and the revocation of  the  CAS  which  she
       believed had happened as a result of this delay.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant had  given  credible
       evidence that he had taken  the  TOIEC  tests  as  he  was  able  to
       describe the tests he took  in  detail,  see  paragraph  22  of  the
       decision. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  makes  criticisms  of  the
       Secretary of State's evidence  that  were  rationally  open  to  the
       Tribunal at paragraph 21 such as it being  produced  on  information
       from ETS which had not been tested by the  Secretary  of  State  and
       that the witnesses did not have expert understanding of  the  issues
       involved. It is  correct  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  false
       positives according to that evidence, and  also  that  the  specific
       evidence from ETS does not say that the claimant  had  obtained  his
       test result by deception but only that ETS had invalidated his  test
       result. The weight to be given to  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the
       Tribunal and is was rationally open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       find that the evidence of deception was not sufficient to show  this
       on the balance of probabilities, as indeed happened in SM & Qadir  v
       SSHD (ETS- evidence- burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229.

    9. However I find that the First-tier Tribunal has fallen into error in
       finding  that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules when he had  no  CAS  or  valid  English  language
       certificate. He could clearly not fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules at paragraph 245ZX (c) and (d) of the  Immigration
       Rules to remain as a Tier 4 student migrant without these documents.
       If common law fairness was engaged then the appeal should have  been
       allowed as the decision was not in accordance with the law, so  that
       the matter was remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a  fresh
       decision, not outright under the Immigration Rules. I find also that
       there is insufficient reasoning at paragraph 24 to justify a finding
       that the Secretary of State had acted  in  a  way  contrary  to  the
       common law duty of fairness in the decision-making process.

   10. I therefore preserve the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
       the claimant had not submitted a false document in the form  of  his
       TOEIC English certificate and so did not fall to  be  refused  under
       paragraph 322(1A) and paragraph 245ZX (a) of the Immigration  Rules.
       But set aside the finding that the decision of  the  respondent  was
       not in accordance with the law; the  decision  that  there  was  any
       breach of the common law duty of fairness; and the decision allowing
       the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Conclusions - Remaking

   11. The only issue that I must remake is whether the  appeal  should  be
       dismissed or allowed as not in accordance with the law on the  basis
       of the common law duty of fairness. As Ms  Ahmad  rightly  submitted
       the Court of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) holds that  the  common  law
       duty of fairness does not mean that a claimant  is  entitled  to  an
       opportunity to comment on a withdrawal of a CAS prior to  a  refusal
       decision and to be given the opportunity to  replace  the  CAS  with
       another one in circumstances where he is  not  responsible  for  the
       withdrawal. I also do not see any reason why a delay  in  19  months
       between application and decision means that a  decision  is  not  in
       accordance with the law, or that in any way adds  to  the  situation
       with the withdrawal of the CAS.

   12. I also note, although this is not a factor  in  my  decision-making,
       that the claimant would appear to be able  to  make  a  new  Tier  4
       student application at this point if he assembles all  the  relevant
       documentation so long as this is made within 28 days of  the  expiry
       of his leave, see paragraph 245ZX (l) of the Immigration Rules.

   13. In these circumstances I must dismiss the claimant's  appeal  as  he
       does  not  have  a  valid  CAS  and  therefore  cannot  satisfy  the
       requirements to have sufficient points under Appendix A or  Appendix
       C and thus does not meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX of  the
       Immigration Rules; and there are no other matters  which  mean  that
       the decision of the respondent is not in accordance with the law.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appeal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.






Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 11th October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







