
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 17 June 2015                       |                   On: 1 July 2015    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                BATYR AMANOV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Z Nasim, for the Appellant
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The issue arising on this appeal is a short point  of  construction  of
    the Immigration Rules 321A.  In order to set the point into context  it
    is necessary briefly to set out certain facts.  The  appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom on 3 December 2010 as a Tier 4 (General) Student  to
    undertake an English language course in London between January 2011 and
    January 2012.  He undertook that course.  It is alleged, however,  that
    the TOEIC English test that he says he took on 24 February 2012 was  in
    fact taken by a proxy and that the appellant  therefore  obtained  that
    particular qualification by deception.

2.   The appellant was then granted further extensions of  leave  to  remain
    as a student. In September 2013 the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain to enable him to attend a BSc (Hons) course  at  BPP  University
    ("BPP").  This was granted on 24 October 2013 valid until  6  September
    2016 as a Tier 4 Student.  In 2014 he left the United Kingdom in  order
    to return to his home country to obtain a  replacement  passport  which
    had been stolen. He returned on 6 August 2014 and  at  the  border  was
    refused  entry  upon  the  basis  that  it  had  been  found  that  the
    educational institution conducting the TOEIC course had been engaged in
    fraudulent procurement of certificates.

3.   The notice of refusal of leave reads as follows:

         "You hold a current UK residence permit ... as a Tier  4  (General)
         Student but I am satisfied that either false  representations  were
         employed or material facts were not disclosed for  the  purpose  of
         obtaining the UKRP or a change of circumstances since it was issued
         has removed the basis of your claim to admission.  The UKRP is  not
         therefore effective. This is because despite  your  assertion  that
         you took an English test on 22 February 2012 and  the  BPP  College
         subsequently assessed your level in English themselves to enrol you
         for your current course in BSc  Hons  in  business  management  and
         finance.  Following an in depth investigation  into  activities  at
         the test centre in question the Home Office have secured sufficient
         evidence for us to be able to conclude that your English  test  was
         taken by a substitute or proxy test taker.   You  have  not  sought
         entry under any  other  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I
         therefore refuse you leave to enter the United Kingdom. I therefore
         cancel your continuing leave.  If your leave was  conferred  by  an
         entry clearance this will also have the effect of  cancelling  your
         entry clearance.  The cancellation of your leave  will  be  treated
         for the purposes of the Immigration Act 1971 and  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as a refusal of leave to enter at a
         time when you were in possession of a current entry clearance."

4.   An appeal was lodged.  It challenged the  correctness  of  the  factual
    allegation that the appellant had obtained a false certificate. However
    it also raised the point of law concerning  the  scope  and  effect  of
    paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules. The  relevant  parts  of  that
    rule are in the following terms:

         "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is  to
         be cancelled at port or while the  holder  is  outside  the  United
         Kingdom

         321A. The following grounds for  the  cancellation  of  a  person's
         leave to enter or remain which is in force on his  arrival  in,  or
         whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply:

         (1) ...

         (2)  false  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
         submitted (whether or not material to the application, and  whether
         or not to the holder's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  were  not
         disclosed, in relation to the application for leave; or in order to
         obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a  third  party
         required in support of the application".

5.   In a nutshell the proposition of law  which  has  been  raised  may  be
    summarised as follows.  For the purposes of Immigration  Rules  321A(2)
    is leave to enter to be cancelled if false documents were submitted  in
    relation to any application for leave or only if those  documents  were
    submitted in relation to the last application for leave to remain?  The
    point is pivotal to the present appeal because the First-tier  Tribunal
    found as a fact that if and insofar as the appellant did obtain a false
    certificate it was not relevant to or used in the context of either (a)
    the decision of BPP to admit the appellant to the degree course, or (b)
    the leave to remain granted on 24 October 2013.

6.   Before considering the relevance of the point  of  law  we  should  say
    something about the factual basis of the Secretary of State's decision.
     In the First-tier Tribunal's judgment at paragraph [23] the  following
    is stated:

         "It is unclear from the above which application  for further  leave
         to remain is  it  is  claimed  that  the  TOEIC  certificates  were
         submitted in support of.  I have not been  provided  with  the  CAS
         details or application form relating to that application.   It  may
         be that it was  used  in  connection  with  the  application  which
         resulted in a grant of leave until 2 September 2013, although there
         is insufficient information or evidence before me to support such a
         finding."

7.    In  consequence  in  paragraph  [24]  of  the  judgment  the  Tribunal
    proceeded to analyse the case in effect in  the  alternative  upon  the
    hypothesis that a  false  document  had  perhaps  at  some  point  been
    submitted to the respondent.  It seems to us that there is  real  doubt
    as to whether the alleged false certificate was in fact used to  obtain
    any leave to remain by this appellant at  all  as  there  was  no  such
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal or us. However as to the  legal
    point, the First-tier Tribunal stated in paragraph [24] as follows:

         "In my view, paragraph 321A(2) relates to 'the  application'  which
         resulted in the current grant of  leave,  which  the  appellant  is
         intended to  entry  the  UK   as  a  consequence  of,  not  earlier
         applications  resulting  in  previous  grants  of  leave.  Had  the
         respondent intended the paragraph to have a broader reach then  she
         could have substituted  'an application' for 'the application'.  As
         the appellant did not submit the TOEIC certificate  concerned  with
         his most recent application for leave, or rely upon it in  any  way
         in order to raise his CAS, paragraph 321A(2) cannot apply."

7.   We agree with the judge. We can summarise our reasons shortly.

8.    First,  the  overarching  context  is  evident  from  the  heading  to
    paragraph 321 of the Immigration Rules. The heading states "Refusal  of
    leave to enter in relation to  a  person  in  possession  of  an  entry
    clearance".  It is in our view clear that the context is a  person  who
    holds an extant or valid entry clearance.  The  same  may  be  said  to
    apply to the heading to paragraph 321A which states "Grounds  on  which
    leave to enter or remain which is in force is to be cancelled  at  port
    or while the holder is outside the United Kingdom".  The  reference  to
    "in force" is a reference to an extant  or  valid  leave.     All  that
    follows in both of those paragraphs  is  being  directed  towards  that
    specific extant leave.

9.   Secondly, as the Judge  observed,  subparagraph  (2)  uses  a  definite
    article "the" not the indefinite article "a"  or  "an".   As  such  the
    application for leave must be "the "  leave  which  is  extant  at  the
    relevant point  in  time  and  the  false  document  must  be  used  in
    connection with that leave.

10.  Thirdly, elsewhere in Part 9 of the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to
    refusals of entry clearance or leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  the
    draftsperson  has  deployed  the  indefinite  article  "an".  Thus   in
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules the following is stated:

         "11. Where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intention of the Rules by:

                  (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State through a third party required
                  in support of the application (whether successful or not);
                  and there are  other  aggravating  circumstances  such  as
                  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary   admission/reporting
                  restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity
                  or   multiple   identities/switching    nationality/making
                  frivolous applications  or  not  complying  with  the  re-
                  documentation process. "

                                         (Emphasis added)

11.  The use of the phrase  "an  application  for  entry  clearance"  is  in
    context a reference to an application whenever made.  This  is  in  our
    judgment significant because it demonstrates that  the  word  "the"  in
    paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules is deliberate and  intended  to
    be different to "an" because in the latter it is intended to  refer  to
    "an" application whenever made and in the  former  to  the  application
    which led to "the" leave in issue.

12.  Fourthly, we note that in the judgment of the Upper Tribunal in  Khaliq
    (Entry clearance - para 321) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00350 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal made clear that under paragraph 321A of the Immigration  Rules
    there  had  to  be  causality  between  the  false  document  and   the
    application for entry clearance:  see paragraphs 20, 21 and  22.    The
    judgment only makes sense if the false document was tendered  in  order
    to procure the extant leave which is at risk of being revoked.

13.  For all these  reasons  we  uphold  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge and we reject this appeal.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date    1st July 2015


Mr Justice Green



