
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 June 2017                       |On 03 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mr Timilehin Raymond Akindejoye
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Akindejoye in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Plumptre, who in a determination promulgated on  21
    November 2016 allowed the appeal of  Mr  Timilehin  Raymond  Akindejoye
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  him  leave  to
    remain under the provisions of Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, that is, he was refused leave to remain as an  "other
    family member".

2.   The judge was aware of the fact that  following  the  determination  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  411
    (IAC) there was in fact no right of appeal  against  a  refusal  of  an
    application under Regulation 8.  However, by the time the  matter  came
    to court  Mr  Akindejoye  and  his  partner  had  married.   The  judge
    therefore considered that she was entitled to look at the appeal  under
    the provisions of Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  She clearly accepted that this was a genuine  marriage  and  she
    allowed the appeal on that basis.

3.   The Secretary of State argued that the judge was not entitled to  allow
    the appeal and moreover that there was no valid appeal. I consider that
    the argument of the respondent is clearly correct and that there  is  a
    clear error of law in the determination of the judge in that there  was
    not in effect a valid appeal before  her,  as  is  made  clear  in  the
    determination in Sala.  She should therefore not have accepted that  it
    was appropriate to hear the appeal, let alone allowed it.  I  therefore
    allow the appeal of the respondent and set aside the  decision  of  the
    Judge in  the  First-tier.  I  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

4.   Mr Deller has, however,  quite  properly  said  that  on  the  evidence
    before the court and new evidence which he has  appraised  he  will  be
    asking the Secretary of State to make a further decision on  the  basis
    that Mr Akindejoye is entitled leave  to  remain  under  Regulation  7.
    That is clearly the appropriate course of action and I trust  that  the
    Secretary of State will make a decision as soon as possible.

5.   If for any reason that the application was refused then there would  be
    a further right of appeal but that appears unlikely on the evidence now
    before the court.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the Judge in the First-tier is set aside and the  appeal  of
the Secretary of State is allowed.






Signed   [pic]                          Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



