
[pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/31679/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/31749/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 17 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   (1) DG
                                   (2) SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms L Targett-Parker, instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State is the appellant before the Upper  Tribunal.   I
    shall refer herein to DG as the first claimant and  SG  as  the  second
    claimant.

 2. An anonymity direction is made pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of documents or information relating to the proceedings  or
    any matter likely to lead members of the public to be able to  identify
    the claimants.

 3. Both claimants are citizens of Nigeria and are siblings, the first born
    on 23 April 1994 and the second on 4 May 1998.  On 12 December 2012 the
    claimants each applied for an EEA residence  card  as  extended  family
    members their  uncle,  AW.  These  applications  were  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in decisions dated 8 July 2013, it  being  concluded
    therein that it had not been demonstrated that:

      i) the claimants were related to AW as claimed, or at all;

     ii) they had been dependent on  AW  in  Nigeria  immediately  prior  to
         entering the United Kingdom; or

    iii) they had been dependent on AW since their  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

Error of Law

 4. The claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Their appeals  were
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan on 28 January 2014 and  allowed
    in a determination promulgated on  18  February  2014.   By  way  of  a
    decision of 9 April 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and,
    consequently, the appeals came before me  on  8  August  2014.   Having
    heard submissions from the parties I concluded, in  a  decision  of  11
    August 2014, that the First-tier Tribunal's determination should be set
    aside as a consequence of  it  containing  errors  of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal.   I  did  so  broadly  for  the
    following reasons:

        "[12] Moving on to the second of the written grounds of appeal,  by
         way of a letter of 4 August 2014 the Secretary of State sought  the
         Tribunal's permission to amend this ground so  as  to  include  the
         submission that:

             "No consideration has been given as to when ... [AW]  acquired
             citizenship of an EEA state  and  thus  whether  any  historic
             dependence/membership of household qualified ..."

        [13] I granted the Secretary of State permission to  rely  on  this
        additional ground, which in reality was no more than a  re-focusing
        of the ground that was originally pleaded. Mr Talacchi did not seek
        an adjournment in order to marshal the claimants' response to it...

        [18] The claimants' submit that the evidence before the  First-tier
        Tribunal plainly demonstrated that the sponsor was the spouse of an
        EEA national as long ago as 4 October 2005, because  on  this  date
        the Secretary of State granted him an  EEA  family  permit  as  the
        spouse of an EEA national (see page 15 of the  claimants'  bundle).
        It was further observed that the accepted evidence before the First-
        tier Tribunal was that the  dependency  by  the  claimants  on  the
        sponsor began in the summer of 2005 and that the claimants did  not
        move to the United Kingdom until January 2006.

        [19] Whilst the claimants are correct in  these  submissions,  this
        does not of itself meet the point made by the Secretary  of  State.
        It is not  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  8(2)  to
        demonstrate dependence on the spouse of an EEA national, dependency
        must be on an EEA national. This is a point that  appears  to  have
        been lost on the claimants. It is  also  entirely  unclear  whether
        Judge Khan properly directed himself in this regard.  In  paragraph
        14 of his determination the Judge initially refers to the  fact  of
        the  sponsor  being  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national,  but
        immediately thereafter reference  is  made  to  him  being  an  EEA
        national.

        [20] There was no evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
        when, if ever, the sponsor became an EEA national, and there is  no
        finding in Judge Khan's determination on this issue. If the sponsor
        has never become an EEA national then Judge Khan  was  required  to
        give consideration to  the  dependency  by  the  claimants  on  the
        sponsor's wife. Such consideration is however wholly lacking in the
        determination.  This issue cannot be resolved by simply saying that
        the sponsor was married  to  an  EEA  national  and  therefore  any
        dependence on him must also be dependence on  his  wife.  The  fact
        that this is so can be seen from the Court of Appeal's judgment  in
        Soares v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
        Civ 575. Each case is fact specific and there has been no  analysis
        of relevant facts relating to this issue by Judge Khan.

        [21] For this reason I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        determination contains an error on a point of law that leads me  to
        set it aside.

        [22] There was also a further ground that the  Secretary  of  State
        sought to pursue in her letter of 4 August 2014 i.e. that the First-
        tier Tribunal erred in allowing the appeals outright given that the
        Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  the  exercise  of   her
        discretion  pursuant  to   Regulation  17(4)  of   the   2006   EEA
        Regulations.

        [23]  This  ground  is  now  academic  given  what  I  say   above.
        Nevertheless for  the  sake  of  completeness  I  once  again  give
        permission to the Secretary of State to rely on  it,  and  conclude
        that this ground is made out.

        [24] Unlike family members, where the issuing of an  EEA  residence
        card is merely confirmatory of a right of  residence  that  already
        exists, the issue of an EEA residence card to  an  extended  family
        member creates the right of residence.   This  is  clear  from  the
        structure  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,   and   in   particular
        regulations 13 and 14 thereof, which set out the personal  features
        required for and individual to have an initial and  extended  right
        of residence in the United Kingdom.  The fact  that  a  person  may
        meet the requirements of regulation 8 of the  2006  Regulations  is
        not determinative  of  the  question  of  whether  or  not  an  EEA
        residence card should be issued.  The grant of such  a  card  is  a
        matter of discretion for the Secretary of State as is made clear by
        the terms of regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.

        [25] Given that the Secretary of State has  not  engaged  with  the
        exercise of her discretion under  regulation  17(4)  it  is  not  a
        matter upon which the Tribunal can come to a  conclusion  upon  for
        itself.  At its highest if it is found that  these  claimants  meet
        the requirements of regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations the appeal
        would have to be allowed to  the  extent  that  their  applications
        remain outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  her  to
        consider the exercise of her discretion to grant them EEA residence
        cards pursuant to regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

        [26] It is clear from reading paragraph  16  of  the  determination
        that  that  Judge  Khan  failed  to  recognise   this   fact   and,
        consequently, in my conclusion he also  fell  into  error  in  this
        regard."

 5. Having come to the above decision I directed that (i) the  decision  on
    appeal would be re-made by the Upper Tribunal (ii) the findings of fact
    made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the   claimants'
    relationship to their uncle, and their dependency on him -  both  prior
    to and after the claimants' arrival in the United Kingdom - were to  be
    maintained and (iii) that the issue for the Upper Tribunal to determine
    would be whether the claimants had been dependent on, or  a  member  of
    the  household  of,  an  EEA  national  both  immediately  prior,   and
    subsequent, to their arrival in the United Kingdom  -  such  directions
    being given for the reasons set out in my decision of 11 August.

Re-making of decision

 6. The appeals came back before me on 31 October 2014 for determination of
    the aforementioned issues.  However, despite specific directions having
    been given as to the further  progress  of  the  appeal,  both  parties
    raised new issues at  that  hearing  that  the  other  party  had  been
    unprepared to deal with.  In such circumstances I once again  adjourned
    the hearing and issued further directions with the aim of ensuring that
    a just decision could be reached in relation  to  the  appeals  at  the
    earliest opportunity.

 7. The matter came back before me on 20 January 2015.

Facts

 8. The following  facts  are  preserved  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination:

        i) The claimants are the nieces of AW;

       ii) The claimants have each been dependent on AW since 2005;

      iii) The claimants arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 January 2006.

 9. It is also not in dispute that AW married  Mrs  AW  in  2001  and  that
    Mrs AW was, at that time and is still, a  joint  Cypriot  and  British
    national.

10. It is not now contended by the claimants, and neither could  it  be  in
    light of  the  amended  definition  of  an  EEA  national  set  out  in
    regulation 2 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006/1003  ("2006  EEA  Regulations"),  that  they  can  rely  upon   a
    dependency on Mrs AW for the purposes of establishing a right to reside
    in the United Kingdom pursuant to those Regulations.  In  short,  as  a
    consequence of her being a dual national with one of her  nationalities
    being British, she is not to be treated as  an  EEA  national  for  the
    purposes of the application of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

Legal Background

11. It is necessary at this stage to set out briefly the  regulations  that
    are pertinent to a decision in this appeal.  Regulation 8 of  the  2006
    EEA Regulations is headed "Extended Family Member".

     Regulation 8(1) reads:

         "In these Regulations 'extended family member' means a  person  who
          is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5)."

    Regulation 8(2) continues:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and -

         (a)  the person is residing in a  country  other  than  the  United
             Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a  member
             of his household;

         (b)  the person satisfied the condition in (a) and is  accompanying
             the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to  join  him
             there; or

         (c)  the person satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a),  has
             joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
             be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household."

    And then Regulation 8(6) says:

        "In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in relation to
        an extended family member, the EEA national who is or whose  spouse
        or civil partner is the relative of the extended family member  for
        the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is
        the partner of the extended  family  member  for  the  purposes  of
        paragraph (5)."

12. Turning to the regulations relating to the issuing of an EEA  residence
    card, these are found in regulation 17 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  -
    the relevant provision in this  appeal  being  regulation  17(4)  which
    reads:

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

          a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15; and

          b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate that to issue the residence card."

Discussion and Decision

13. I have before me a certified copy a Cypriot passport in AW's name, such
    passport having been issued on 22  May  2009.  On  the  basis  of  this
    evidence I am prepared to accept that it has been demonstrated  to  the
    balance of probabilities that AW became an EEA national on 22 May 2009,
    as claimed.

14. The consequence of this is that the  claimants  cannot  rely  upon  any
    dependency on AW prior to 22 May 2009 in seeking to establish that they
    meet the requirements of regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.  For
    the purposes of regulation 8 there must  be  a  dependency  on  an  EEA
    national and AW did not become an EEA national until 22 May 2009.

15. This though is  not  where  the  claimants'  case  rests  because  each
    claimant maintains that (a) they were dependent  on  AW  during  their
    visit to Nigeria between 20 October 2009 and 12 December 2009  and  (b)
    they were "residing in" Nigeria  at  that  time  for  the  purposes  of
    regulation 8(2)(a) of the 2006 Regulations.

16. The Secretary of State disputes (i) that the claimants  were  dependent
    on AW during their visit to Nigeria in 2009 and  (ii)  that  they  were
    'residing in' that country for the purposes of the 2006 EEA Regulations
    at that time.

17. Taking the issues in turn, the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  AW
    took over responsibility for the claimants care in the summer of  2005,
    and that they eventually joined him in the United  Kingdom  in  2006  -
    when they came here as visitors and did not leave as required.  It  was
    further accepted that they have lived with AW in his family home  since
    that time, and that "no-one  else  is  responsible  for  looking  after
    them".

18. Although the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  specifically  consider  the
    issue of whether the claimants were dependent on AW during their  visit
    to Nigeria in 2009, because this issue did  not  arise  before  it,  my
    consideration of such issue must  nevertheless  be  informed  by  those
    findings that the FtT did make and which were subsequently preserved.

19. When the claimants visited Nigeria in 2009 they would have been just 15
    and 11 years old respectively. At that age they were highly unlikely to
    be self sufficient,  and  must  have  been  dependent  on  someone  for
    financial support. The claimants' biological father had passed away  by
    this time, and AW's evidence was that their mother was struggling,  and
    continues to struggle, financially. This evidence  is  consistent  with
    the evidence provided by the claimants' mother in her statement  of  12
    December 2014, which points to the death of the claimants' father as an
    event significantly worsening her financial position.

20. It is unfortunate that neither the  claimants'  mother,  nor  AW,  gave
    direct evidence as to how the claimants were funded and upon whom  they
    were dependent whilst they were in Nigeria in 2009.   Nevertheless,  on
    the basis of the findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  in
    particular the acceptance that AW has  been  the  claimants  long  term
    carer and the person who has undertaken responsibility for  them  since
    late 2005, as well as the findings and other evidence relating  to  the
    death of the claimants' father in 2008 and the  financial  difficulties
    that their mother found herself in after  her  husband's  death,  I  am
    prepared to accept on the balance of probabilities that  the  claimants
    were dependent on AW during their trip to Nigeria in 2009.

21. Moving on, I must also consider whether the claimants' dependency on AW
    during their visit to Nigeria in 2009  is  a  dependency  that  can  be
    relied upon for  the  purposes  of  establishing  that  they  meet  the
    requirements of regulation 8(2) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

22. Mr Avery submits that (a) the claimants' approach to the interpretation
    and application of regulation 8(2) is not supported either by  (i)  the
    natural and ordinary meaning of the term  'residing  in'  or  (ii)  the
    purpose  behind  such  Regulations  and  Directive  2004/38/EC  -  such
    purpose, it is said, being  to  facilitate  the  free  movement  of  EU
    citizens (and their families), (b) regulation  8(2)  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations requires an applicant to have a  degree  of  permanency  of
    stay in the country from which they have come and (c) if the  claimants
    are correct in their submissions then  the  application  of  regulation
    8(2) would be open to abuse.

23. Consideration of  the  terms  of  the  EU  Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the
    Directive"), which was transposed into United Kingdom law by  the  2006
    EEA Regulations, assists in assessing how  regulation  8(2)  should  be
    interpreted and applied.

24. The Directive regulates the right of citizens of the  Union  and  their
    family members to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the
    Member States. The CJEU has held that the purpose  of  this  Directive,
    which aims to facilitate the  exercise  of  the  fundamental  right  of
    residence of EU citizens in a Member State other  than  that  of  which
    they are a national, requires a broad interpretation.

25.  Article 3(2) of the Directive provides:

        "3(2). Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
        the persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member
        State shall, in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate
        entry and residence for the following reasons:

        (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality, not
        falling under the definition in point 2  Article  2  [which  defines
        family members] who, in the country from which they have  come,  are
        dependents or members of the household of the Union  citizen  having
        the primary right of residence..." (emphasis added)

26. It can be seen that on a plain reading of Article 3(2)  it  requires  a
    dependency to be demonstrated by 'other family members' in the  country
    from which  they  have  come.  It  is  clear  from  Article  6  of  the
    Directive's preamble that the objective of Article 3(2) is to  maintain
    the unity of the family in the broader sense by facilitating entry  and
    residence for persons who are not included in the definition of  family
    members of  the  Union  citizen  contained  in  Article  2(2)  but  who
    nevertheless maintain close and stable family ties with a Union citizen
    on  account  of  specific  factual  circumstances,  such  as   economic
    dependence (See SSHD v Rahman [2012] 3 CMLR 55 at [32]).

27. It is in the context of all that I have set out above that regulation 8
    of the 2006 EEA Regulations must be viewed and considered.

28. In my view, when seen in the aforementioned context, the term 'residing
    in'  found  in  regulation  8(2)(a)  does  not  import  the  degree  of
    permanence, or an  intention  to  reside  permanently,  that  Mr  Avery
    advocates it must, and I can see no principled basis for deriving  such
    a conclusion from either the Directive or its  recitals,  or  from  the
    authority of the CJEU or the higher courts of the United Kingdom.

29. As to Mr Avery's submission that the Regulations and Directive would be
    open to abuse if interpreted in the manner suggested by the  claimants,
    and that it should therefore not be so interpreted; if  such  abuse  is
    established in any particular case then either the EU 'abuse of rights'
    principle and/or regulation 21B of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  could  be
    invoked against the 'abuser' in order to deprive such  person  of  what
    would otherwise be the benefit of the Regulations  and/or  Directive  -
    each providing a sufficiently robust mechanism to protect  against  the
    possibility of such abuse.  In the  instant  matter  the  Secretary  of
    State has not suggested that the claimants' situation is  characterised
    by any abuse of rights.

30. Having considered the specific circumstances of  these  claimants,  and
    given what I have said above, it is my conclusion  that  the  claimants
    were 'residing in' Nigeria for the purposes of regulation 8(2)(a)  when
    they visited that country between 20 October 2009 and 12 December 2009,
    and that each claimant was dependent on  AW  during  such  time.  Since
    their return to the UK the claimants have both  continuously  lived  in
    AW's household and also been dependent on him. There is now no  dispute
    that AW has, at all material times, been a 'qualified person'.

31. Consequently, I find that the claimants are 'extended  family  members'
    of an EEA national for the purposes of regulation 8  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations..

32. The fact that the claimants are extended family  members  does  not  of
    itself give them a right to remain in the United Kingdom. The provision
    of an EEA residence card to extended family members is not confirmatory
    of a right that they have already acquired, it is  the  creation  of  a
    right and is discretionary - as identified by regulation 17(4)  of  the
    2006  EEA  regulations.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  thus  far
    considered the exercise of discretion under regulation 17(4) and it  is
    not for the Tribunal to consider such  discretion  for  itself  in  the
    absence of the Secretary of State having first done so. Given that  the
    Secretary of State has not yet undertaken a task that she  is  required
    to undertake by the 2006 EEA Regulations, her  decisions  refusing  the
    claimants an  EEA  residence  card  are  decisions  which  are  not  in
    accordance with the law.

33. Having already set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  I  now
    substitute a decision allowing the claimants' appeals for  the  reasons
    given above; with the effect that the claimants'  applications  for  an
    EEA residence card remain outstanding before  the  Secretary  of  State
    awaiting a lawful decision.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                         Date: 2 March 2015

