
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31550/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2015                   |On 13th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Miss sANJANA rENU jUGGOO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Mair, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) which in a  decision  promulgated
    on 30th October 2014, allowed Sanajana Renu Juggoo's appeal against the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  24th  July  2014  to  refuse  her
    indefinite leave to remain as a dependant child.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout these proceedings I shall  refer  to
    the Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and Sanjana Renu  Juggoo  as
    "the Appellant", as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. There is a background to this appeal. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Mauritius who entered the UK on 16th November 2013 initially  with  six
    months' leave to enter. On 31st March 2014 she applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in order to be  cared  for  by  her  aunt  who  is  her
    Sponsor. The Appellant  travelled  with  her  younger  brother  Luvnish
    Juggoo who also made application for indefinite leave to remain  albeit
    with another aunt currently residing in the UK.

 4. The Appellant and her brother lived in Mauritius  with  their  parents.
    Their father died in October 2013 and their mother became seriously ill
    with depression and was therefore unable to work.  She  was  unable  to
    look after herself let alone the Appellant her brother.  She  is  being
    cared for in Mauritius by her mother, the Appellant's grandmother.  The
    Appellant's grandmother is elderly and unable to take on  the  task  of
    caring for her daughter and her daughter's two children.

 5. As there was no-one to look after the children it was agreed within the
    family that the Appellant and her brother would come to the UK to  live
    with other family members who are present here. The Appellant therefore
    lives with her Aunt Madoomatee Emambocus  a  British  citizen  and  her
    brother Luvnish Juggoo lives  with  Aunt  Kowsaleesa  Seewooruttun,  an
    Italian citizen exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

 6. For some reason, the appeals of Sanjana Renu  Juggoo  and  her  brother
    were not linked; possibly because Sanjana Renu Juggoo's application was
    refused under the  paragraph  298  of  the  Immigration  Rules  whereas
    Luvnish Juggoo's application was refused under the EEA Regulations.

 7. However despite the appeals  not  being  linked  the  appeals  of  both
    Sanjana Renu Juggoo and her brother coincidentally came before the same
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, although on different dates. The Judge heard
    Luvnish Juggoo's appeal first and allowed it. When  she  heard  Sanjana
    Renu Juggoo's appeal she also allowed it relying a great  deal  on  the
    findings that she had made in Luvnish Juggoo's case. Central of  course
    to both appeals was the question of dependency.

 8. The Respondent  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  both
    decisions.

 9. Luvnish Juggoo's appeal came before me in Bradford on 5th January  2015
    and a copy of my decision in his appeal is annexed  to  this  decision.
    Luvnish Juggoo's case has now resolved. Miss Mair produced as  part  of
    the  evidence  in  Sanjana  Renu  Juggoo's  appeal,  a  copy   of   the
    Respondent's  decision  granting  Luvnish  Juggoo  a   Certificate   of
    Residence as the dependant of his Aunt Kowsaleesa Seewooruttun.

Sanjana Renu Juggoo's Appeal

10. So far as Sanjana  Renu  Juggoo  is  concerned  the  Respondent  sought
    permission to appeal on two grounds.

      i) Serious and compelling family or other considerations.

         It was said by the Respondent that the findings made by the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge did not satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph
         298 as they did not amount to  serious  and  compelling  family  or
         other considerations making Sanjana's exclusion undesirable.

     ii) Application of Luvnish Juggoo.

         The respondent's challenge to Luvnish Juggoo's appeal  is  material
         to the consideration of  Sanjana  Renu  Juggoo's  circumstances  in
         Mauritius and the impact on her of any return there.

11. Permission to appeal was granted to the  Respondent  but  on  the  sole
    basis that the outcome  of  the  ongoing  appeal  in  Luvnish  Juggoo's
    decision is material to Sanjana Renu Juggoo's appeal.

12. Mrs Pettersen before me quite properly agreed that the  FtT  Judge  had
    made clear findings on the issue  of  dependency  and  that  the  first
    ground seeking permission is disposed of in  any  event.  She  accepted
    that the second ground seeking permission effectively  also  now  falls
    away. Luvnish Juggoo's case has been resolved. He has  been  granted  a
    residence document and that grant implicitly acknowledges that  Luvnish
    Juggoo cannot be cared for other than by his Italian national aunt  who
    is resident here in the UK. Equally it follows that Sanjana Renu Juggoo
    who is also a minor cannot be cared  for  other  than  by  her  British
    citizen aunt and Sponsor. It was accepted therefore that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not  materially  erred  in  her  consideration  when
    allowing Sanjana Renu Juggoo's appeal and the decision therefore should
    stand.

Decision

13.  The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  FtT's  decision  is
    dismissed. The decision of the FtT allowing the appeal of Sanjana  Renu
    Juggoo contains no error of law and therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature         Dated 18th March 2015

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
