
                                                              [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/31291/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4th May 2017                       |      On 16th May 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            muhammad ijaz saleem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R de Mello of Counsel instructed by IJ Law
Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Bowler  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 24th June 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 10th November 1975.  On
    3rd February 2015 he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.  On 12th
    June 2012 the Claimant had applied for entry clearance  from  Pakistan,
    and this application was granted from 28th  November  2012  until  28th
    November 2015.

 4. The application was refused on  28th  August  2015  with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    Claimant had used deception in his application for entry clearance.

 5. It was contended  that  he  had  submitted  with  his  entry  clearance
    application a TOEIC certificate issued by Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS).  It was believed  that  the  Claimant  had  not  undertaken  the
    English language test, but another person had taken the test and passed
    it on his behalf.  It was therefore contended  that  the  Claimant  had
    submitted a false English  language  certificate,  and  obtained  entry
    clearance by deception.

 6. The Claimant appealed to the FtT and the appeal was heard on  6th  June
    2016.  The FtT heard evidence from the Claimant.   The  FtT  noted  the
    evidence submitted on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  that  being
    witness statements from Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington,  and  an
    ETS spreadsheet showing that the tests taken by the  Claimant  on  24th
    April 2012 had been declared invalid by ETS.

 7. The FtT did not find that this evidence was sufficient to discharge the
    evidential burden which was on the Secretary of  State.   However,  the
    FtT nevertheless went on to the next stage, and considered whether  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the legal burden of proof and  proved
    dishonesty.

 8. The FtT found that the legal burden of proof had  not  been  discharged
    and therefore allowed the appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  provided
    inadequate reasons for its conclusions.  The FtT had erred  in  law  by
    failing to have proper regard to the Claimant's poor level  of  English
    at the hearing.  It was contended  that  the  FtT  had  misapplied  the
    guidance in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229  (IAC).   The  Claimant  had
    given an account of what occurred at the test centre when he  took  the
    test, but this was entirely uncorroborated.

10. The Secretary of State contended that the level of English demonstrated
    at the hearing was in direct contrast to the high score in the ETS test
    taken in 2012.

11. It was contended that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of  State
    was sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of proof, which meant
    that there was then a burden on the Claimant  to  provide  an  innocent
    explanation.

12. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Robertson, who found the FtT decision generous, but  concluded
    that adequate reasons had been provided, and no arguable material error
    of law established.

13. A renewed application for permission to appeal was  granted  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Davey who found the grounds arguable.

14. Following the grant of permission the Claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Directions were issued  making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

15. Mr Armstrong relied upon the  grounds  and  the  grant  of  permission.
    Reliance was placed upon SM and Qadir which indicates that the  generic
    evidence provided by the Secretary of  State  in  cases  such  as  this
    sufficed to discharge the evidential burden and the FtT  had  erred  in
    law in finding to the contrary.  It was not clear why the FtT found the
    evidential burden not to have been discharged, and  inadequate  reasons
    were given for concluding that  the  Claimant  had  given  an  innocent
    explanation,  and  therefore  the  legal  burden  of  proof   was   not
    discharged.

16. Mr de Mello submitted that the decision disclosed no material error  of
    law.  The FtT was entitled to find that the evidential burden of  proof
    had  not  been  discharged,  and  if  the  evidential  burden  was  not
    discharged there was no  obligation  on  the  Claimant  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation.

17. In any event, the FtT had been entitled to find that the  legal  burden
    of proof had not been discharged by the Secretary of  State.   The  FtT
    was entitled to place little weight upon the Claimant's English ability
    displayed at the hearing, and reference was made to paragraph 80 of  SM
    and Qadir in support of that submission.  Mr de  Mello  submitted  that
    there could be no challenge in law to the conclusion reached by the FtT
    that the explanation offered by the Claimant was accepted.

18. In response Mr Armstrong pointed out that the ETS spreadsheet confirmed
    that the tests taken by the Claimant were invalid.  The FtT  had  found
    that  the  English  spoken  by  the  Claimant  at   the   hearing   was
    unintelligible and an interpreter was needed.  Therefore  the  FtT  had
    given inadequate reasons for concluding  that  the  initial  evidential
    burden had not been discharged by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  for
    concluding that the legal burden of proof had not been discharged.

19. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. The FtT did not have the benefit of the guidance given by the Court  of
    Appeal in  Shehzad  and  Chowdhury  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615,  which  was
    published after  the  FtT  decision  was  promulgated.   That  decision
    endorsed what had been found by the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  and  Qadir
    regarding the burden of proof.   The  position  is  that  there  is  an
    initial evidential burden upon the Secretary  of  State.   If  that  is
    discharged, there is a burden upon the Claimant to provide an  innocent
    explanation.  The legal burden  of  proof  in  relation  to  dishonesty
    remains with the Secretary of State.

21. I find the FtT erred in  law  at  paragraph  25  in  finding  that  the
    evidential burden had not been discharged by the  Secretary  of  State.
    The error is in not providing adequate reasons for that conclusion.

22. The evidence before the FtT comprised the generic witness statements of
    Rebecca Collins and Peter Millington,  and  an  ETS  spreadsheet  which
    showed that the two tests taken by the Claimant on 24th April 2012 were
    invalid.  That was very much the same evidence as had  been  considered
    in SM and Qadir and the Upper Tribunal found at paragraph 68 that  this
    evidence, although it was described as having shortcomings,  discharged
    "the  comparatively  modest  threshold  which  an   evidential   burden
    entails".  As explained in SM and Qadir, the effect  of  this  is  that
    there is a burden, again an evidential one, on an Appellant of  raising
    an innocent explanation.

23. The reason given by the FtT for concluding that the  evidential  burden
    was not discharged was the absence of the application form submitted by
    the Claimant when he made his entry clearance application.   I  do  not
    find that a satisfactory explanation was given by the  FtT  as  to  why
    that was relevant, and why the absence of that document meant that  the
    evidential burden had not been discharged.

24. The conclusion by the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir  was  endorsed  by
    the Court of Appeal in Shehzad and Chowdhury.

25. Having found that the FtT had  erred  in  law,  I  must  then  consider
    whether the error is material.  I find that it is not for the following
    reasons.

26. The FtT, having found that the evidential burden on  the  Secretary  of
    State was not discharged, could have ended the decision there.  However
    the FtT went on to consider whether the Secretary of State had  in  any
    event discharged the legal burden of proof in relation to dishonesty.

27. The FtT noted the apparent inability of the Claimant  to  speak  fluent
    English at the hearing, and considered this at paragraph 27.   Reliance
    was placed upon the guidance in SM and Qadir, to the effect that judges
    should be cautious in evaluating  the  level  of  English  shown  at  a
    hearing.

28. The FtT noted  at  paragraph  28  the  detailed  description  that  the
    Claimant gave of how he sat the test in 2012.  At paragraph 29 the  FtT
    noted the Claimant's consistent explanation as to how he  arranged  the
    test.  At paragraph 30 the FtT  considered  the  point  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State, that the ETS certificate had been collected by  the
    Claimant's friend rather than the Claimant.  The FtT found  that  there
    was no evidence as to whether identification was required to obtain the
    certificate.

29. At paragraph 32 the FtT notes that the Claimant's friend was not called
    to give evidence  but  concludes  that  given  the  Claimant's  general
    consistency about the circumstances of his English test, and the  level
    of detail provided, the FtT was satisfied that the Claimant had sat the
    ETS tests in 2012 and had not used a proxy.

30. Therefore the  FtT  concluded  that  the  Claimant  had  satisfied  the
    evidential burden of providing an innocent explanation,  and  that  the
    generic evidence together with the ETS spreadsheet  did  not  discharge
    the legal burden of proof.

31. I conclude that those findings were open to the FtT  on  the  evidence.
    When permission to appeal was initially refused, the FtT  decision  was
    described as generous.  I would observe  that  many  judges  would  not
    reach the same conclusion as the judge in this case, but  that  is  not
    the test to be considered.  I find that the FtT has  given  sustainable
    reasons for the conclusions reached in relation to the legal burden  of
    proof,  and  that  the  challenge  made  by  the  Secretary  of   State
    demonstrates a very strong disagreement with the FtT decision, but does
    not disclose a material error of law in relation to the legal burden of
    proof.  Therefore although the FtT erred in finding  that  the  initial
    evidential burden on the Secretary of State was  not  discharged,  that
    error was not material, because  the  FtT  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the legal burden of proof was not discharged.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date 10th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a
fee award.


Signed                              Date 10th May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
