



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/31032/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 June 2014                                 |On 25 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                                 Mrs santosh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Hayre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Santosh was born on  20th  January  1949  and  is  a
    citizen of  India.  She  had  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 15th July 2013 refusing her leave to remain in the  UK
    as the dependent parent of her son and UK Sponsor  Jagdeep  Singh.  The
    Respondent's refusal was based on  paragraph  317  of  HC  395  and  in
    addition the Respondent made a decision to remove the Appellant by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration   Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 7th  April  2014.
    The Appellant now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is now a 65 year old widow, living alone in India and  it
    is claimed dependent upon her UK Sponsor for financial support. She has
    travelled to the UK on several occasions in the past to see the Sponsor
    and his family. For the purposes of this determination, she arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 12th June 2012 in possession of  a  Family  Visit
    Visa valid from 15th July 2011 to 15th July 2016.

 4. Shortly after her arrival, she made application for settlement  as  the
    dependent parent of her UK Sponsor. That is the  application  that  was
    refused and the appeal against which was dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Edwards).

 5. I find that Judge Edwards' determination should be set aside for  legal
    error and these are my reasons for so  finding.  The  majority  of  the
    determination consists of what  may  be  termed  "standard  paragraphs"
    setting out familiar jurisprudence, but making little attempt to  apply
    that jurisprudence to the facts which the Judge has found.

 6. It is asserted in the grounds seeking permission that the Judge,

      i) fails to properly consider all the material before him,

     ii) errs in his findings in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

 7. I am bound to agree with that assessment. The refusal  in  this  appeal
    was under paragraph 317 of the  Immigration  Rules.  One  of  the  core
    components under paragraph 317 is whether an  Appellant  can  establish
    financial dependency on their UK Sponsor.  The  evidence  of  financial
    dependency in this appeal came from the  Appellant's  son  who  is  her
    sponsor. In evidence he claimed that he  not  only  gave  cash  to  his
    mother when he visited her in India, but also that when she visited him
    in the UK, he sent  her  home  with  cash.  This  is  what  formed  the
    financial dependency. Whilst the Judge refers to this in [13], I see no
    clear finding on that evidence. That evidence is a vital  part  of  the
    Appellant's case and the Judge needed to make a proper reasoned finding
    on whether he had considered that evidence and  whether  that  evidence
    was accepted or rejected.

 8. Such a finding may well have enabled the Judge to come to  a  different
    conclusion on the Article 8 consideration. I find that the  lack  of  a
    clear  finding  on  this  point  alone  is  sufficient  to  render  the
    determination unsatisfactory.

 9. I am further satisfied that the Judge has adopted the wrong approach to
    the Article 8 issue. This application for  leave  to  remain  was  made
    prior to 9th July 2012 and thus the refusal fell to be considered under
    what is termed "the old Rules".

10. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to make proper  findings
    regarding the Appellant's circumstances and how  this  may  affect  the
    application of Article 8 ECHR. These are  issue  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should  have  considered.  The  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is neither sufficiently adequate nor cogent enough  to  render
    this determination sustainable.

11. I set aside the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Further  I
    consider that this is an  appropriate  case  to  be  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal (not Judge Edwards) to make fresh  findings  of  fact  and  to
    apply the  relevant  jurisprudence  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8, to those findings.

DECISION

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    7th April 2014 is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to remake the decision.


No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


