
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31122/2014
                                                               IA/31125/2014
                                                               IA/31132/2014
                                                               IA/31140/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                    |t a                               |First Appellant     |
|                    |a o a                             |Second Appellant    |
|                    |o p o a                           |Third Appellant     |
|                    |i a                               |Fourth Appellant    |
|                    |(anonymity direction made)        |                    |


                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Bestway
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellants. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I  make  this  order  because  the  case
    concerns the welfare of children.

 2. They appeal with the permission of the Upper Tribunal a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal on 20 March 2015 to dismiss their  appeals  against
    the decision of the respondent on 9 July 2014 to remove them  from  the
    United Kingdom having refused them leave to remain  in  an  application
    brought on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. In broad terms it is the appellants'  case  that  removing  them  would
    interfere disproportionately with their private and family lives.  This
    is particularly so because of the length of time that  the  family  has
    spent in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant  was  born
    on 5 March 1972.  He has lived in the United Kingdom since  July  1999.
    The second appellant is his wife.  She was born on 9 June 1976 and  has
    lived in the United Kingdom since August 2014.  The  third  and  fourth
    appellants are their sons.  The third appellant was born  in  September
    2007 and the fourth appellant was born in July 2009.  They  have  lived
    in the United Kingdom all of their lives.

 5. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  and  has  had
    leave for most but not all of the time that he has been in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The second  appellant  appears  to  have  had  leave  as  the
    dependant of the first appellant but does not appear to have had  leave
    in any other capacity at any time.  The respondent's letter of  9  July
    2014 spills over some twelve pages explaining why the applications were
    refused but the bulk  of  the  letter  consists  of  rehearsal  of  the
    immigration  history of the appellants or explains  in  tedious  detail
    why particular Rules that no-one ever thought did apply in fact do  not
    apply.

 6. At page 10 there is a paragraph dealing with the rights  of  the  third
    and fourth appellants.  It points out that  the  appellants  were  then
    aged 6 and 5 years and although they had lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    all of their lives in the event of their return they would be returning
    as a family unit  to  their  country  of  nationality.   There  was  an
    education system available  for  them  in  Nigeria  and  there  was  no
    evidence that they would be unable to  manage  there.   The  respondent
    considered any disruption in their  private  and  family  lives  to  be
    proportionate and consistent with the obligation under  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to make  the  welfare
    of children a primary consideration.

 7. The Respondent  also  considered  paragraph  35(3B)  of  HC  395  which
    codifies the kind  of  exceptional  circumstances  that  might  make  a
    difference in applications of this kind.  The Respondent worked through
    the requirements of the Rule and found no  factors  that  assisted  the
    appellants.  It also pointed out that the first and second  appellants'
    leave ran out in 2008 and they had remained in the United Kingdom since
    30 April 2008 without permission.

 8. I considered carefully the skeleton argument provided Miss Heybroek for
    the First-tier Tribunal. One of the reasons I do this is she complained
    that it was not considered properly by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    but, with respect, it is  a  useful  summary  of  her  case  which  she
    developed orally.

 9. Miss Heybroek recognised that her case really depended on the rights of
    the third appellant who by the time the First-tier Tribunal Judge heard
    the case had been in the United Kingdom  for  more  than  seven  years.
    This is not a case where it can be argued that, for example, any of the
    appellants have a compelling reason to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    beyond the amount of time that they had spent there.  It is not a case,
    for  example,  of  exceptional  medical  need   or   other   compelling
    circumstances.  Neither is it a case where it can be argued  they  will
    be returning to unconscionable conditions in Nigeria.

10. The skeleton argument refers to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of HC  395  and
    as Ms Brocklesby-Weller pointed out the qualification of  having  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years depended on
    the applicant having achieved that age "at the  date  of  application".
    It follows that it does not matter when the  application  was  actually
    considered.  There is a requirement under the Rules that the  applicant
    is aged 7 when the application is made.  Otherwise the  Rule  does  not
    apply.  Nevertheless the judge was required to consider the appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  at
    the time he made his decision which was 20 March 2015.  Miss Heybroek's
    primary submission is nothing if not clear.  She said:

         "It is submitted that it always has been, and continues to be,  the
         Secretary of State's policy that, absent compelling  countervailing
         fear factors such as criminality, if a child has resided in the  UK
         for  more  than  seven  years  it  will   be   a   disproportionate
         interference with their Art.8 rights to  disrupt  their  lives  and
         remove them from the UK."

11.  She  supports  this  contention  by  reference  to  the  "grounds   of
    compatibility" with Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights statement  by  the  Home  Office  that  was  prepared  when  the
    Immigration Rules on family and private life (HC 194) was introduced to
    parliament.  At paragraph 27 it states:

         "The Rules deal clearly with how  to  treat  British  citizens  and
         other children in cases where they would otherwise intend to remove
         their parent(s) and how countervailing factors should weigh in  the
         decision.  There are  some  circumstances  where  children  may  be
         allowed to stay on a permanent or temporary basis on best interests
         grounds.  The key test for remaining on a permanent basis is around
         the length of continuous residence of a child in the UK - which  we
         have said seven  years,  subject  to  countervailing  factors.   We
         consider that a period of seven continuous years spent in the UK as
         a  child  will  generally  establish  his   sufficient   level   of
         integration for family and private life to exist such that  removal
         would normally not be in the best interests of the child.  A period
         of seven years also echoes a  previous  policy  (known  as  DP5/96)
         under which children who had accumulated  seven  years'  continuous
         residence in the UK were not deported, which is still referenced by
         the Courts on occasion.  In policy terms, we would  not  propose  a
         period of seven years as this would enable migrants who entered the
         UK on a temporary route (for example a route limited to five  years
         in the UK) to qualify for settlement if they had  brought  children
         with them.  The changes  are  designed  to  bring  consistency  and
         transparency to decision-making."

12. I think that that word "deported" is incongruous and does  not  reflect
    the policy accurately but that is the word the Secretary of State chose
    to use.

13. I cannot agree with  Miss  Heybroek's  submission.   The  Secretary  of
    State's policy is set out in her Rules.  The Rules give great weight to
    seven years' residence in the United Kingdom in the case of a child who
    has achieved that before the application is made.  It may well be  that
    the terms of the Rule represent a shift in policy so that it is now the
    date of application that is crucial rather than the amount of time that
    the child has spent in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State  did
    not claim to be reproducing DP5/96 but to be echoing  it.   Given  that
    the grounds of  compatibility  were  dealing  with  amendments  to  the
    Immigration Rules which are applied when people make applications  this
    is an unremarkable proposition but if it represents a change in  policy
    it is a lawful change in policy.  Any  fixed  period  in  which  it  is
    assumed that a person will have acquired  a  right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is arbitrary and  provided  it  is  always  possible  in
    appropriate cases to make  a  decision  outside  the  Rules  or  as  an
    exception within the Rules there is nothing objectionable in  principle
    either to having an arbitrary policy or to changing it.

14. I remind myself of the arbitrary nature of  the  decision.   Given  the
    ease with which applicants can make fresh applications or rely upon the
    pressures in the system to cause delay the  Secretary  of  State  would
    have to have a policy of refusing applications in the case of  children
    with, say, five years' leave, to make sure that  seven  years  had  not
    been expended by the time any appeal was heard.  I do not  suggest  the
    Secretary of State should do this.  I do it to emphasise that it is  an
    arbitrary level set at seven years and  the  judges  are  not  required
    necessarily  to  allow  appeals  by  children  who   have   established
    themselves in the United Kingdom for seven years.

15. It is not at all clear to me that the grounds of compatibility have any
    relevance except in the context of construing a Rule.   Conceivably  it
    might make it difficulty for the Secretary of State to disagree with  a
    judge who said that a child had acquired a weighty private  and  family
    life after seven years but that is not what has happened here and  that
    is a point that should be argued if and when it becomes relevant.

16. Ms Heybroek's skeleton argument also referred to Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  but  that  includes  the
    qualification "It would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the United Kingdom." When the Secretary of State is  deciding  what  is
    reasonable she must apply her policies but Section 117 does  not  apply
    to the Secretary of State's decision-making but to decisions made by  a
    court or tribunal.  It is for the court or tribunal to decide  what  is
    reasonable and that is what this judge has done.  I do not  agree  with
    Miss Heybroek that the Secretary of State has committed  herself  to  a
    policy of allowing any child with seven years' continuous residence  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  subject  to  countervailing  factors  or
    otherwise.  It follows that  the  apparent  failure  of  the  judge  to
    consider the skeleton  arguments  is  immaterial.   The  arguments  are
    misconceived.

17. I see no arguable error in the judge's finding  that  the  interference
    consequent of removal is reasonable.  It may have been more helpful  if
    the First-tier Tribunal had said more about the rights of the  children
    but the evidence before the Tribunal about their integration  and  role
    in the United Kingdom although important cannot amount  to  much.   The
    evidence was that the appellants as a family are very involved  in  the
    local church. That is a relevant factor because it shows integration in
    the community outside the family but I do not see how it can be thought
    of as a particularly weighty factor.  There is no reason to think  that
    the church could not carry on without them and although their departure
    would represent some sort of change in the life  of  that  congregation
    and its place in the community it  does  not  have  the  makings  of  a
    finding that removal is disproportionate.  The third appellant  appears
    to be doing well at school.  That is wholly to his credit but again  is
    not a particularly weighty matter.

18. It is recognised that although the first seven years in a child's  life
    are important for Article 8 purposes it is the years after infancy, say
    the age of 4, that are more important.  I also agree with Miss Heybroek
    that there are reasons to think that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    been unnecessarily "sniffy" about the first appellant's qualifications.
     The role of a pastor in a church  varies  enormously  from  church  to
    church but there is no reason to think that the first appellant is  not
    sincere in what he does or not qualified to do what he is  expected  to
    do, save that some might think that leading  a  church  in  the  United
    Kingdom at a time when he did not  have  permission  to  be  there  was
    discreditable.   This  does  not  matter  for  present  purposes.    It
    certainly does not impact on the rights of the children.

19. In paragraph 76 of the decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  finds  there
    will be no compelling or compassionate or other reasons why the  public
    interest and the maintenance of a firm  and  fair  immigration  control
    should not prevail over the rights of the individuals.   It  noted  the
    age of the children.  It is noted that they  do  not  complain  of  any
    health problems.  There is nothing other than the  length  of  time  on
    which the decision to allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds  could
    turn.

20. Having thus answered Miss Heybroek's contention that there is a  policy
    requirement to allow children who have lived in the United Kingdom  for
    seven years to remain there can be nothing wrong  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

21. It follows therefore that I  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and dismiss the appellants' appeals.

    Notice of Decision

22. The appellants' appeals are dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 February 2016                |

